
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03024/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 November 2017                           |On 7  November 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                               Mr Visar Nuhaj
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, Counsel, instructed by Danielle Cohen
                    Immigration Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Onoufriou promulgated on 23 December  2016.   In  that  decision  Judge
    Onoufriou refused an appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State dated 13 July 2015 to  refuse  the  appellant  his  human  rights
    application and application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Kosovo  born  on  10  October  1983.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 13 September 1998 as a dependant  of  his
    cousin but their claim for asylum was dismissed on 3 March  1999.   The
    appellant has been in the United Kingdom  since  then.   He  adopted  a
    false identity and has worked and paid taxes using that identity.

3.    The  case  for  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   is
    summarised at paragraph 19 of the determination.  The central issue was
    a claim under Article 3 of the ECHR based on his  mental  health.   The
    appellant led in evidence Dr  Rachel  Thomas,  a  chartered  consultant
    clinical psychologist.  She had examined the appellant and  produced  a
    report dated 3 March 2015 together with an addendum dated  12  December
    2016. Dr Thomas' qualifications are set out in the first two  pages  of
    the report of 3 March.  They were not  disputed  before  the  Tribunal.
    The report concluded that the appellant was suffering  from  PTSD.   Dr
    Thomas considered the appellant's  prognosis  and  concluded  that  the
    psychiatric consequences of his return would, in her view, be severe in
    such a psychologically  vulnerable  man.   The  extensive  and  chronic
    levels of post-traumatic avoidance practised by the appellant  rendered
    him extremely and particularly vulnerable to  retraumatisation  in  the
    event of return.  She suggested that his return to Kosovo  would  cause
    severe  psychiatric  deterioration.   Although  at  present  he  denied
    suicidal thinking that would, in her view, change in the event that  he
    was returned to Kosovo.  She concluded that this would therefore pose a
    significant suicidal risk.

4.   At paragraph 29 of the determination Judge Onoufriou noted  Dr  Thomas'
    qualification as a chartered consultant clinical psychologist and noted
    that she was not  a  medical  doctor  and,  more  specifically,  not  a
    psychiatrist.  While she had experience of working with issues  arising
    from psychiatric classifications of PTSD he did  not  see  any  medical
    qualifications which would qualify her to make a medical  diagnosis  in
    this case.  At paragraph 32 Judge Onoufriou dealt  with  the  issue  of
    suicidal feelings.  He noted that the appellant denied feeling suicidal
    currently.  He recorded Dr Thomas's opinion that this would  change  if
    he was returned to Kosovo and would pose a significant  suicidal  risk.
    He  observes  that  individuals  often  state  that  they  would   kill
    themselves rather than return to their country of origin but these  are
    often idle threats.  He then repeats his observation of paragraph 29 to
    the effect that there had been no medical psychiatric  diagnosis  by  a
    psychiatrist in this case.  He said that he had to query why,  in  view
    of his apparent serious psychiatric problems and the apparent threat of
    suicide, Dr Thomas did not recommend a psychiatric assessment.   As  he
    had already stated, PTSD was a medical condition and whilst he accepted
    that Dr Thomas could  work  with  this  condition  it  still  needed  a
    psychiatrist to make this diagnosis.  At paragraph 34  Judge  Onoufriou
    summarised that he did not place great weight on Dr Thomas' report  for
    the reasons that he had already explained.

5.   Dr Thomas' ability to make a diagnosis of PTSD was  not  questioned  by
    the Home Office Presenting  Officer  during  cross-examination.   While
    Judge Onoufriou did ask a few questions of her it was not suggested  by
    him that she was not qualified diagnose PTSD.

Decision

6.   From our own knowledge and experience we find  it  surprising  that  it
    should be thought that a consultant clinical psychologist did not  have
    the qualifications to make a  diagnosis  of  PTSD.   That  is  not  our
    experience.  However, the serious procedural  error  into  which  Judge
    Onoufriou fell was to fail to put the matter to Dr Thomas when she gave
    evidence before him.  That deprived Dr Thomas  of  the  opportunity  to
    respond to the serious professional criticism that was  being  levelled
    at her by Judge Onoufriou.  Since Dr Thomas' evidence was  critical  to
    the  appellant's  case  his  failure  to  put  his  doubts  about   her
    qualifications to her was unfair to the appellant.

7.   Mr Duffy conceded that there had been an error  of  law  and  concurred
    with our view that it deprived the appellant of a  fair  hearing.   For
    these reasons we  shall  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and remit it back to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  reheard
    before a different judge.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.








                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                       Date: 6 November 2017

