
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
hu/03977/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3rd January 2018                       | On 22nd February 2018            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ANDREW JORDAN
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             MR Boris Zivkovski
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis ( Senior HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the re-making of the appeal following  the  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jordan to set  aside  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hanbury, promulgated on 16th December 2016, following  a
    hearing  at  Taylor  House  on  4th  November  2016.   He   found   the
    determination contained an error on a point of law.   His  reasons  for
    doing so are set out in the Appendix to this determination.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Macedonia, and was born  on  28th
    August 1996.  He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, dated 10th November 2015, deciding  to  deport  the
    Appellant as a  persistent  offender  under  paragraph  398(c)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State determined that  there  were
    no compelling circumstances over and above those in paragraphs 399-399A
    of the Immigration Rules in the Appellant's favour, and that there were
    no very significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's  reintegration  into
    Macedonian society.  Nor, were there  'very  compelling  circumstances'
    within paragraph 398 of HC 395 to outweigh the need to deport a foreign
    criminal.  The Appellant had first come to the UK in February 2001,  at
    the age of 4 with his mother.  He was given indefinite leave to  remain
    on 26th August 2009.  Between 16th September 2010  and  16th  September
    2015, however,  he  committed  six  offences  on  six  occasions,  thus
    resulting in the Secretary of State's  decision  to  deport  him.   The
    details of the offending are set out in the Appendix.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is  that,  although  he  has  been
    convicted of six offences in total, all were committed  whilst  he  was
    under the age of 18, and that no one offence has resulted in a sentence
    of imprisonment of greater than twelve months.  His behaviour did  not,
    accordingly, show a "particular disregard for the law".

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not  accept  the  Appellant's  attempt  to  mitigate  the
    severity of his offences.  He held that the offences  were  not  minor.
    Moreover, the last offence was committed after his 18th birthday.   The
    offence may well also relate to his gangland associates.  This was even
    though the Appellant had attempted to explain his purchase  of  weapons
    on the basis that he  wanted  to  display  them  as  ornaments  on  his
    mother's wall.  The judge had rejected such an  explanation  (paragraph
    23).  The Appellant's offending must be seen, according to  the  judge,
    against  the  background  of  his  association  with  gangland  members
    (paragraph 34).  One person in fact, JA, whom the Appellant  knew,  was
    known to have been a member of the gang.  Moreover, the  Appellant  had
    been the victim of a  stabbing  in  the  buttocks,  which  is  a  known
    gangland initiation technique.  The Appellant  had  also  used  several
    aliases (paragraph 34).  Account was taken by the judge of the  leading
    judgment in Maslov v Austria - 1638/03 [2008] ECHR 546, as well as  the
    Appellant's young age, during which time  many  of  the  offences  were
    committed,  but  the  judge   concluded   that   given   the   numerous
    opportunities to improve his behaviour, and the Appellant's failure  to
    do so, a  deportation  order  was  the  appropriate  course  of  action
    (paragraph  35).   This  was  particularly  the  case  given  that  the
    Appellant had been a guest in this country and there was a duty on  the
    Secretary of State to protect the public interest (paragraph 36).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

The Finding of an Error of Law

 6. The Upper Tribunal noted that the Appellant's last conviction was  when
    he  was  aged  19.   This  was  on  16th  September  2015  at  Uxbridge
    Magistrate's Court, where the Appellant was convicted of possession  of
    an offensive weapon, and sentenced to a twelve months' community  order
    and 100 hours of unpaid work.   The  Appellant  was  at  the  time  the
    subject of "Operation Nexus" which was aimed at targeting an increasing
    number of foreign  nationals  in  the  London  area  who  were  causing
    significant harm by their criminal activities. In fact, in relation  to
    such gang activity the Appellant was encountered twenty  times  by  the
    police between 31st October 2009 and 3rd February 2014.  It  was  noted
    that  before  Judge  Hanbury,  however,  when  PC  Raichira  had  given
    evidence, she had accepted that the Appellant  had  not  been  arrested
    since March 2016. The judge had moreover accepted the  submission  made
    on the Appellant's behalf that there was not a risk of  future  serious
    offending.  The Upper Tribunal drew attention to the  police  officer's
    admission during  cross-examination  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the  Appellant  had  any  ongoing  contact  with  gangland
    associates anymore.  Moreover, in the Rule 24 response,  the  Secretary
    of State did not dispute that such an admission had taken place.

 7. Second, the judge had misdirected himself (at paragraphs 26 and 27)  in
    relation to the application  of  the  "very  compelling  circumstances"
    test.  He had justified the deportation because  the  Respondent  could
    demonstrate that there were very  compelling  circumstances  justifying
    her decision.  That, however, was not the test.   The  very  compelling
    circumstances refer to the Appellant. The Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer conceded that it would be unwise to rely upon  a  determination
    which  was  based  upon  a  misunderstanding  of  the  relevant   legal
    framework.   Since  the  judge  had   focused   on   the   Respondent's
    circumstances, he had failed to examine the Appellant's case as to what
    were, or might be, the relevant circumstances.

 8. Third, the pattern of offending must be seen within the context of  the
    Appellant's age and the fact that he was a minor when all  but  one  of
    the offences took place.  Whilst reliance was placed upon the  decision
    of the European Court of Human Rights  in  Maslov  v  Austria,  it  was
    important not to overlook the  underlying  principle,  which  was  that
    juvenile delinquency has to  be  seen  as  an  unpleasant  and  harmful
    episode, but it should nevertheless not be viewed in the  same  way  as
    offending committed by an adult.   This  is  because  an  adult  has  a
    greater level of maturity, understanding, and discernment between  what
    is right and wrong.  Criminal damage and  possession  of  cannabis  for
    personal use, and street fighting, are reprehensible conduct but,  when
    committed by a minor, they should not be treated as determinative of  a
    settled  state  of  mind  thereby  classifying  the  individual  as   a
    persistent offender showing a particular disregard for the law.

 9. In the determination by Judge Hanbury, it was stated (at paragraph  36)
    that, "I am not satisfied that the fact that the  Appellant  was  below
    the age of  18  when  most  of  the  offences  were  committed  provide
    sufficient  excuse  for  his  offending  or  place  him  in  a  special
    category..."  The Upper  Tribunal  held  that  such  a  statement  runs
    counter to the relevant  jurisprudence  which  expressly  requires  the
    judicial decision maker to consider  juvenile  offending  as  requiring
    separate consideration and to  avoid  treating  juvenile  offending  as
    indicative of future offending.

10. Accordingly, had the judge given consideration to  these  factors,  his
    decision on  whether  the  Appellant  could  now  be  classified  as  a
    persistent offender, might have been different  and  it  therefore  now
    required reconsideration.

11. The Tribunal proceeded to set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Hanbury and directed that the remaking of the decision  would  be
    conducted by the Upper Tribunal.

The Hearing

12. At the hearing of 3rd January 2018 Ms Childs, appearing as  Counsel  on
    behalf of the Appellant, relied upon her Skeleton Argument,  which  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  She submitted that the  Appellant  was
    not a foreign criminal.  He was not a persistent offender.  He did  not
    come under Section 117, so as to justify  his  expulsion.   She  relied
    upon the Tribunal determination of Chege ("is a  persistent  offender")
    [2016] UKUT 00187 (IAC), for the proposition that in assessing  whether
    the  Appellant  is  a  persistent  offender,  who  shows  a  particular
    disregard for the law, the onus was upon the Secretary of State to show
    that this was the case, and the standard of proof was on a  balance  of
    probabilities.  The Tribunal had to consider the whole history  of  the
    individual from the commission of the first offence, right  up  to  the
    date of the decision, and then ask itself  whether  the  Appellant  can
    properly be described as  someone  who  keeps  on  committing  criminal
    offences (see paragraph 57 of Chege).   Ms  Child  submitted  that  the
    Respondent had not discharged that burden of proving that the Appellant
    was a persistent offender.   What  was  relevant  was  the  Appellant's
    offending.  The statutory focus was on the offences he had  been  shown
    to have committed. Five of the six offences  were  committed  when  the
    Appellant was a  minor.   Chege  did  not  consider  whether  being  of
    minority age was a relevant factor in assessing the test in  the  Rules
    and Section 117B, although Ms Childs' submitted that  it  should  be  a
    relevant factor.  It will obviously be established that a minor has the
    necessary mens rea to commit a criminal offence, but the Tribunal must,
    be more hesitant to find that a  child  has  settled  on  a  course  of
    offending, or that the child shows a particular disregard for the  law.
    Given that the Appellant was of a minor age when he committed  five  of
    the six offences upon which the Respondent relies, and considering  the
    nature  of  the  offending,  which  may  be  categorised  as   juvenile
    delinquency (as stated in Maslov v Austria), the Tribunal  should  hold
    that he was not a foreign criminal and allow his appeal.

13. Second, the Appellant  was  subject  to  the  exception  applicable  in
    paragraph 399A, insofar as Section 117C(4)  was  concerned.   This  was
    because the Appellant arrived in the UK when he was 4 years of age.  He
    undertook his entire education in this country.  He only spoke English.
     The family members with whom he continues to have contact are here  in
    the UK, including his mother, and his sister.  He has  also  worked  in
    the UK. He could not  be  considered  to  be  socially  and  culturally
    integrated into Macedonian life.  The  Appellant's  offending  did  not
    serve to establish that he was not integrated into the UK life.  It was
    well-known that the Respondent  had  a  policy  which  recognises  that
    children who have lived in the UK for  a  continuous  period  of  seven
    years would start to put down roots and integrate into life in the  UK.
    Given  this,  the  Appellant  would  now  encounter  very   significant
    obstacles to integration on deportation in Macedonia.  There would be a
    language barrier  for  the  Appellant  and  he  has  no  experience  of
    education or employment in Macedonia.  His statement and those  of  his
    relatives all make it clear that he is not in contact with  any  family
    member in Macedonia.  After all, the Appellant's mother left  Macedonia
    when the Appellant was 4 years of age.  The principle  was  also  well-
    known that those, who had spent most or all of their childhood  in  the
    host country, were in a  "special  situation"  requiring  very  serious
    reasons  which  justify  expulsion,  and  this  could   be   of   added
    significance given that the Appellant had committed most  his  offences
    when he was a juvenile.

14. Ms Childs went on to explain that there was Pre-Sentence report of 16th
    September 2015 by Patricia H Ryan (see  pages  210  to  211),  who  had
    stated with respect to the Appellant that,

         "He is suitable for a period of unpaid work.  He now lives with his
         mum.  He has never  spent  time  in  prison.   So  has  not  broken
         conditions.  He has no family  in  Macedonia.   He  does  not  have
         family there.  Therefore, there was a very significant risk to  him
         if he was returned there."

15. For his part,  Mr  Jarvis,  for  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,
    submitted that paragraph 398(c) stated that the deportation of a person
    on conducive to the public good grounds was justified if  "they  are  a
    persistent offender who shows a  particular  disregard  for  the  law".
    There were concerns on the part of the judge (at paragraph 36) that the
    Appellant's offences may have related to gangland violence, and he  had
    stated (at paragraph 34) that the Appellant used aliases  to  hide  his
    identity as a gang member.  After all,  he  had  been  stabbed  in  the
    buttocks as an initiation process.  With respect to  paragraph  399(a),
    in Bossade (ss.117A-D-interrelationship with Rules) [2015]  UKUT  00415
    (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  confirmed  that  anti-social  behaviour  and
    criminality breaks down the continuum of integration in the UK, because
    the history of offending, "betokens  a  serious  discontinuity  in  his
    integration in the UK especially because it shows blatant disregard for
    his fellow citizens."  That was the position here.  It was insufficient
    for the Appellant to rely on Maslov v Austria because the  Court  there
    did not create a special rule for  juveniles.   Many  people  committed
    offences  when  they  were  young.   There  were  no  very   compelling
    circumstances in this case.  There was a relatively high  risk  of  re-
    offending in the next few years.

16. In reply, Ms Childs submitted that the Appellant may well have  been  a
    persistent offender when he was younger but he  was  not  one  now.  At
    paragraph 13 of the grounds it had been stated that the  Appellant  had
    no longer any ongoing contact with gang members.  None of the  offences
    had been gang related.  The Appellant could not reintegrate  into  life
    in Macedonia.  In Bossade, the deportee was an adult.  He was 29  years
    of age and he could work in the country of his origin.   This  was  not
    the case here.

Remaking the decision

17. We have remade the decision on the basis of  the  decision  finding  an
    error of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury,  the
    submissions we have heard today, and the findings that were made by the
    judge below.  We are allowing this appeal for the following reasons.

18. First, it is well-established that juvenile delinquency has to be  seen
    in a different manner to adult delinquency: see Maslov v  Austria.   In
    this case, five of the Appellant's six offences were committed when  he
    was a minor.

19. Second, with respect to the future, the evidence of  PC  Raichira,  who
    was cross-examined in  the  Tribunal  below,  was  that  there  was  no
    evidence to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  had  ongoing  contact  with
    gangland associates.

20. Third, the Appellant has not offended since.

21. Fourth, we accept the Appellant was a persistent offender (contrary  to
    what Ms Childs has submitted before us) but this is a  case  where  the
    Appellant did not commit serious offences.

22. Finally, he has been in the UK since the age of 4, he  does  not  speak
    the language in Macedonia, has not worked there or been educated there,
    and would not be able to reintegrate into that country.  There are very
    compelling circumstances on  his  part  suggesting  he  should  not  be
    deported because as was stated in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ  813,  the  concept  of  a  foreign
    criminal's "integration" into the country to which it is proposed  that
    he should be deported, as set out in Section 117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
    339A, is a broad one.  It is not confined to the mere ability to find a
    job or to sustain life while living in the other country.  In fact, the
    idea of "integration" is one which,

         "calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on and the
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there..." (see paragraph 14).

    In this broad sense, we are of the view that the Appellant would not be
    able to integrate into Macedonian society.

DECISION


 1. The Judge made an error on a point of law.
 2. We re-make the decision allowing the appellant's appeal against the
    respondent's decision of 26 January 2016 refusing the appellant's human
    rights claim and the decision to deport him pursuant to Section 5(1) of
    the Immigration Act 1971.
No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th February 2018

                                  Appendix

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW
Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms G. Peterson, Counsel, instructed by Bijana & Co.,
                    solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P. Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

   1. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  the  Former  Yugoslav  Republic  of
      Macedonia who was born on 28 August 1996.  He is  21  years  old.   He
      arrived in the United Kingdom aged 4 and has remained here ever since.


   2. The appellant appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Hanbury whose determination was promulgated on 16 December  2016
      dismissing the appellant's appeal against the  decision  made  by  the
      Secretary of State  on  10  November  2015  intending  to  deport  the
      appellant as a persistent offender within  paragraph  298(c)   of  the
      Immigration Rules.

   3. The relevant rules are

         Deportation and Article 8

           398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
           Rights Convention, and
            (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public interest because, in the view
           of the Secretary of State,...they are a persistent offender who
           shows a particular disregard for the law, the Secretary of State
           in assessing that claim will consider whether paragraph ...399A
           applies and, if it does not, the public interest in deportation
           will only be outweighed by other factors where there are very
           compelling circumstances over and above those described in
           paragraph...399A.
           399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398...(c) applies
           if -
           (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
           his life; and
           (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
           (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
           into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.
   4. The judge described the offences  as  principally  for  possession  of
      controlled drugs (cannabis) all of which  were  committed  whilst  the
      appellant was a minor, save for the last offence.


   5. The appellant's history of  offending,  extracted  from  the  decision
      letter consists of 6 convictions:
           i)  On  16  September  2010  the  appellant  was  convicted   of
              destroying or damaging property and  sentenced  to  a  three-
              month referral order.
          ii) On 2 November 2010  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  using
              disorderly behaviour or threatening,  abusive  and  insulting
              words which resulted in an extension of the referral order.
         iii) On 25 January 2012 the appellant was convicted of affray  and
              sentenced to a 12 month use rehabilitation order,  a  six-day
              activity requirement and a four-month curfew requirement.
          iv) On 17 April 2013 the appellant was convicted of possession of
              a class B drug for which he was conditionally discharged  for
              six months.
           v) On 4 February 2014 the appellant was convicted of  possession
              of a class B drug and find �50.
          vi)  (In  paragraph  34  of  his  determination,  the  First-tier
              Tribunal Judge appears to place reliance on an offence  which
              took place on 7 July 2012 when the police  officer  confirmed
              in evidence that his mobile telephone showed he  was  not  in
              the area at the time.)


   6. The final conviction took place  on  16  September  2015  at  Uxbridge
      Magistrates Court where the appellant was convicted of  possession  of
      an offensive weapon and sentenced to a 12 month  community  order  and
      100 hours of unpaid work. At the date of conviction the appellant  was
      aged 19.  There have been no further offences since.


   7. However, the appellant was the subject of Operation Nexus targeting an
      increasing number of foreign nationals  in  the  London  area  causing
      significant harm by criminal activities. The appellant was encountered
      20 times by the police between 31 October 2009 and 3 February 2014  in
      relation to gang activity carried out by a large number of  associates
      most or all of whom had criminal convictions.

   8. PC Raichira gave evidence. She accepted that  the  appellant  had  not
      been arrested since March 2016. The judge accepted the submission made
      on the appellant's behalf that there was not a risk of future  serious
      offending. However  he  did  not  accept  there  was  not  a  risk  of
      continuing offending were  the  appellant  to  be  successful  in  the
      present appeal.  I shall refer to this element later in this decision.

   9. The grounds of appeal asserted the judge failed to consider the police
      officer's  admission  during  cross-examination  that  there  was   no
      evidence to suggest the appellant had ongoing contact  with  'gangland
      associates'.  In the respondent's rule  24  notice  the  Secretary  of
      State does not dispute that such  an  admission  took  place.  In  due
      course, it will, however, have to be proved.

  10. I am satisfied that in reaching his conclusion, the  judge  materially
      erred.


  11. In paragraphs 26 and 37 of his determination,  the  judge  misdirected
      himself in  relation  to  the  application  of  the  'very  compelling
      circumstances'  test.  He  justified  the  deportation   because   the
      respondent could demonstrate there were very compelling  circumstances
      justifying her decision. That is not the  test.  The  very  compelling
      circumstances refer to the appellant. Given the circumstances of  this
      case, Mr Deller accepted that it  would  be  unwise  to  rely  upon  a
      determination which is based upon a misunderstanding of  the  relevant
      legal framework. By focussing on the respondent's  circumstances,  the
      judge did not examine the appellant's case as to what were or might be
      relevant circumstances.

  12.  More importantly, perhaps, the pattern  of  offending  must  be  seen
      within the context of the appellant's age and the fact that he  was  a
      minor when all but one  of  the  offences  took  place.  Whilst  great
      reliance is placed upon the decision of the ECtHR in Maslov v  Austria
      (2008) EHRR 546,  the  underlying  principle  is  universal.  Juvenile
      delinquency has to be seen as an unpleasant and harmful episode but it
      should not be viewed in the same way  as  offending  committed  by  an
      adult  who  should  have  developed  a  greater  level  of   maturity,
      understanding and discernment between what is right and wrong. It  was
      for this reason that the Court said that there was

     little room for justifying an expulsion of a settled migrant on account
           of mostly non-violent offences committed when a minor.


     In the context of this case, it is particularly apposite and crucial to
      the process of decision making.  Criminal  damage  and  possession  of
      cannabis for  personal  use  and  street  fighting  are  reprehensible
      conduct but, when committed by a minor, they should not be treated  as
      determinative of a settled  state  of  mind  thereby  classifying  the
      individual as a persistent offender showing a particular disregard for
      the law. It is not simply a pipe  dream  that  juvenile  offending  is
      reversible with growing maturity. In the circumstances of  this  case,
      (i) there was  no evidence of recent offending save for the offence in
      2014 (ii) Mr Blundell's  assertion  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  (the
      Counsel who represented the appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal)
      that the police officer admitted during cross examination  that  there
      was no evidence to suggest the appellant had ongoing contact with  his
      former  gangland  associates  (iii)  the  judge's  concession  in  the
      determination and in the probation service report that  there  was  no
      risk of future serious offending.


  13. In paragraph 36 the judge said:


     I am not satisfied that the fact that the appellant was below  the  age
           of  18  when  most  of  the  offences  were  committed   provide
           sufficient excuse for his offending or place him  in  a  special
           category. Insofar as the appellant  is  within  such  a  special
           category, I take full  account  of  all  the  circumstances  and
           reject the suggestion that he will not reoffend.


  14. In my judgment that passage runs counter to the relevant jurisprudence
      which expressly requires  the  judicial  decision  maker  to  consider
      juvenile offending as requiring separate consideration  and  to  avoid
      treating juvenile offending as indicative of future offending.


  15. Were the judge to have  given  consideration  to  these  factors,  his
      decision on whether  the  appellant  could  now  be  classified  as  a
      persistent  offender  might  have  been  different  and  will  require
      reconsideration.

  16. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The re-making of
      the decision will be conducted in the Upper Tribunal.

   I direct


   If the appellant seeks to adduce further evidence, he must file and serve
   an additional bundle of material within 28  days  of  the  date  of  this
   direction.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                                             18 October 2017
