
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03337/2018
                                                HU/03341/2018, HU/03347/2018
                                                             & HU/03350/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2019                  |On 21 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

|                 |Jankiben [P]                           |First Appellant  |
|                 |Eleshkumar [P]                         |Second Appellant |
|                 |[A P]                                  |Third Appellant  |
|                 |[J P]                                  |Fourth Appellant |

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Kumar, legal representative from Capital
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Notwithstanding that minority of two of the appellants I  see  no  need
    for and do not make any order restricting publicity about this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on 23
    April 2019  dismissing  the  appeals  of  the  appellants  against  the
    decision of the respondent on 11 January 2018 to refuse them leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Garratt.   In  summary
    his reasons for granting permission were that it was arguable that  the
    First-tier Tribunal should not have  concluded  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the third named appellant, a child who had resided in the United
    Kingdom for nine years, to accompany her parents to India and that  the
    judge had given the impression of unfairness by, for example, reference
    to the appellant as a "trojan horse".

 3. I begin  by  considering  carefully  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 4. This, helpfully, begins by explaining  the  family  relationship.   The
    first appellant and second appellant are married to each  other.   They
    are the parents of the third appellant  who  was  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom in May 2010 and the fourth appellant who was born in the United
    Kingdom in August 2012.  The appellants are  all  nationals  of  India.
    They appealed a decision of the respondent on 11 January 2018  refusing
    them leave to remain.  The application was made on 25  September  2017.
    The judge noted that the first appellant was given leave to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as a student in 2009 accompanied  by  her  husband,  the
    second appellant.  The first  and  second  appellant  had  their  leave
    extended until June 2014 and the third and fourth appellants were given
    leave in line with their parents.  On 20 June 2014 the first  appellant
    applied for leave but the application was refused.  That  decision  was
    appealed and the appeal was dismissed.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    dealing with that appeal was satisfied that  the  first  appellant  had
    been identified correctly as a person who had relied on a  fraudulently
    obtained certificate of competence in the English  language.   At  that
    time neither child had achieved seven years' residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the appellants remained in the
    United Kingdom.  Paragraph  4  of  the  decision  and  reasons  begins,
    regrettably, with the phrase:

         "Undeterred by the dismissal of the appeals and in the  absence  of
         any application to appeal against the decision of [the  Immigration
         Judge], the appellants remained in the UK until such  time  as  the
         third appellant had attained the age of 7, whereupon  in  September
         2017 the appellants applied for LTR.  This application, refused  on
         11 January 2018, is the subject of the present appeal."

 6. Although factually correct, it is not helpful when judges  give  in  to
    the temptation to use phrases such as "undeterred by the  dismissal  of
    the appeals".  The judge must be seen to be acting fairly and there  is
    no need to make  comments  in  that  way  on  the  good  faith  of  the
    appellants, especially as two of them are  minors  and  clearly  wholly
    blameless for any manipulation in which the other appellants might have
    indulged.

 7. The judge noted that in the case of the first and second appellants the
    respondent took the view that they were adults who had lived  in  India
    in their adult life and had not identified any significant obstacles to
    their reintegration into life in India.  I set out in its entirety  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's summary of the  respondent's  consideration
    of the third appellant's case.  The judge said at paragraph 5(c) of the
    Decision and Reasons:

         "In addressing the third  appellant's  application  the  respondent
         considered this appellant's claim  under  the  private  life  route
         only.  She was not eligible to apply as a child under  Appendix  FM
         because her parents had no LTR and were  at  the  same  time  being
         refused under Appendix FM.  Acknowledging that this  appellant  had
         lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  over  seven  years,  it  was
         considered that it would be reasonable for  her  to  leave  as  she
         would be returning with parents  and  the  fourth  appellant  as  a
         family unit.  She was a national of India with family  ties  there.
         She could speak Gujarati.  As her parents  spent  the  majority  of
         their lives in India they would be able to help her adapt  to  life
         there.  It was in her best interests to remain with her parents."

 8. The case of the fourth appellant, the younger child, added  nothing  of
    importance to the reasons.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  said  at
    paragraph 6:

         "The crucial issue to address in these appeals is  whether  in  the
         first  instance  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the   third
         appellant, in particular, to leave the UK  in  circumstances  where
         she has lived continuously in the UK for  over  eight  years  since
         birth and the fourth appellant for over six years."

 9. The judge then summarised the evidence that might be  thought  to  show
    that removal would be unreasonable.  He noted that in cross-examination
    that the first appellant acknowledged that some Gujarati was spoken  at
    home but she said the children were not fluent and had not been  taught
    to read or write in Gujarati.

10. At paragraph 7 the judge said:

         "At the hearing of the appeals the first appellant  gave  evidence,
         adopting the brief joint statement made by  her  and  her  husband.
         The evidence centred on the circumstances of  the  third  appellant
         and her satisfactory progress at school.  For her part the daughter
         was agitated and concerned about  the  risk  of  being  removed  to
         India.  Her friends were here and it would be impossible for her to
         continue her schooling in  India.   Her  best  interests  would  be
         served in remaining in the UK.  The appellants' financial situation
         was difficult in the absence  of  any  right  to  work.   In  these
         circumstances they were dependent on help given to them by  others.
         In  his  statement  R.  S.  Patel  asserted  that  he  occasionally
         financially helped the appellants.  He considered the parents to be
         responsible people".

11. Overall the Decision and Reasons contains a very  slim  review  of  the
    evidence but I have reviewed the evidence that  was  available  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and, with respect, there is little to criticise  in
    the judge's summary.  It might have been helpful to have added that the
    joint statement referred to the children having "visited India briefly"
    but never having lived there permanently.  It is also right that  there
    are statements from neighbours and friends and documents in the  school
    tending to suggest that both the third and fourth  appellant  are  well
    behaved children who are taking advantage of the opportunities provided
    them by the education system.  That is to their credit and  the  credit
    of their parents but does not go very far on the road of  showing  that
    it would be  unreasonable  to  remove  the  third  appellant  from  the
    jurisdiction.

12. There are aspects of the appeal decision and reasons that surprise  me.



13. At paragraph 15 the First-tier Tribunal Judge states, before  embarking
    upon findings about what is "reasonable", that the third  appellant  is
    the "remaining appellants' 'Trojan horse'".  At paragraph 22 the  judge
    refers to "going to their home country" which  I  find  a  questionable
    description of the country of which the third and fourth appellants are
    citizens but where they have only lived for brief times on holidays.

14. The judge directed himself to leading cases concerning the  appropriate
    test and Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, sub-Section (6) which applies in the case of a person not  liable
    to deportation (and this is such a case) and provides that  the  public
    interest does not require a person's removal where  the  person  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child
    and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United
    Kingdom.

15. However it is entirely clear  to  me  that  the  judge  identified  the
    correct statutory test  and  leading  cases  that  illuminated  it  and
    concluded that it was reasonable to expect the qualifying  child,  that
    is the third appellant, to leave the United Kingdom.

16. I have to say that little had been  raised  to  point  to  a  different
    conclusion.  It  is  wholly  unremarkable  that  the  child  should  be
    apprehensive about removing to India.  It represents an enormous change
    in her life.  She is being taken away from  the  school  where  she  is
    doing well and happy and no doubt has established a circle  of  friends
    to somewhere else but this kind of disruption  is  a  common  childhood
    experience.  Parents  move  and  they  move  within  their  country  of
    nationality and they move to other countries.  It would  be  surprising
    if the mere fact of removal established unreasonableness.

17. Obviously, as the First-tier Tribunal Judge recognises,  the  longer  a
    child has spent in the United Kingdom the more likely that child is  to
    have developed a significant private and family life of his or her  own
    and therefore the more likely that it is  that  removal  would  not  be
    reasonable, but there has to be evidence  and  explanation.   There  is
    very little here.  Nothing is advanced to suggest the children  have  a
    special reason to be in  the  United  Kingdom.   I  hesitate  to  offer
    examples because I do not wish to be a hostage to fortune but there are
    not, for example, special educational  or  health  needs.   Neither  is
    there anything to contrast the education  available  to  the  child  in
    India  that  might  illuminate  the  reasonableness  of  removal.   The
    evidence is not there and the judge cannot be criticised for not making
    findings based on evidence he had not got.

18. The grounds of appeal are extensive.

19. They begin by complaining the judge gave "too much undue weight to  the
    conduct of the parents".

20. At paragraph 23 of the  Decision  and  Reasons  there  is  a  long  and
    appropriate quotation from the decision of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    Nigeria [2018] UKSC 53 and there the  judge  noted  the  Supreme  Court
    disagreeing with any lurking suggestion from an earlier  decision  that
    reasonableness is otherwise than  "in  the  real  world  in  which  the
    children find themselves."  In other words the judge  directed  himself
    expressly that he had to look at the impact of  the  decision  and  its
    consequences on the children and that is what he did.  He noted that it
    was good for the children to be with their parents (that much is surely
    uncontroversial), that the parents could guide the children and  expect
    help from the first appellant's parents  and  siblings  (see  paragraph
    22).

21. Clearly the judge was looking at the impact on the children  and  found
    that they would be supported in the event of return.

22. I agree with the grounds that it is regrettable that the judge chose to
    see a link between the third appellant obtaining seven years' residence
    and the subsequent application for further leave to remain.  It was  in
    fact made just more than a fortnight after their appeal rights had been
    exhausted in an earlier application.  The  link  which  interested  the
    judge may have been a  coincidence.   I  do  not  know  why  the  judge
    referred to a "Trojan horse".  The grounds of appeal describe  this  as
    "offensive language".  Certainly the appellants have done nothing wrong
    in making an application and then appealing a decision.  I have already
    disassociated myself  from  the  suggestion  that  the  appellants  are
    returning to their "home".  Nevertheless I do not regard any  of  these
    things as things capable  of  so  undermining  the  decision  that  the
    decision  itself  becomes  unsafe.  It  does  not  show  prejudice   or
    unfairness even though it  would,  in  my  judgement,  have  been  best
    avoided.

23. Importantly, the correct legal test was identified and there was little
    evidence to point to another conclusion.

24. I have considered carefully Mr Kumar's submissions which were  measured
    and helpful. Certainly I accept that  the  children  had  done  nothing
    wrong and should not be punished for any error by their parents.   That
    is uncontroversial but important and is a point worth emphasising.

25. There was a time when obtaining seven years' residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom almost guaranteed a right to remain and many parents were  able
    to remain, at least for a time, because  their  children  had  obtained
    seven years' residence.  That state of affairs arose from a  particular
    policy which is no longer the policy of the  Government.   Little  that
    emerged from those years is of direct help now.

26. There is a two prong test created by statute.  A need for seven  years'
    residence is the starting point but it is not the only  criteria.   The
    need for reasonableness is not  a  makeweight  or  afterthought  but  a
    second distinct separate point.  This was identified by the  judge  who
    considered the limited evidence before  him  and  reached  an  entirely
    rational conclusion.

27. Although I regret some of the phraseology used  by  the  judge  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal it has not undermined the decision which  is  based
    on a clear legal test and limited evidence.

28. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and I dismiss each of  these
    appeals.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 January 2020                |



