
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03446/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2016                   |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                            MISS REGINA MAPURANGA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Muzira, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew promulgated on 11 March 2016.  The appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Zimbabwe who was born  on  15  November  1962.  On  16  July  2015  the
    Respondent refused the appellant's application for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom, which had been pursued primarily under human rights
    grounds.

2.   The appellant is some 54 years of age and has  a  lengthy  and  complex
    immigration history, having arrived in this country as a visitor in May
    1999.   Throughout  1999  into  2001  and  further  into  2004  various
    applications were made for further  leave  to  remain  which  were  all
    dismissed.  She was declared an overstayer  by  the  issuance  of  form
    IS151A on 22 December 2004.  Her  current  claim,  under  human  rights
    considerations, dates from 13 May 2008.  The judgment of the First-tier
    Tribunal sets out the findings which the judge came to based  upon  the
    matters that were in issue before her. Paragraph 20 reads as follows:

         "The  Appellant's  representative's  skeleton   argument   confirms
         reliance  on  two  matters,  the  first  of  which   is   Paragraph
         276ADE(vi).  I am satisfied, on the evidence that is before me, the
         Appellant has not lost all her ties to Zimbabwe and there  are  not
         significant obstacles to her returning to that  country.   She  has
         her mother and one daughter there.  The  Appellant  has  spent  the
         majority of her life there.  While I accept she has  lived  in  the
         United Kingdom for seventeen years for the first thirty seven years
         she lived in Zimbabwe.  There is  no  reason  why  she  should  not
         obtain some form of employment in Zimbabwe such as to  be  able  to
         maintain  herself.   I  accept  there  may  be   difficulties   and
         challenges for the Appellant but these do not amount to significant
         obstacles".

    In  consequence  upon  those  findings,  in   paragraph   21   of   the
    determination, the judge dismissed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

3.   The judge went on to consider applying SS  (Congo)  and  Others  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387  where  compelling  circumstances  could  be  demonstrated
    justifying an assessment outside the  Rules.   The  judge  did  not  in
    paragraph 22 immediately identify  such  compelling  circumstances  but
    proceeded in the following paragraphs to analyse the various matters to
    be considered under the guideline authority of Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.
    The judge said as follows:

         "25. In making my proportionality assessment  I  must,  of  course,
             consider   the   best   interests    of    [the    Appellant's
             grandchildren].  However, for the reasons that  I  have  given
             above I am not satisfied that the  Appellant's  care  for  the
             children is as claimed by her and [her  daughter].   Whilst  I
             have  little  doubt  that  the  children   will   miss   their
             grandmother it is in their best interests for them  to  remain
             with their mother in their family unit.

         26.  Article 8 does not give a right of home  or  accommodation  or
             even employment for those  returning  to  their  own  country.
             However, for the reasons that I given above I do not find  the
             Appellant would be in very severe hardship on her return.  The
             Appellant has spent most of her life in Zimbabwe and  will  be
             better equipped on her return by reason of her  education  and
             experience in the United Kingdom.

         27.  I have to have regard to the  public  interest  considerations
             under Section 117B including that immigration  control  is  in
             the public interest.  Whilst I accept there have  been  delays
             on the part of the Respondent the fact remains  that  much  of
             the private life the Appellant has developed  whilst  she  has
             been in the United Kingdom is at a time when her presence  was
             precarious.  This means that I am able to attach little weight
             to the  Appellant's  private  life  developed  in  the  United
             Kingdom including her relationship with her family members.

         28.  I do accept that the Appellant speaks  English.   However  she
             has not demonstrated her present  ability  to  be  financially
             independent.

         29.  Putting all these factors together and considering the case in
             the round, I find, for the reasons set out above,  that  there
             are no compelling circumstances and that the decision  of  the
             Respondent was not disproportionate to the family and  private
             life circumstances of the Appellant and her family members".

4.   In granting permission to appeal in this matter, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins stated the following:

         "3.  I am far from satisfied that any error will  be  found  to  be
             material but the appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for
             more than 17 years and she claims that for 7  of  those  years
             she was awaiting a decision from the Respondent.

         4.   It is arguable that, in the absence of  a  proper  explanation
             for the delay, she should have been allowed to remain".

5.   In advancing the appeal before me this  morning  Ms  Muzira  makes  her
    primary focus the issue of delay.   She  says  that  the  judge  failed
    properly to take into account the unexplained delay both in her Article
    8 proportionality assessment and that such a  view  similarly  infected
    her assessment of the case under the Immigration Rules and  that  delay
    was a criterion which should have featured more heavily in the issue of
    determining whether there were insurmountable obstacles to returning to
    Zimbabwe.

6.   Ms Muzira made particular reference to the decision  of  the  House  of
    Lords in EB (Kosovo) (FC) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2008] UKHL 41 and took me in particular to paragraphs 14 and 15 of the
    opinion of Lord Bingham of Cornhill.  There are two ways in which delay
    is relevant in a decision making process.   First,  the  applicant  may
    during a period of any delay develop closer personal  and  social  ties
    and establish deeper roots in the community than would  otherwise  have
    been the case.  Lord Bingham continues at paragraph 15 that there is  a
    second less obvious way in which delay  is  relevant  and  this  is  as
    follows:

         "An immigrant without leave  to  enter  or  remain  is  in  a  very
         precarious situation, liable  to  be  removed  at  any  time.   Any
         relationship into which such an applicant enters is likely  to  be,
         initially, tentative,  being  entered  into  under  the  shadow  of
         severance by administrative order".

    Lord Bingham continues:

         "If months pass without a decision to remove being made, and months
         become years, and year succeeds year, it is  to  be  expected  that
         this sense of impermanence will fade and the expectation will  grow
         that if the authorities had intended to remove the  applicant  they
         would have taken steps to do so. This result depends  on  no  legal
         doctrine but on an understanding of how, in some cases,  minds  may
         work and it may affect the proportionality of removal".

7.   Ms  Muzira  also  took  me  briefly  to  Enforcement  Instructions  and
    Guidance, a policy document of the Secretary of State and in particular
    to Chapter 53 which deals with issues of exceptional circumstance.  She
    took me to a number of matters within  that  guidance  where  delay  is
    referred to, although she conceded this was not part  of  the  case  as
    advanced on the appellant's behalf before the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   I have read with care the factual findings which the judge made and  it
    is plain to me by reference to paragraphs 10 and 27 that the judge  had
    uppermost in her mind the issue of delay when coming to the conclusions
    that she did.  I do not think she can be criticised for failing to make
    any reference to EB (Kosovo) because it is clear from the tenor of  the
    decision that the import of the observations I have quoted lay  at  the
    heart of her consideration of the appeal before her. I do not  consider
    there to be any error of law in the judge's  analysis  of  the  factors
    relevant to paragraph 276ADE(vi) and the judge coming to the conclusion
    that the appellant had not lost her ties to Zimbabwe  such  that  there
    were not significant obstacles to her returning.  In my assessment that
    factual conclusion is unimpeachable.

9.   That then brings me next  to  the  criticism  made  of  the  Article  8
    assessment and the proportionality assessment. The submission  here  is
    that  the  judge  gave  undue  prominence  to   the   public   interest
    considerations under  Section  117B  and  insufficient  weight  to  the
    considerable delay in determining this matter. Mr Nath was not  in  the
    position to offer any explanation for the Secretary of  State's  delay.
    Of course  it  is  regrettable  and  unfortunate  that  lengthy  delays
    occasionally  occur  in  the  administration  of  immigration  control.
    Nonetheless, reading the determination it is plain to me that the  fact
    of unexplained delay was in the forefront of the judge's mind and  that
    it was taken fully  into  account.   I  accept  that  it  is  a  little
    unfortunate that in paragraph 10 the judge states:

         "However, I have nothing before me to show that had the  Respondent
         dealt with the Appellant's applications efficiency,  as  it  should
         have  done,  there  would  have  been  any  leave  granted  to  the
         Appellant".

    That is not necessarily the sole way  of  looking  at  delay  but  even
    taking that sentence out of context, it does not detract from the  fact
    that the judge put all factors into consideration including  the  delay
    but nonetheless came to the conclusion that  there  was  no  compelling
    circumstance permitting the matter  to  be  successfully  reviewed  and
    allowed under Article 8.

10.  In my view, the judge's assessment was within the broad  parameters  of
    discretion properly allowed to fact-finding  Tribunals.   Other  judges
    may have come to another conclusion, but the conclusion of  this  judge
    is not one which can in any way amount to a material error of law.   In
    the circumstances this appeal must be dismissed and the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal is maintained.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     11 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
