







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03428/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 17 January 2019                  |On: 31 January 2019                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                  Alex [L]
                        anonymity direction NOT made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja, Counsel, instructed by UK Migration
Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of  Jamaica,  born  on  9  July  2001.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge promulgated on 5 November 2018  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision on 11 January  2018  to  refuse  his
      application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of  his  family
      life in the UK with his parent and sponsor, [CL].


   2. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge S H  Smith
      found there was an arguable material error of law in  that  the  Judge
      ascribed great significance to the decision  in  Devaseelan,  arguably
      overlooking the impact of his mother's residence in the United  States
      (a development which post dated the  earlier  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Thomas, promulgated on 30 March 2016), upon his British
      father's claimed assumption of sole responsibility for his care.


   3. The Judge did not refer to any of the key  authorities  applicable  to
      the determination of  sole  responsibility,  including  TD  (Paragraph
      297(i)(e): Sole Responsibility) Yemen [2006] UKAIT 0049  and  appeared
      to conclude that because the appellant has regular  contact  with  his
      mother, his father did not have sole responsibility. Judge Smith noted
      that more detailed reasons for the Judge's finding  are  not  apparent
      from the decision.


   4. In addition, First-tier Tribunal Judge  Smith  found  that  the  Judge
      speculated that the appellant would be able to join his mother in  the
      UK [27], because "... it seems to me that a minor child would have the
      right to join his mother there". In the  absence  of  evidence  as  to
      foreign law, domestic courts are to  assume  that  English  law  would
      apply. In circumstances where the Judge held that there  was  no  such
      "right"  for  the  appellant  to  remain  here  with  his  father,  by
      definition there was no basis to assume that the US approach would  be
      more generous, still less was it appropriate to speculate.


   5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith stated that  the  Judge's  speculative
      approach arguably contaminated  his  Razgar  proportionality  analysis
      whereby at [32] he adopted the reasoning of Judge  Thomas's  decision.
      It is not clear how  the  latter's  proportionality  assessment  could
      properly be applied to the situation that the Tribunal was faced  with
      on this occasion, given that Judge Thomas ascribed significance to the
      fact that the appellant could return to his mother in Jamaica  or  the
      BVI where he had lived previously. That was arguably not a  conclusion
      properly open to the Judge to reach as it relied  on  the  speculative
      approach outlined above.


   6. At the commencement of the error of law hearing on 17 January 2019, Mr
      Avery indicated that the respondent accepted that there  had  been  "a
      lot of errors" including the  fact  that  the  Judge  did  not  remind
      himself of sole responsibility and  the  parental  situation  in  this
      case. Nor was any case law referred to.


   7. He accepted that  the  Judge  made  various  assumptions  relating  to
      matters which were not open to him. Further, there was a disregard  of
      the approach mandated by s.55 of the 2009 Act. The appellant was  only
      now living in a secure and safe environment with his father.


      Assessment


   8. The appellant, a minor, contended before the First-tier Tribunal  that
      he had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  his  father  who
      himself is a British citizen and who claimed  to  be  exercising  sole
      responsibility for  him  since  being  abandoned  in  the  UK  by  his
      biological mother over four years ago.


   9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  take  into  account  the  best
      interests  of  the  appellant.   There  were  no  effective  reception
      facilities available for him either in BVI or Jamaica if he is  forced
      to return to either place. His British father is residing  in  the  UK
      and his mother is in the USA on a student visa. There  are  no  family
      members available to receive him in either place.


  10. The appellant had previously been abused and abandoned by his  mother.
      That fact had been ignored by the Judge. A letter  was  produced  from
      the Senior Investigating Officer, Richard Smith, dated  1  June  2018,
      which confirmed that the appellant  whilst  living  in  Jamaica  on  1
      December 2007 witnessed the murder of  his  uncle  alongside  a  diary
      entry which appertains to the same incident.


  11. There was  thus  other  evidence  which  was  not  challenged  by  the
      respondent and which was not taken into consideration.  The  appellant
      had moved after that incident to the BVI  in  order  to  be  with  his
      mother. He then suffered physical and mental abuse at the hands of his
      mother's new partner, his stepfather, and upon visiting his father  in
      the UK was abandoned by his mother who had  moved  on  to  the  United
      States as a student.


  12. The evidence before the Tribunal was that the appellant's father could
      not abandon his ties to the UK and return to Jamaica or  the  BVI  and
      that the appellant was best placed to continue to  reside  in  the  UK
      with him, where he  would  be  safe  and  stable.  At  [9]  the  Judge
      incorrectly referred to the sponsor as "a foster parent",  whereas  he
      was the biological father.  The  Judge  noted  from  the  respondent's
      submissions, that there is no challenge to the fact that  the  sponsor
      can look after the appellant and has integrated in the United  Kingdom
      [13].


  13. As noted by the Judge, the psychology report of Dr Zdaniecki dated  26
      June 2018 did suffer from substantial  defects  and  had  been  poorly
      prepared.  It had not been properly  checked  and  contained  material
      unrelated to the appellant. He nonetheless found  that  the  appellant
      was suffering from symptoms of PTSD and/or anxiety/depression.


  14. The Judge referred to Dr Zdanieki's report in which he stated that the
      appellant described a number of traumatic incidents to  which  he  had
      been subjected, including the murder of his uncle and abuse  from  his
      mother's partner in BVI. The Judge went on  to  state  at  [20],  that
      despite referring to other traumatic incidents there is no description
      of them and he had no evidence of them elsewhere. The report described
      the appellant having ongoing panic attacks, hyper vigilance and  other
      symptoms but did not indicate when these started.


  15. However, as noted, there was evidence that following the witnessing of
      his uncle's murder there the appellant moved after the incident to the
      BVI to be with his mother. He then suffered physical and mental  abuse
      at the hands of his mother's new partner,  his  stepfather,  and  upon
      visiting his father in the UK he  was  abandoned  by  his  mother  who
      herself had moved on to the United States as a student.


  16. Moreover, as noted by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Smith,  in  the
      absence of evidence as to foreign law there was  no  basis  to  assume
      that the US approach would be more generous than English law. That was
      unsubstantiated speculation.


  17.  The  speculative  approach  was  applied   to   the   proportionality
      assessment. In addition, it ignored the fact that the sponsor had sole
      responsibility for the appellant from 2014 until the present.


  18. Nor was there a proper assessment of the appellant's private life.  He
      was a minor who was abandoned and who has now forged  a  private  life
      with his father, a British  citizen.  There  has  not  been  a  proper
      assessment of his private life.


  19. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that Mr  Avery's  concession  was
      properly made.


  20. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge. The parties
      agreed that in the circumstances, the matter should be remitted to the
      First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made. There will  be  a
      de novo hearing with no findings preserved. I am  satisfied  that  the
      extent of judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision to
      be re-made is extensive.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, Birmingham,  for  a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             20 January 2019

