

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03335/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st January 2020                            |On 13th February 2020         |
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                            OGULSENEM TEGELEKOVA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Saifolahi, instructed by Sterling Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


         1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal the decision  of
            First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio who dismissed her appeal against
            a decision of the respondent to refuse her human  rights  claim
            dated 7th February 2019.


         2. Permission to appeal was sought and granted on the grounds that
            the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to provide reasons for his
            finding  that  the  appellant  had  tendered   documents   from
            Portsmouth International College;  that  the  judge  failed  to
            consider adequately  or  at  all  the  appellant's  educational
            certificates  and  degree  and  failed  to  engage   with   the
            appellant's evidence in assessing the  proportionality  of  the
            decision that she could return to Turkmenistan.

            Background

         3. The appellant arrived in the UK as a student on 10th May  2008.
            Her leave to enter was varied and extended until 29th  December
            2014. That leave to remain was curtailed  and  expired  on  7th
            November 2012 with no right of appeal.


         4. On 4th January 2014 she  was  granted  leave  to  enter  as   a
            student valid until 4 December 2014. That leave  to  enter  was
            then cancelled at port on a return visit on 23rd  August  2014.
            Her appeal against that decision was dismissed on 10th November
            2015 by First-tier Tribunal judge Higgins and  she  was  appeal
            rights exhausted on 9th June 2016.

         5. On 7th July 2016 the appellant made a human rights (family  and
            private life) application which was refused  and  certified  as
            'clearly  unfounded'.   That   certificate   was   subsequently
            withdrawn, and she appealed the decision. Her appeal was  heard
            and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  judge  Adio.  It  is  the
            appeal against that decision that comes before me.

         6. The SSHD submitted the appellant had relied upon a fraudulently
            obtained  TOEIC  certificate  from   Portsmouth   International
            College and had thus used  deception  in  her  application  for
            leave to remain made on 23rd April 2012.

         7. The appellant expressed a fear of return to  Turkmenistan.  She
            has not  made  an  application  for  international  protection.
            She does not have a partner or child in the UK.


            First-tier Tribunal decision

         8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio correctly  identifies  that  the
            starting point for his consideration is the earlier decision of
            First-tier Tribunal Judge Higgins. He summarises that  decision
            and notes that the judge was informed that the appellant stated
            she had not attended Portsmouth International College, that she
            claimed to have taken the language test independently elsewhere
            and that the judge had found that the appellant  had  succumbed
            to temptation and had submitted a TOEIC  report  to  which  she
            knew she was not entitled. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Higgins
            states, inter alia:

                29.   ....I am satisfied nonetheless  that  frustration  at
                her  inadequate  IELTS  and   Pearson   results   and   her
                desperation to continue with her education in this  country
                led her to  succumb  to  temptation  and  submit  with  her
                application to the Home Office  a  TOEIC  score  report  to
                which she knew she was not entitled. I am satisfied in  the
                light of the conclusion drawn by ETS on the basis of  voice
                recognition technology, the Appellant's own admission  that
                she did not go to Portsmouth  where  I  am  satisfied  that
                TOEIC was allegedly administrated,  and  her  answers  when
                interviewed in August and September  2014,  that  she  used
                deception in order to secure  a  CAS  from  the  School  of
                Business and Law and , ultimately, leave to remain.....

         9. Judge Adio set out a summary of the submissions made to him. He
            noted that the appellant's representative referred, inter alia,
             to the evidence in 2015 being different to that in 2019;  that
            the appellant's academic achievements  had  not  been  factored
            into the decision; that SM and Qadir had not been before  Judge
            Higgins, that the National Audit Report undermined the evidence
            relied upon by the SSHD, she had not been cross examined on the
            details she  had  given  to  provide  a  plausible  explanation
            concerning her TOEIC test.


        10. Judge Adio reached the following conclusion:

            16. ....I have taken into account the submissions  made  by  Mr
                Singer concerning the executive  summary  of  investigation
                into response to cheating in English language  tests  which
                was not before the first judge. I note that the  concluding
                remarks  in  the  executive  summary  is  that   the   data
                environment is weak, and the department has not  been  able
                to independently validate ETS  judgements  about  cheating.
                The remarks also state that it is reasonable based  on  the
                balance  of  probabilities  to  conclude  that  there   was
                cheating  on  a  large  scale  because   of   the   unusual
                distribution of marks and high numbers of invalid tests  in
                test centres successfully prosecuted for cheating. ...
            17. I have to consider  whether  the  doubts  created  by  this
                report with regards to some of the  actions  taken  by  the
                Respondent  affects  this  Appellant.  I  find   that   the
                particular aspects of this Appellant's case are  different.
                The fact remains that she tendered documents which gave the
                impression that she took exams at Portsmouth  International
                College. She does not deal with this  particular  issue  in
                her witness statement...I  find  that  the  fact  that  the
                Appellant made an admission, coupled with the fact that she
                submitted a TOEIC certificate from a college at  which  she
                did not sit the exam, means that she is unable  to  give  a
                reasonable explanation for the contested matters which were
                advanced as constituting dishonesty on her part.
            18. Even though Devaseelan is a starting point I find that  the
                particular facts of this  case  are  such  that  the  later
                evidence does not make any difference to the findings Judge
                Higgins made in his decision dated  2nd  November  2015.  I
                find that  the  explanation  the  Appellant  has  given  at
                paragraphs 7 to 21 do not make a difference to the findings
                of Judge Higgins despite the fact that Ms Kugendran did not
                cross-examine her....


            Error of law


        11. The appellant  submits  through  Ms  Saifolahi  "it  is  wholly
            unclear on what basis the judge [Adio] find that the  appellant
            did   submit   documents    from    Portsmouth    International
            College....the appellant confirms in her witness statement that
            she  undertook  her  language  test  at  Sanjari  International
            College...her  evidence  was  that   she   had   not   attended
            Portsmouth...no certificate from Portsmouth was  produced...the
            reference to Portsmouth in the  decision  letter  is  to  score
            reports."


        12. It is correct that a copy of the appellant's  2012  application
            for leave to remain was not produced either  by  her  (she  was
            legally represented at the time she made  her  application  for
            further leave to remain and  before  each  First-tier  Tribunal
            hearing) or by the respondent. Nor was a copy of any  documents
            that accompanied that application produced.  The  decision  the
            subject of  appeal  refers  clearly  to  the  appellant  having
            submitted a TOEIC certificate from ETS at Portsmouth with  that
            2012  application.  The  appellant  does   not   address   that
            assertion. Her  witness  statement  refers  at  length  to  the
            courses she has taken and her history of taking language tests.
            She does  not  deny  submitting  a  language  certificate  from
            Portsmouth; the fundamental core of the rejection of her  human
            rights application.

        13. The submission that it is unclear on what  basis  either  judge
            found she submitted documents  from  Portsmouth  is  incorrect.
            That finding was plainly because the basis of the rejection  of
            her application initially and  subsequently  her  human  rights
            application was that  she  had  submitted  a  certificate  from
            Portsmouth. The appellant herself denies having sat the test in
            Portsmouth.  She  does  not  deny  having  submitted   a   test
            certificate from Portsmouth. It follows the test relied upon in
            that 2012 application was one to which she was not entitled.

        14. It is not relevant that the copy certificate was not  produced.
            The applicant was aware what she had relied upon  in  her  2012
            application; she has not at any stage denied having put in that
            certificate.

        15. There is no error of law by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Adio  in
            his finding that her circumstances  differed  from  those  that
            were before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Higgins  such  that  the
            decision could not be a starting point.  The  appellant  relied
            upon a certificate from Portsmouth which on  her  own  evidence
            she had not sat for.

        16. The second limb of the appellant's appeal was  that  the  judge
            had failed to take account of the appellant's  explanation  and
            the qualifications she had obtained. This is  not  relevant  in
            this case. It is not a case of the judge  having  to  determine
            whether the explanation before  him  was  such  that  he  could
            conclude  that  she  had  not  'cheated'.  In  this  case   the
            certificate relied  upon  in  the  2012  application  was  from
            Portsmouth and the applicant said she had not been there.

        17.  The third limb of the appellant's appeal was that  Judge  Adio
            had failed to consider adequately the appellant's circumstances
            in whether it was disproportionate for her to  be  required  to
            return to Turkmenistan given  claims  relating  to  her  mental
            health, the expert's report, that she would be targeted by  the
            security forces because she had been away from the country  for
            so long, that she would be unable to access health etc services
            because of the Propiska system because she was  estranged  from
            her family because of a previous relationship.

        18. The appellant had not  claimed  international  protection.  Her
            human rights claim was based upon a submission that it would be
            disproportionate for her to return.

        19.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  considered  the  appellant's
            medical history and  current  health  in  the  context  of  the
            supporting documents relied upon.  He  considered  the  medical
            facilities available and reached the  conclusion  open  to  him
            that her health was not such as to support her submission  that
            it  would  be  disproportionate  for  her  to  not  return   to
            Turkmenistan.

        20. The judge considered her previous visits to  Turkmenistan,  her
            previous unpleasant experiences with immigration  (there  is  a
            typographical error in the decision referring to her not having
            difficulties) and took her evidence at face value. He  referred
            to  her  having  previously  worked  in  Turkmenistan  and  her
            qualifications. He took into account the expert's  report  that
            single women who have been, in  effect,  cut  off  from  family
            support can be at risk. The evidence before the judge  was  not
            specific to the appellant. Although she has been away from  the
            country for some considerable time, she  has  gained  reputable
            qualifications, she is no longer in  a  relationship,  she  has
            friends who there is no reason to doubt would not  continue  to
            provide her  with  support  and  the  expert's  report,  whilst
            identifying the discriminatory treatment meted  out  to  single
            women and the risks that can be encountered, is insufficient to
            conclude that the First-tier Tribunal judge  erred  in  finding
            that it would not be disproportionate for her to return there.

        21. If her claims were such that she considered she was entitled to
            international protection either because of her health problems,
            or fear of physical  harm  on  return  or  combination  of  all
            factors, then an international protection claim could have been
            made. The question of whether refusal of  an  Article  8  human
            rights claim is disproportionate is not a watered-down  refugee
            or Article 3 claim.

        22. The First-tier Tribunal judge considered  the  evidence  before
            him  holistically,  addressed  whether  the   refusal   was   a
            disproportionate interference in her human rights and reached a
            conclusion that was open to him on that evidence.

        23. There is no error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  in
            his decision dismissing her appeal.



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the appeal stands.




                                    Date 10th February 2020
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
