






Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03823/2018

                                                               HU/03826/2018

                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th December 2019                          |On 16th December 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                   MT & AT

                         (Anonymity Direction made)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke   Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Shah of counsel instructed by Taj Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State (SSHD) against the decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Eban promulgated on the  10th  April  2019
    whereby  the  judge  allowed  the  respondents'  appeals  against   the
    decisions of the SSHD  to  refuse  the  respondents'  claims  based  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR. The judge allowed the appeals to the extent that
    the appellants were to be given leave in line with the husband  of  the
    first appellant/the father of the 2nd appellant.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. These proceedings concern the  interests  and  status  of  a
    minor. To protect the minor  I  consider  it  appropriate  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Designated
    Tribunal Judge MacDonald on 14th  May  2019.  Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. In allowing the appeal Judge Eban was aware that the husband of MT, who
    is the father of AT, had an appeal in his own right. It was unclear  as
    to what had  taken  place  in  the  husband's  appeal.  [Appeal  Number
    HU/17637/2018]. Clearly the husband's case should have been linked with
    the present cases. Although  it  would  have  been  difficult  for  the
    administration of the Tribunal to  notice  because  the  case  were  at
    separate centres.

 5.  Whatever  else  can  be  said,  it  has  been   suggested   that   the
    husband/father did not have leave to remain in the UK, whether that was
    as a result of the appeal hearing is unclear.

 6. Judge Eban in considering the present appeals allowed  the  appeals  to
    the extent that the appellants were to be given leave in line with  the
    husband/father as dependents.   Otherwise  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellants were not entitled to leave in their own right.

 7. It now appears that the husband's appeal has  been  remitted  from  the
    Upper Tribunal back to the First-tier Tribunal for further hearing.  It
    is unclear on what basis it has been remitted back.

 8. I indicated to the parties that the only practical course  to  take  is
    for the present appeals to be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    with a direction that they be linked to the husband's  appeal  so  that
    all the appeals could be heard together. Arguably if the  husband  does
    not have leave, as he appears not to  have  at  the  moment,  then  the
    effect of the decision by Judge Eban would be that the  appellants  had
    no leave either and their appeals should have been dismissed.

 9. I indicated to the parties that these appeals and  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant's husband/father should have been  determined  together.  The
    failure to link the cases I find gave  rise  to  procedural  unfairness
    amounting to an error of law such that the present  appeals  should  be
    allowed and remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  with
    the husband's appeal.

10. Whilst Mr Shah on behalf of the respondents sought to  argue  that  the
    appeal should remain in the Upper Tribunal and await the outcome of the
    husband's further appeal, there would be many  circumstances  in  which
    these appeals would be languishing in the Upper Tribunal  indefinitely.
    Mr Shah accepted in the circumstances that the proper  course  was  for
    these matters to be remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    heard with the appeal of the husband/father.

11. In the circumstances I find that there is procedural unfairness,  which
    requires that these appeals be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal
    to be heard with appeal HU/17637/2018. In order not  to  prejudice  the
    position of the respondents, I consider it appropriate to  direct  that
    none of the findings of fact made in the present case are preserved.

    Notice of Decision

12. I allow the appeal of the Secretary of State and remit these cases back
    to the First -tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 6th December 2019





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 6th December 2018

