
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03138/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2017                   |On 01 February 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                                     and
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Justice Lavender


                                   Between

                             MRS TANIA JAHANGIR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Iqbal of Iqbal Law Chambers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 22 August 2016.  It is accepted that the  scope  of  the
    appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  shaped  by  the  relevant
    Article 8 provisions contained  in  Appendix  FM  and  the  residue  of
    Article 8 itself.  The main error of law canvassed  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant is that the judge fell into error  in  paragraph  19  of  the
    determination where he said:

         "turning to the issue of Article 8 I accept that there is a genuine
         and subsisting relationship between the Appellant and  the  Sponsor
         and that they do intend to live together permanently".

    He decided, however, that the decision of the  ECO  was  in  accordance
    with the law on the basis of the evidence that was before him.

 2) The crux of the grounds  for  permission  to  appeal  focuses  on  that
    passage in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   The  question  which
    arises is whether  the  further  evidence  adduced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal could properly  be  considered
    by that Tribunal having regard to section  85(4)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   This  empowers  the  Tribunal  to
    consider any matter which it thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the
    decision including a matter arising after the  date  of  the  decision.
    Bearing in mind in particular that Article 8 lay at the  heart  of  (a)
    the application to the Entry Clearance Officer, (b) his  decision,  and
    (c) the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal we  consider  that
    there was no prohibition of the kind  to  which  the  judge  averts  in
    paragraph 19 of his determination.

 3) In other words all  of  the  evidence  adduced  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should properly have been  considered  in  the  round  by  the
    judge.  The judge's failure to do so on the ground of the  self-denying
    ordinance erected in paragraph 19 was plainly erroneous in  law  having
    regard to section 85(4) of the 2002 Act.  The materiality of this error
    is beyond plausible dispute.  It follows that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal must be set aside.

 4) Having regard to our primary decision, namely that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is  infected  by  a  material  error  of  law  that
    decision has to be re-made.  It can re-made in one of two  ways  either
    by remittal to a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal or by this
    Tribunal.  This is not one of those cases where we require to remit  it
    and the obvious course is firstly to retain the appeal in this form and
    secondly to re-make the decision of the First-tier Tribunal by allowing
    the Appellant's appeal and we do so.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date: 01 February 2017
