
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03423/2019
                                                               HU/04327/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 October 2019                   |On 25 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                        Dilruba [A] (First Appellant)
                        Ahmed [S] (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Hasan, Counsel instructed by Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.  The first appellant was
    born on 22 November 1982 and is the partner of the second appellant,
    who was born on 28 September 1978.  The appellants have two children,
    who were born on 13 May 2014 and 16 August 2016. The first appellant
    has been in the UK since 2013 and the second appellant since 2009.
    Both of their children were born in the UK.

 2. The appellants are appealing against a decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Aujla ("the judge") promulgated on 13 July 2019 dismissing their
    human rights appeal.

 3. The appellants made their human rights application on 24 November 2017.
     The respondent rejected the application on the basis that they have
    spent most of their lives in Bangladesh and would not face obstacles
    integrating into that country; and because there would not be any
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for them, or their children, returning
    to Bangladesh.  In respect of the first appellant's mental health,
    which had been raised in the application, the respondent stated that
    she would be able to access treatment in Bangladesh and the second
    appellant would be able to continue providing her with support, as the
    family would be returned as a unit.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. It is evident from the decision, as well as the papers that were before
    the First-Tier Tribunal, that the appellants' case was not properly
    prepared.  The judge observed that the appellants did not specify any
    grounds of appeal in the notice of appeal or submit a bundle of
    documents.

 5. Neither of the appellants attended the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Hasan,
    who appeared in the First-tier Tribunal as well as at the hearing
    before me in the Upper Tribunal, sought an adjournment in the First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis that the first appellant had had a panic
    attack requiring attendance at hospital the previous evening and the
    second appellant was busy looking after the children.  The judge
    refused the application in light of the absence of evidence certifying
    that the first appellant was unable to travel to court or was unfit to
    give evidence; and the absence of an adequate explanation for the non-
    attendance of the second appellant.

 6. The judge found that removal of the appellants (along with their
    children) would be proportionate.  In particular, the judge found that
    the claim by the first appellant to have mental health problems was
    "not made out as on the date of the hearing" and that there was no
    evidence "of any health problems affecting either of the two children".



 7. The findings of the judge at paragraphs 23 and 24 are of particular
    significance to this appeal and therefore I set them out in full:

         "23. The appellant had submitted to the respondent with the
             application a number of letters from doctors and the
             psychiatric outpatient clinic.  None of those letters were
             recent as they were all from 2016 and 2017.  No comprehensive
             medical report, psychologists report or a psychiatric report
             was submitted.  In the circumstances, I find that any claim by
             the appellant to having mental health problems was not made
             out as on the date of the hearing before.  That claim did not
             add anything to her claim to established private life in the
             UK.

         24.  I have also considered the appellants' children and their best
             interests in accordance with section 55 of the 2009 Act as did
             the respondent.  There was no evidence before me of any health
             problems affecting either of the two children.  They are still
             too young, being aged 5 years and 2 years.  They had no status
             in the United Kingdom.  They are Bangladeshi nationals just
             like their parents.  In the absence of credible evidence, I do
             not accept the appellants' claim that the Bangladeshi
             authorities had refused to issue them with passports."

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 8. The first ground of appeal argues that the failure to grant an
    adjournment was unjust and a material error of law.  Mr Hasan did not
    pursue this argument at the error of law hearing. He was right to not
    do so given the absence of evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to
    substantiate that the first appellant was not medically fit to attend
    the hearing and the absence of any evidence to explain the second
    appellant's non-attendance.

 9. The second and third grounds of appeal argue that the assessment of the
    best interests of the appellants' children was deficient because of a
    failure to consider all of the relevant information.

10. Mr Hasan drew my attention to three letters that he had handed to the
    judge in the First-Tier Tribunal hearing which, he claimed, had been
    overlooked by the judge.  As these letters were on the court file, and
    the respondent also had a copy, I am satisfied that they were, as
    claimed, provided to the judge.

11. One of the letters is undated but refers to the family moving in March
    2019, and therefore I am satisfied it is a letter that was written
    recently. It is a short letter from Dr Mees, a Senior Child and
    Adolescent Psychotherapist at the Tower Hamlets Child and Adolescent
    Mental Health Services.  In the letter, Dr Mees states that the
    children have been subject to a child protection plan and there has
    been considerable concern about the family.  The letter included the
    following:

         "Mother had been actively suicidal in front of the children and
         father was limited in his parenting availability.

         "The children's wellbeing in my view, depends on the effective
         management and stabilisation of mother's mental health and I would
         be concerned about any move that would unsettle this".

12. The second letter referred to by Mr Hasan is dated 28 May 2019. It is
    from a social worker at the Tower Hamlets Children's Services
    Directorate. It states that the children became known to Tower Hamlets
    Children Social Care in June 2016 and are currently now on a Child in
    Need Plan due to the family requiring support.




13. The third letter, also dated 28 May 2019, is from the first appellant's
    GP.  The letter states that she "still gets episodes of severe
    depression".




14. Mr Hasan argued that the decision is undermined by a failure to have
    regard to these three letters.

15. Ms Cunha argued that even if the judge fell into error by overlooking
    the letters described above, this would not be material.  She argued,
    firstly, that the letter from Dr Mees is in the past tense and is
    therefore referring to a situation which previously existed.  She also
    argued that even if it referred to the current circumstances, the
    appellants had not shown that there would not be suitable treatment
    available in Bangladesh.  She argued that in the absence of any more
    evidence than these three letters there was no basis upon which the
    judge could find that the first appellant's mental health was such that
    removal of the family would be disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR.
    She maintained that the analysis of the children's best interests at
    paragraph 24 was adequate given the young age of the appellants'
    children and the absence of any medical or other evidence to show that
    they have any vulnerabilities that would create difficulties on return
    to Bangladesh.

Analysis

16. One of the main reason given by the judge (at paragraph 23 of the
    decision) for finding the first appellant had not established she had
    mental health problems was that the medical evidence submitted by the
    appellants was not recent and only dated from 2016 and 2017. However,
    the appellants' representative in fact submitted, on the day of the
    First-Tier Tribunal hearing, three recent letters from professionals
    which are clearly relevant to the first appellant's mental health. It
    is apparent from the wording used by the judge in paragraph 23 that
    these letters were overlooked - and not taken into consideration - in
    the evaluation of whether the first appellant had mental health
    problems. Failing to have regard to this evidence was an error of law.

17. Had the judge not overlooked these letters, it is likely he would have
    accepted that the first appellant has (and has had) mental health
    problems. However, there was no evidence before the judge to explain
    the nature and severity of her mental health difficulties or how the
    condition would be impacted by her removal to Bangladesh, apart from a
    single sentence in Dr Mees' letter expressing concern about a move
    unsettling her effective management and stabilisation. Nor was there
    any evidence before the First-Tier Tribunal about the availability of
    treatment in Bangladesh; or evidence indicating that her effective
    management and stabilisation would be negatively impacted by being in
    Bangladesh as opposed to the UK.

18. Given the content of Dr Mees' letter, one might have expected there to
    be a substantial amount of medical evidence before the First-Tier
    Tribunal about the mental health of the first appellant. However, apart
    from the three letters described above, there was no such evidence.

19. It was for the appellants to support their case, where appropriate,
    through evidence. Given the paucity of evidence before the First-Tier
    Tribunal about the first appellant's mental health, and the complete
    absence of evidence to show there would not be suitable treatment in
    Bangladesh, even if the judge had not overlooked the three letters
    handed to him at the hearing by Mr Hasan, I am satisfied that the judge
    would have reached the same conclusion in the assessment of the best
    interests of the appellants' children. This is because, apart from the
    three letters relating to the first appellant's mental health described
    above, there was no evidence (or even submissions) before the First-
    Tier Tribunal to show any health or other problems affecting, or any
    circumstances pertaining to, the appellants' children that would
    support the view that it is in their best interests to remain in the UK
    even though they, and their parents, are citizens of Bangladesh who
    would be returning to their country as a family unit. I therefore agree
    with Ms Cunha that the error in overlooking the three letters was not
    material to the outcome.

Notice of Decision


    A. The appeal is dismissed.


    B. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal does not contain an error of
       law that is material to the outcome and therefore, having regard to
       section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, I
       do not set aside the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal and it
       stands.


    C. No anonymity direction is made.

|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan        |Dated: 23 October 2019               |










