
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: HU/03106/2019 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2021                            |On 2 February 2021            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     TA

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For  the  appellant:  Mr  J  Oliveira-Agnew,  instructed  by   Kitty   Falls
Immigration Law

For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a Nigerian national with date  of  birth  given  as
   9.1.75, has appealed with permission to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  4.9.20  (Judge  Aziz),
   dismissing on all  grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decisions  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 21.1.19 and 13.2.20, to refuse his  application
   for further leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.

2. The background is that following an unsuccessful asylum  claim  in  2009,
   the appellant was  eventually  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain,
   extended to 24.4.18. He  then  sought  further  leave  to  remain,  which
   application was refused on 21.1.19. The subsequent appeal  was  dismissed
   by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  11.6.19  (Judge  Broe).  However,  that
   determination was set aside by the decision of the Upper Tribunal (Deputy
   Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lewis)  on  10.1.20,  for  failure  to  apply  the
   Discretionary  Leave  Policy.   This   resulted   in   the   respondent's
   supplementary decision of 13.2.20, refusing leave  to  remain  under  the
   Transitional Arrangements,  the  decision  against  which  the  appellant
   appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and which is now the subject of  this
   appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz recorded that the appeal  was  pursued  on
   three grounds: the Discretionary Leave Policy; Very significant obstacles
   to integration pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi); and  Article  8  ECHR
   outside the Rules. On the evidence, Judge Azis found that the appellant's
   claimed relationship with his partner DS had ended, so that he no  longer
   qualified for discretionary leave as there had been a material change  of
   circumstances from when he was originally  granted  discretionary  leave.
   Although it was accepted that the appellant had been in the UK since 2004
   and that he was suffering from depression and  anxiety,  the  judge  also
   found no very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  in
   Nigeria. At [102] the judge  noted  the  submission  of  the  appellant's
   representative that he met the 10 years' continuous lawful  leave,  long-
   residence requirements under paragraph 276B of the Rules. However, whilst
   it was accepted that he been lawfully resident in the UK  for  10  years,
   the appellant was unable to demonstrate that he met the 'Life in the  UK'
   test and the English language requirement. For  that  reason,  the  judge
   concluded that the long-residence requirement under the Rules  could  not
   be met.

4. The judge then went on  from  [105]  of  the  decision  to  consider  the
   article 8 ECHR claim outside the  Rules,  applying  the  public  interest
   considerations under s117B of the 2002 Act, which required little  weight
   to be given to the appellant's private life developed in  the  UK  whilst
   his immigration status was precarious. He has only ever had limited leave
   to remain and his  relationship  with  his  partner  had  ended.  In  the
   premises,  the  judge  concluded  that  the  refusal  decision  was   not
   disproportionate to the appellant's right to respect for private life. In
   consequence, the human rights appeal was dismissed.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Martin, acting as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  on  21.9.20,
   on the basis that it was arguable "that while  the  appellant  could  not
   meet the Immigration Rules for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of
   long residence he may have met the requirements of para 276A for  further
   limited leave to remain on that basis, although the judge however was not
   take to this by the appellant's representative at the hearing."

6. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the submissions made to me and the  grounds  of  application
   for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Mr  McVeety  informed  me
   that there is a Rule 24 response,  which  I  have  not  seen,  apparently
   conceding the appeal on 276A grounds.

7. 276A04 provides that where a person  who  has  made  an  application  for
   indefinite leave to remain on long residence  grounds  but  falls  to  be
   granted limited leave to remain on the basis of long residence under  the
   Rules, the Secretary of State will treat that application for  indefinite
   leave to remain as an application for limited leave to  remain.  276A1-A2
   provides for an extension of stay on the ground of long residence  for  a
   period not exceeding 2 years, where each of the requirements in paragraph
   276B(i)-(ii) and (v) are met. These are the 10 years'  continuous  lawful
   residence requirement; the absence of  public  interest  reasons  why  it
   would be undesirable for indefinite leave  to  be  given;  and  that  the
   applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws (subject to
   paragraph 39E). In effect, the knowledge  of  life  in  the  UK  and  the
   English language qualifications are not required for such  limited  leave
   to remain.

8. The judge granting permission was not clear whether  qualification  under
   this limited scope for extended leave to  remain  was  canvassed  by  the
   appellant's representative at the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing,
   although Mr Oliveira-Agnew stated that it was. In any event, it is raised
   in the grounds and I am satisfied that  whether  or  not  raised  at  the
   hearing, it should have been considered. All parties are  satisfied  that
   the appellant does qualify. In this  regard,  I  note  that  the  refusal
   decision specifically accepted that the appellant met 276B(i)  and  (ii),
   and there has been no suggestion that he has been in the UK in breach  of
   immigration law.

9. In the premises, I find that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred  in
   law in not considering the appellant's entitlement to  limited  leave  to
   remain and in dismissing the appeal.

10. The appropriate course of action is to set aside  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal and remake the decision immediately by  allowing  the
   appeal on human rights grounds, with the expectation that the  respondent
   will grant the appellant further limited  leave  to  remain  pursuant  to
   paragraph 276A  of  the  Rules.  This  will  provide  the  appellant  the
   opportunity to make good the absent Life  in  the  UK  test  and  English
   language requirements.





Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

      I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing  it  on  human  rights
      grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       20 January 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       20 January 2021





