
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03422/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2021                  |On 2 July 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                           Suwayne Tonian Bennett
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel instructed by Anthony Ogunfeibo
                    & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born in February 2001.
        She appeals the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  her
       appeal against the decision of the respondent, by an Entry Clearance
       Officer, on 1 February 2019 refusing  her  entry  clearance  to  the
       United Kingdom for the purpose of settlement.

    2. The appeal is brought  on  human  rights  grounds  but  it  was  the
       appellant's primary submission that she satisfied  the  requirements
       of the Immigration Rules and therefore refusing her application  was
       a disproportionate interference with her private and family life.

    3. In short, it was the appellant's contention that her father, who  is
       settled in the United Kingdom, was the sole responsible parent,  but
       if  not  there  were  in   any   event   "serious   and   compelling
       considerations" that made her exclusion undesirable and, further, in
       the unlikely event of anything important  to  her  case  not  coming
       within the scope of the rules, it was her contention that the appeal
       should have been allowed on Article 8 grounds in any event.

    4. Permission was given by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara who said:

  "2 It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its  approach  to
      sole responsibility where there are relatives in the country of origin
      who care for  the  child,  applying  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  'sole
      responsibility'), Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.
  3  It is further arguable that the judge may have  erred  in  relying  on
      historic  decision  making  by  the  appellant's  mother  rather  than
      focusing on the present circumstances.
  4  Permission is not refused on any ground."

    5. I begin by looking carefully at the First-tier  Tribunal's  Decision
       and Reasons.

    6. The judge began  by  setting  out  almost  completely  the  detailed
       reasons  for  refusing  the  application.    Here   the   respondent
       recognised that there was evidence that the  appellant's  father  in
       the United Kingdom had given financial support, but  the  respondent
       did  not  regard  this  as  conclusive  proof  of  exercising   sole
       responsibility.  The respondent noticed that the appellant's  father
       had moved to the United  Kingdom  in  2003  and,  according  to  the
       respondent, had visited Jamaica on only a  "handful"  of  occasions.
       There was an approving letter from the appellant's mother which  the
       respondent took as an indication that the mother was involved in the
       appellant's life.

    7. There was no documentation to show that the appellant's  father  had
       "sole custody" but that is unremarkable because it  had  never  been
       the appellant's case that her father was the sole custodial  parent.
       The respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellant's  father  had
       sole responsibility for her upbringing.

    8. The Decision and Reasons also set out the grounds  of  appeal  which
       are not particularly illuminating.

    9. The judge then  noted  that  she  had  received  evidence  from  the
       sponsor, that is the appellant's father and  his  wife.   The  judge
       does not give much detail about that evidence.

   10. I will summarise the statements.

   11. First is the statement of the appellant's  father.   Here  he  makes
       plain that he and his present wife are happy to provide a  home  for
       the appellant and  he  outlined  some  of  his  involvement  in  the
       appellant's life.  He explained how,  when  he  first  came  to  the
       United Kingdom, money was short but he  always  made  sure  he  sent
       money initially to the appellant's mother for her welfare and  later
       as she grew up the appellant herself.  He said when he sent money he
       gave instructions about how it was to be spent and made sure it  was
       spent properly.   He  objected  to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
       suggestion that he had only visited the  appellant  "a  handful"  of
       times.  He said he had been to Jamaica to see his children (there is
       another child) at least once a year since he left  except  for  2007
       and sometimes he has visited more than once a year.  He  spent  time
       with the children.  Presently he speaks to the appellant as much  as
       two or three times a day and it is rare that they do  not  speak  at
       least once on a day.  He talked about  the  pressing  need  for  the
       appellant to join him.  The appellant used to live with  her  mother
       who had three sons including his son, that is the  appellant's  full
       brother.  It was not right for the appellant to  share  the  bedroom
       with her three brothers and she removed to live with an  aunt,  that
       is her mother's sister, although  the  house  was  full  there  too.
       There would be more appropriate accommodation in the United Kingdom.

   12. There is a supporting statement from the appellant's  father's  wife
       in which she said she got to know the appellant as a result  of  her
       visits to Jamaica and looked forward to her living with them.

   13. The bundle of evidence also includes a letter from  the  appellant's
       mother which refers to both children having a close bond with  their
       father and how he played an encouraging role in the appellant's life
       telling her, for example, to work hard at school and there is indeed
       other evidence suggesting that is precisely what she has done.   She
       said that it was the appellant's father who did not like the idea of
       the appellant living with her  brothers  and  arranged  a  move  and
       confirmed that  the  appellant  and  her  father  were  in  frequent
       contact, mainly by "WhatsApp".

   14. The judge then directed herself correctly on the burden and standard
       of proof and reminded herself of  the  decisions  in  TD  (Paragraph
       297(i)(e): 'sole responsibility') Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 and Nmaju
       [2001] INLR 26.

   15. The judge also recorded things said in cross-examination.

   16. Particularly the sponsor confirmed that he had not  lived  with  his
       daughter for about seventeen years, that she  initially  lived  with
       her mother and then because the accommodation was  limited  she  did
       not think it appropriate for the appellant  to  share  accommodation
       with her brothers and according  to  the  evidence  the  appellant's
       mother made the decision for the appellant to live with her maternal
       aunts.  The sponsor confirmed that on a day-to-day basis it was  the
       appellant's aunt who provided care.

   17. The judge accepted  evidence  that  the  sponsor  had  made  regular
       financial contributions, more recently  directed  to  his  daughter,
       that the appellant and her father spoke regularly by  telephone  and
       there were photographs showing them spending time together and there
       was evidence of contact with  "WhatsApp"  messages,  sometimes  many
       times in a day.

   18. The judge was told that the  appellant  lives  quite  close  to  her
       mother and sees her regularly with her siblings.

   19. The judge said that in cross-examination the sponsor said he  shared
       responsibility for the appellant with the  appellant's  mother.   By
       way of illustration they were each named on the appellant's  medical
       records as her parents.  The sponsor had attended parents'  meetings
       in the eighteen months  or  so  that  he  was  in  Jamaica  but  the
       appellant's mother attended on other occasions.  The judge  accepted
       evidence  that  the  appellant  asked  her  father  for  advice  and
       permission to attend places but found that she made similar requests
       of her mother.

   20. In paragraph 11 of the Decision and Reasons the  judge  particularly
       found that  it  was  the  appellant's  mother's  decision  that  the
       appellant should go and live with her aunts  who  are  the  mother's
       sisters.  The judge did not believe that the  appellant  only  asked
       permission of her father in London.

   21. At paragraph 13 the judge found that the appellant and his wife  had
       exaggerated their role in the day-to-day life.  She did not  believe
       that the appellant needed to ask her father's permission  for  every
       activity that she attended with her friends.

   22. At paragraph 15 the judge found that both  parents  attended  school
       and took an interest in her studies and that the appellant consulted
       with her aunts and her mother as well as her  father  about  various
       decisions in her life.  The judge found that the appellant's  mother
       had not abdicated responsibility for her.  She did not live  in  the
       same house as her mother but they were in frequent contact.

   23. The judge said at paragraph 16:

  "In taking the evidence as a  whole,  I  find  that  whilst  the  sponsor
  financially supports the appellant including paying for her studies, I do
  not find that he has sole responsibility.  I find that the  circumstances
  in which the appellant lives with various family members makes  it  clear
  that responsibility shared for her by  her  aunts,  her  mother  and  the
  sponsor."

   24. The judge then moved on to  consider  if  there  were  "serious  and
       compelling family or other circumstances which makes the appellant's
       exclusion from the United Kingdom undesirable".  The judge looked at
       evidence of accommodation and seemed to  accept  evidence  that  her
       house was overcrowded and not very peaceful but  found  no  credible
       evidence that the appellant was not looked properly.  She had access
       to education and to a mobile telephone and welfare was monitored  by
       close relatives.

   25. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal were drawn by Ms Revill.



   26. Ground 1 maintains that the judge was wrong in her approach  to  the
       evidence.  The judge made findings  about  the  involvement  of  the
       appellant's aunts who were "on site" and  readily  available  rather
       than her father who lived in a different time zone and, according to
       the  grounds,  found  that  it  undermined  the   claim   for   sole
       responsibility that the appellant was on good terms with  her  aunt.
       This according to the grounds was  wrong.   In  TD  it  was  clearly
       established that the day-to-day responsibility may be shared without
       preventing sole responsibility.  The judge  should  have  been  more
       impressed with her own  findings  that  the  sponsor  was  in  daily
       contact.

   27. Ground 2 complains that the judge lost sight of the need to consider
       the present  arrangements  because  the  judge  placed  considerable
       weight on the  appellant's  mother's  decision  that  the  appellant
       should move out but this appellant's removal was some time ago.

   28. Ground 3 was directed to the "serious and compelling" reasons relied
       upon by the appellant and criticised the judge  for  accepting  that
       there was overcrowding but rejecting the evidence of the  extent  of
       the overcrowding  because  it  was  not  supported  by  "independent
       evidence".  It did not have to be  proved  independently  and  there
       were inadequate reasons for rejecting it.

   29. This point was refined in "Additional Grounds" which are  signed  by
       the appellant's solicitors.  I do not find that  they  add  anything
       that needs specific comment.  Permission  was  granted  on  all  the
       grounds as a whole.

   30. Ms Revill also produced written submissions, partly to deal with the
       question of whether there was a need for a hearing.  In  as  far  as
       they relate to  the  merits  of  the  case,  these  are  essentially
       reworkings of the points made in the grounds and none the worse  for
       that.

   31. The respondent made written submissions signed by N Willocks-Briscoe
       in the specialist appeals  team,  which  maintain  essentially  that
       there was no error of law.

   32. Before me Ms Revill  relied  on  her  grounds  and  on  the  written
       submissions.  Particularly she emphasised that, as was explained, in
       TD,  some  day-to-day  responsibility   does   not   displace   sole
       responsibility being elsewhere and there was little in the  Decision
       to show that the judge was looking at how  things  were  now  rather
       than how they had been in the past.  There were no clear findings on
       overcrowding and the appeal should be redetermined.

   33. Ms Revill's arguments are narrow and clear  and  I  have  considered
       them.  I am not persuaded by them.

   34. It is difficult where there is regular  contact  with  both  parents
       playing a significant part in a child's life to show that  there  is
       sole responsibility in only one parent.  In relying on the fact that
       it was the appellant's mother that initiated the move, the judge was
       not losing sight of the need to look at  present  circumstances  but
       was rather seizing on the change of address which, according to  the
       evidence before her,  was  something  that  the  appellant's  mother
       initiated, as an indication that the  mother's  involvement  in  the
       life of the child is significant.

   35. The judge was careful also to note that the appellant  is  still  in
       good terms with her mother and sees her frequently as she  does  her
       aunts.  The judge was looking at the present circumstances.

   36. This is a case where the  appellant's  father,  notwithstanding  his
       decision to  leave  his  country  of  nationality  and  re-establish
       himself many thousands of miles away, has  remained  supportive  and
       involved in the life of his child.  This was never doubted  and  was
       clearly accepted by the judge.   However,  although  there  is  good
       evidence of his being involved in the life of the child and  of  his
       being on good terms with the  child,  there  was  very  little  that
       pointed to him having  sole  responsibility.   Rather  the  evidence
       pointed to both parents with the assistance of  the  maternal  aunts
       who the appellant's father plainly  trusted,  together,  making  the
       important decisions in the life of the child.  There is no fault  in
       the judge's approach and the conclusion was plainly open to her.

   37.  Similarly,  this  is  not  a  case  where  there   are   compelling
       circumstances.  There is evidence that the child would be better off
       in the United Kingdom.  That is very often (not always) the case and
       may well very well be the case here.  Although the judge might  have
       been a little  equivocal  about  what  the  circumstances  were  her
       finding was clearly on the  assumption  that  the  accommodation  is
       overcrowded by UK standards but that is  not  at  all  the  same  as
       establishing compelling reasons. Each case must be considered on its
       own merits but it will only be in  extraordinary  circumstances,  if
       ever, that a person can  establish  a  right  to  enter  the  United
       Kingdom because they are living  in  poverty  in  their  country  of
       nationality.

   38. The appellant is  now  a  young  woman  living  in  her  country  of
       nationality with a caring family and supportive relatives as well as
       a father who continues to be supportive in  her  life.  In  reality,
       Article 8 adds nothing to both elements of the Rules taken together.



   39. The judge cannot be criticised fairly for  reaching  the  conclusion
       that she did.


Notice of Decision

   40. This is a decision that will no doubt disappoint the  appellant  and
       her father but the First-tier Tribunal's decision was  open  to  the
       judge for the reasons given.  I find no error of law and  I  dismiss
       the appeal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 2 July 2021                    |

