
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03640/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2018                          |On 9 January 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              md. sibbir ahmed
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Delbourgo, Counsel instructed by M-R
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By way of a decision promulgated on 9 August  2018,  I  set  aside  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre.  The appeal came before
    me to be remade.


 2. For the purposes of this  decision  I  refer  to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer as the Respondent and to Mr. Ahmed as the Appellant, reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. The appeal was adjourned in October as no British Sign Language ("BSL")
    interpreter had been booked.  At the hearing on 29 November  2018,  Mr.
    Mark West, a British Sign Language interpreter, assisted  the  Sponsor.
    She confirmed that she understood him.  I was satisfied that there were
    no problems with understanding during the course of the hearing.

 4. As I set out in the error of law decision, the Judge in the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to give reasons for why she could depart  from  the
    previous  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  Sponsor's
    deafness was not an exceptional circumstance which made the decision  a
    breach of Article 8.

Evidence

 5. In addition to the Sponsor's oral evidence, I have taken  into  account
    the documents in the Respondent's bundle, the  Appellant's  bundle  (23
    pages),  the  Appellant's  supplementary   bundle   (12   pages),   the
    Appellant's bundle provided for the Upper Tribunal hearing (8 pages), a
    letter from the Sponsor's doctor dated 9 October 2018, and two  further
    supporting letters.

The burden of proof

 6. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant to show, on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, at the date of the  hearing,  that  the  decision  is  a
    breach of his rights, and/or those of the Sponsor,  to  a  family  life
    under Article 8 ECHR.


Findings and Reasons


Immigration rules


 7. Judge Russell found that the Appellant had used deception  in  relation
    to the ETS testing issue.  It was found  by  Judge  Plumptre  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") was fully  justified  in  refusing  the
    Appellant's appeal under the immigration rules [50].   She  found  that
    the ECO was entitled to refuse entry clearance with  reference  to  the
    discretionary ground set out in paragraph 320(11).  She also found that
    the Appellant and Sponsor had not improved their case by continuing  to
    assert that the Appellant left the UK voluntarily.

 8. As I stated at the hearing, there had been no cross-appeal against  the
    finding of Judge Plumptre that the ECO was  entitled  to  refuse  entry
    clearance on the discretionary grounds set out  in  paragraph  320(11).
    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made by the Respondent in relation
    to the failure by Judge Plumptre to give reasons for departing from the
    decision of Judge Russell.  There was no cross-appeal  in  relation  to
    the findings of Judge Plumptre that the  ECO  was  entitled  to  refuse
    entry clearance on the discretionary grounds.

 9. I therefore adopt the unchallenged finding that  the  Appellant  cannot
    meet the requirements of the immigration rules as  the  Respondent  was
    entitled to refuse the application with reference to paragraph 320(11).

Article 8


10. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article  8  outside  the
    immigration rules in accordance with the steps set out in Razgar [2004]
    UKHL 27.  The Respondent accepted that the Appellant and  Sponsor  were
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  I find  that  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor have a family life sufficient to engage  the  operation  of
    Article 8.  The Appellant has been in Bangladesh since  November  2016.
    I find that family life has been maintained between the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor during this time.  There was no suggestion by Mr.  Walker  that
    family life no longer subsisted between the Appellant and the  Sponsor.
    The Sponsor visited the Appellant in Bangladesh in March 2017.  I  find
    that the decision is an interference in their family life.


11. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
    immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.


12. In considering proportionality I have taken into account  section  117B
    of the 2002 Act.  Section 117B(1)  provides  that  there  is  a  strong
    public interest in refusing leave to enter to those who do not meet the
    requirements of the immigration rules.  The  Respondent  was  satisfied
    that the Appellant met the substantive requirements for entry clearance
    as a spouse, but that paragraph 320(11) applied.

13. In relation to section 117B(2), the  application  was  not  refused  by
    reference to the  English  language  requirements.   I  find  that  the
    Appellant speaks English.

14. In relation to section 117B(3) the application  was  not  refused  with
    reference to the financial requirements.  At the date  of  the  hearing
    before me the Sponsor is still employed.  I  find  that  the  Appellant
    would be financially independent.  Sections  117B(4)  to  (6)  are  not
    relevant.

15. The Appellant's immigration history is set out in the decision of Judge
    Russell.  He came to the United  Kingdom  on  20  December  2009  as  a
    student.  He  was  granted  further  leave  to  remain,  but  this  was
    curtailed as his sponsor college's licence was revoked.  On  24  August
    2012 he was granted further leave to  remain  until  2014  with  a  new
    sponsor college.  On 2 November 2013 the Appellant married the Sponsor.
     On 6 June 2014 he applied for leave to remain  as  her  partner.   The
    application was refused on 19 January 2015.  The Appellant  was  appeal
    rights exhausted in August 2015, and was removed to  Bangladesh  on  22
    November 2016.

16. At the hearing before me the Sponsor stated  that  she  now  understood
    that the Appellant had returned to Bangladesh at Home  Office  expense.
    I find that the Sponsor now accepts, despite some confusion,  that  the
    Appellant did not leave voluntarily.  However, I find that between when
    he arrived, and when he made the application in June 2014, he had leave
    to remain.  It was after his application was  refused  and  the  appeal
    dismissed that he was returned to Bangladesh.

17. I have carefully considered whether I can depart from the findings made
    by Judge Russell in 2015 in accordance with  the  case  of  Devaseelan.
    It was found in 2015 that the Sponsor's deafness was not such  that  it
    would cause her significant  problems  in  integrating  in  Bangladesh.
    Three years has passed since that decision was made, during which  time
    the Appellant has returned to  Bangladesh.   I  have  received  further
    evidence regarding the Sponsor's deafness and the issues that she would
    face were she to move to Bangladesh.  I find that this evidence was not
    before Judge Russell, or before Judge Plumptre.   I  find  that  I  can
    depart from the findings of Judge Russell given the evidence before  me
    now.

18. The essence of the case before me is whether or not family life can  be
    enjoyed between the Appellant and Sponsor with the Appellant  remaining
    in Bangladesh, taking into account the Sponsor's deafness, and  whether
    the Appellant' and Sponsor's circumstances outweigh the public interest
    in maintaining effective immigration control.


19. I note at the outset that Mr. Walker did not suggest that  family  life
    could  continue  in  Bangladesh.   Rather  he  submitted  that  it  was
    necessary for the Sponsor and the Appellant  to  continue  family  life
    through visits, as demonstrated by the Sponsor's visit to Bangladesh in
    March 2017, and other means of communication.  He  accepted  that  some
    methods of communication  would  be  difficult  due  to  the  Sponsor's
    deafness.  However, he submitted on behalf of the Respondent that there
    was nothing which would constitute exceptional circumstances such  that
    the Sponsor should and could not maintain family life  through  visits.
    Essentially the Respondent's position,  given  the  concession  by  Mr.
    Walker that there would be problems in using  the  usual  channels  for
    communication, was that family life should be maintained through visits
    to Bangladesh.


20. I find that the Sponsor is profoundly deaf.  I find that she would face
    significant difficulties in Bangladesh were she to  relocate  there  in
    order to enjoy family life with the Appellant.   Were  this  an  appeal
    against a decision to refuse leave to remain,  I  find  that  paragraph
    EX.1(b), with reference to paragraph EX.2 would be made  out.   I  find
    that there would be very significant difficulties for the Sponsor which
    could not be overcome and which would involve very serious hardship  in
    enjoying family life with her husband in Bangladesh.

21. I find that the Sponsor's first  language  is  British  Sign  Language.
    There was no acknowledgement of this by Judge Russell.   She  does  not
    speak English, and she  does  not  speak  Bengali.   She  uses  a  sign
    language interpreter in order to communicate, both to  understand  what
    has been said, but also to respond to what has been said.

22. I therefore find that the Sponsor would face  significant  difficulties
    communicating with anybody in Bangladesh.  I have considered the letter
    from [NB], a registered BSL interpreter (page 8).  She states that  BSL
    is the Sponsor's first language, and English is  her  second  language.
    The Sponsor does not have any other means  to  communicate  other  than
    those two  languages.   She  states  that  BSL  is  similar  to  spoken
    languages in that each country has its own sign language, and each area
    has its own dialect.  A move to another country would disadvantage  the
    Sponsor severely as she would not be able to access spoken  or  written
    language.  She would have to find a way to access  the  deaf  community
    and learn the local sign language before resuming basic  communication.
    There was no objection to this evidence by Mr. Walker and I  find  that
    it can be relied on.  It is consistent with the Sponsor's evidence, and
    with the other documentary evidence provided.

23. Given that the Sponsor does not speak or understand Bengali, and  given
    that she is profoundly deaf and her only language is BSL, I  find  that
    she  would   face   very   significant   difficulties   in   Bangladesh
    communicating with anybody.

24. I have taken into  account  the  Sponsor's  employment  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I find that, despite the Sponsor's profound deafness, she has
    forged an impressive career.  I have taken  into  account  the  letters
    from [NB] (page 8), [GN] (page 6), [AH] (page 5) and also from her  MP,
    [JF] (pages 1 and 2).

25. The Sponsor is a project manager working to support deaf drivers.   She
    has set up a system for deaf drivers to become partners with Uber.  The
    evidence shows  that  she  has  developed  very  strong  networks  with
    companies such as Uber, TFL and training colleges.  She has been on the
    board for the young people's Mayor Committee in London.   I  find  that
    she has not allowed her deafness to stop her  from  becoming  a  highly
    qualified employee who makes a significant  contribution  both  to  the
    deaf community, but also to the wider community.  However, I find  that
    these skills, while transferable to a  certain  extent,  would  not  be
    transferable  to  Bangladesh,  given  the   significant   communication
    difficulties that she would  face.   I  find  that  the  Sponsor  would
    struggle to find any  sort  of  employment  in  Bangladesh,  let  alone
    employment such as she now has in the  United  Kingdom.   She  makes  a
    significant contribution  to  the  community  through  her  employment.
    Given what she has achieved both personally and for the deaf community,
    I find that this is a significant factor.  I find that it would not  be
    proportionate to expect her to give up what she  has  achieved  in  the
    United Kingdom in order to move to a country where  she  will  struggle
    even to communicate.


26. Further, as noted above, Mr. Walker did not  suggest  that  she  should
    give up her job and move to Bangladesh.  Instead he submitted that  she
    should maintain her family life through visits.

27. I find that, although the Sponsor has visited Bangladesh, she has  only
    been once, and this was in the period  since  the  Appellant  moved  to
    Bangladesh.  While she has Bengali heritage, given her deafness, she is
    not an integrated part of the Bengali community in the  United  Kingdom
    in the same way as she is an integrated part of the deaf community  who
    communicate using BSL.  It is entirely unsurprising that  she  has  not
    learnt Bengali, given that her first language is BSL, and her second is
    English, let alone learn Bengali Sign Language.

28. I have also taken into account the evidence from the Sponsor's  doctor,
    which was not before Judge  Russell,  given  that  it  relates  to  the
    Sponsor's current situation.  In her letter dated 9  October  2018  the
    Sponsor's GP, Dr. Tamanna Sarker  states  that  since  the  Appellant's
    removal from the United  Kingdom  the  Sponsor  has  been  experiencing
    distress and social isolation.  She has been prescribed  Sertraline  to
    help with anxiety and depression and has been seeing a counsellor.  She
    only communicates with the GP using the BSL advocate.

29. I find that the removal of the Appellant has had a negative  effect  on
    the Sponsor's mental health.  The problem of isolation for deaf  people
    and the associated mental health problems that it can bring is referred
    to in the letter from [NB], who states that a  "lack  of  communication
    that Deaf people experience has been named as one of the  many  reasons
    that Deaf people are more likely to have mental health in comparison to
    a person who can hear".

30. I find that the suggestion of the Home Office that family life  can  be
    maintained through visits is neither realistic one  nor  proportionate.
    I find that face-to-face contact is how the Appellant and  the  Sponsor
    maintain their relationship given the Sponsor's profound deafness.  She
    cannot just pick up the phone to speak to  the  Appellant.   There  are
    very significant difficulties for  her  in  maintaining  communication.
    Further, given her employment, she would be limited in  the  amount  of
    time  that  she  could  spend  in  Bangladesh  by  her  holiday   time.
    Alternatively she would have to take unpaid  leave,  which  would  mean
    that she may not have the funds in order to visit the Appellant.  It is
    not a realistic suggestion  by  the  Respondent  that  family  life  be
    enjoyed through visits, which would be infrequent.

31. In any event,  the  Sponsor  would  still  face  the  same  significant
    communication difficulties when visiting Bangladesh that she would face
    were she to live there.  The  Sponsor  does  not  have  any  family  in
    Bangladesh.  The Appellant's mother, aunts and uncles all live  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Sponsor has no particular knowledge of Bangladesh.



32. I have found above that  I  can  depart  from  the  findings  of  Judge
    Russell.  Three  years  have  passed  since  that  decision  was  made.
    Further  and  significantly,  I  now  have  evidence  before  me  which
    indicates the significant difficulties  that  would  be  faced  by  the
    Sponsor, an individual who only communicates using BSL,  in  relocating
    to Bangladesh.

33. I find, taking into account all of the evidence, while bearing in  mind
    that it has been found in the First-tier Tribunal  that  the  Appellant
    used deception  in  the  English  language  test,  that  the  Sponsor's
    disability, and the compelling  and  compassionate  circumstances  that
    exist because of that, mean that  family  life  cannot  be  enjoyed  in
    another country apart from the United Kingdom.  I find that  there  are
    compassionate and compelling circumstances in this case.  I  find  that
    it is not proportionate to expect family life to continue only  through
    visits.  This would  mean  effectively  that  the  Sponsor  would  have
    contact with the Appellant for only a very short period of time, up  to
    a month perhaps, a year.  As I have found above, the usual channels  of
    communication through e.g. phone calls are  not  possible  due  to  the
    Sponsor's profound deafness.

34. Taking into  account  all  of  my  findings  above,  I  find  that  the
    circumstances of the Appellant and Sponsor outweigh the public interest
    in maintaining effective immigration control.  I find that the  balance
    comes down in favour of the Appellant and Sponsor, and the decision  is
    not proportionate.  I find that the Appellant has shown on the  balance
    of probabilities, at the date of the hearing, that the  decision  is  a
    breach of his rights and those of the Sponsor to a  family  life  under
    Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds, Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 19 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award.  Submissions were made  regarding  the
failure of  the  Respondent  to  consider  the  Sponsor's  deafness  in  the
decision.  However, her deafness does not appear to have been  mentioned  in
the application.  There is reference in the print out of the application  to
a covering letter.  However I do not have that covering  letter  before  me.
In the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal there  is  no  reference
to the  Sponsor's  deafness.   Judge  Plumptre  stated  that  there  was  no
indication that the Entry Clearance Officer had considered the  disabilities
of the Sponsor [53].  This is correct, but what is not clear is  the  extent
to which those difficulties were put forward to the Entry Clearance  Officer
as being a significant obstacle to family  life  continuing  in  Bangladesh.
Clearly the Respondent was  aware  that  the  Sponsor  was  deaf  given  the
decision of Judge Russell, but in that decision  Judge  Russell  found  that
there were no significant difficulties for the Sponsor in adapting  to  life
in Bangladesh.

It does not appear that any particular evidence was  put  forward  with  the
application relating to the Sponsor's deafness and associated problems.   In
the circumstances, and given the reason why the application was  refused,  I
make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 19 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


