
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03299/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reason Promulgated  |
|On 12th December 2017                      |On 14th December 2017          |


                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           FUNMILAYO ADEKEMI BADMUS
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms F Allen, of Counsel, instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 25th October 1968.  She
       claims that she arrived in the UK on 4th May 1995 as a  visitor  and
       that she has overstayed in the  UK  since  that  time.  She  applied
       unsuccessfully to the Secretary of State in 2010 and 2013 to resolve
       her immigration status. Following the second application she  had  a
       right of appeal which was dismissed by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Finch,
       and she became appeal rights exhausted in May  2014.  She  reapplied
       for leave to remain on the basis of her private and family life ties
       to the UK on the 15th May 2015, and this application was refused  in
       a decision dated 24th July 2015. Her appeal  against  this  decision
       was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rastogi in a  determination
       promulgated on the 7th January 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Ransley on 20th July 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that the
       First-tier judge had erred in law in accepting that the claimant had
       been in the UK for 20 years simply because the  Secretary  of  State
       was not present at the hearing to challenge  her  evidence,  and  in
       failing to take into account the fact that a  previous  decision  of
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Finch dated 18th February 2014  had
       found that the claimant had only shown residence since 2007.

    3. The matter came before the Upper Tribunal to determine  whether  the
       First-tier Tribunal had erred in law. There were  hearings  on  18th
       September 2017 and 1st November 2017. Both of  these  hearings  were
       adjourned without resolving this issue, and after the hearing on 1st
       November 2017 a direction was made that the Secretary of  State  was
       to file and serve the decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Finch, and pay the costs of the claimant for that  hearing.  On  3rd
       November 2017 the Secretary of State provided a copy of the decision
       of  Immigration  Judge  Finch  promulgated  on  18th  February  2014
       together with the refusals of  permission  to  appeal  against  that
       decision.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal contend, firstly, that the First-tier Tribunal
       erred in law as a burden of proof was placed  on  the  Secretary  of
       State to disprove what the claimant sets out  with  respect  to  her
       period of residence, when in fact it is for the  claimant  to  prove
       her case and further that she was unable to do this as  she  had  no
       uncontentious evidence to support her claim of having been  resident
       for 20 years or more. The First-tier Tribunal  should  in  any  case
       have placed weight on what was  said  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter even if a presenting officer had not attended the hearing.

    5. Secondly  it  is  argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  fails  to
       understand that the failure to meet the Immigration Rules identified
       at paragraph 21  is  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  whether  the
       claimant can succeed in her human rights appeal.

    6. Thirdly it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal failed to treat as
       authoritative the reported case of Devaseelan, which is pertinent as
       there is a failure to take the findings of the previous  immigration
       judge, namely Judge Finch, in her decision of 18th February 2014  as
       a starting point. This was material as Judge Finch  had  found  that
       the claimant's period of residence had only been shown from 2007 due
       to grave concerns about the genuineness of documents submitted.

    7. Ms Allen argued for the claimant that there was no material error of
       law in failing to take the decision of Judge Finch into  account  as
       that decision was not one regarding the length of residence but  one
       with  respect  to  whether  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with her partner, Mr Tijani. Judge Finch had
       not believed that this was a genuine relationship but did  not  deal
       with the appeal on the basis that there was  a  20  year  period  of
       residence because it was not claimed that there was at the  time  of
       that hearing, see paragraphs 9 and 10  of  the  decision.  Ms  Allen
       argued that the decision of Judge Finch was not entirely clear  that
       the appellant had used forged  documents  to  advance  her  case  at
       paragraph 25 of the decision either.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. The First-tier Tribunal does set out a summary of the refusal letter
       at paragraph 3 of the decision, and also confirms at paragraph 8  of
       the decision that the Secretary of State's bundle had been  provided
       as evidence.

    9. The analysis at paragraphs 21  -  26  of  the  decision  is  legally
       correct. A finding that a claimant  can  show  compliance  with  the
       private life Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE(iii)  would  mean
       that there was  no  immigration  control  public  interest  weighing
       against the claimant so that her private life ties would  then  make
       it highly probable that her removal would be disproportionate.

   10. It is however possible that paragraph 19 does amount to asserting  a
       reversing burden of proof in putting some sort of obligation on  the
       Secretary of State to supply records, which would amount to an error
       of law, although paragraph 20 of the  decision  is  clear  that  the
       burden of proof is on the claimant and asserts a correct approach in
       finding that information has been considered in the round.

   11. It is clear however that the First-tier Tribunal errs in law  as  it
       does not follow Devaseelan in making the previous decision of First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Finch a starting point, and indeed seems  to  be
       oblivious to its existence despite reference to it  in  the  reasons
       for refusal letter chronology.

   12. This is a material error of  law  as  Judge  Finch  found  that  the
       claimant had not lived in the  UK  with  her  purported  partner  Mr
       Kehinde Badmus/Tijani since 1995, and indeed had not shown  she  was
       married to him (in part due to  anomalies  with  the  official  date
       stamp on the Nigerian marriage certificate)  or  that  they  were  a
       couple, which led in turn to a finding  that  the  claimant  had  no
       family life relationship in the UK.  Judge  Finch  also  found  that
       claimant had only been present  in  this  country  since  2007.  See
       particularly paragraphs 19, 20 and 23 of her decision.

   13. In coming to these conclusion Judge Finch considered the  statements
       and evidence of Olawale Adetoro, Abdiodun Agboluaje and  the  letter
       from Grace Oderinde, as well as the witness evidence of the claimant
       and Mr Tijani. At paragraph 25 of her  decision  Judge  Finch  found
       that the HMRC documents, P60s, payslips for the period 1995 to 2008,
       and a British Gas bill from 1998, were all false as the Secretary of
       State had provided detailed reasons for this being the case and  the
       claimant had not provided an explanation dealing with these reasons.
       It is clear that these were all material  findings  which  ought  to
       have been considered as the starting point for  this  appeal,  which
       was a human rights appeal advanced before the First-tier Tribunal on
       grounds of both the claimant's supposed 20 years of residence in the
       UK and also on the basis of her family life ties with her partner Mr
       Badmus/Tijani who has indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  UK,  see
       paragraph 17 of the decision which sets out the submissions for  the
       claimant before the First-tier Tribunal.

   14. We also find that the decision errs in law for want  of  reasons  at
       paragraph 25  for  the  conclusion  that  the  claimant  could  meet
       paragraph 276ADE (iii). This is because there are no  reasons  given
       for believing the appellant's history beyond saying that she was not
       inconsistent in her statement, and there  is  no  reference  to  any
       supporting documentation or other reasons given for  concluding  she
       had been in the UK for 20 years or more.

   15. As a result, we set aside the findings and decision  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal and remake the appeal de novo. We took a break in  the
       hearing over lunch for the parties  to  consider  how  the  remaking
       should take place and formulate submissions on this issue.

   16. Ms Allen submitted that we should remit the matter to the First-tier
       Tribunal for  remaking  due  to  the  extent  of  the  fact  finding
       required. Mr Kotas was prepared for the remaking to  take  place  in
       the Upper Tribunal. Our decision was that there  was  not  extensive
       fact finding required: there were three issues  the  length  of  the
       claimant's  residence  in  the  UK;  whether  she  had  two   years'
       cohabitation with her partner in the UK; and whether there would  be
       insurmountable obstacles to family life taking place in Nigeria.  As
       a result, we decided, the remaking processes  would  happen  in  the
       Upper Tribunal.

   17. Ms Allen then applied for the hearing to be  adjourned  rather  than
       for the remaking to take  place  immediately  as  we  proposed.  She
       submitted that it was appropriate to adjourn as the  claimant  would
       like to collate further evidence in support of her appeal. She  said
       that the  claimant  and  her  partner  would  like  to  produce  the
       following: the original  photos  and  marriage  certificate  (copies
       being  in  the  bundle);  an  expert  report  showing  the  marriage
       certificate is genuine; the birth certificate of their daughter  and
       a statement  from  their  daughter;  documents  from  a  Freedom  of
       Information  Request  to  the  Secretary  of  State  which  she  was
       instructed would show that the claimant had said she had  a  partner
       in a previous judicial review and in the previous SET(O) application
       which would show some of the conclusions of Judge Finch finding that
       the claimant had not disclosed her  partner  in  these  applications
       were not sound; further evidence of recent cohabitation in the  form
       of utility bills and a letter from the landlord. Ms Allen said these
       documents were material as  they  could  show  the  claimant  was  a
       credible witness and counter the findings that she was not  made  by
       Judge Finch. If the claimant was a credible witness it would be open
       to us to find that she had been in the UK since 1995, and  thus  for
       more than twenty years, and for her appeal to succeed  on  her  oral
       evidence alone. Ms Allen could not explain why this application  was
       only being made now or why  this  evidence  had  not  been  collated
       earlier.

   18. Mr Kotas submitted that  we  should  proceed  immediately  with  the
       remaking as the claimant had not applied under Rule  15(2A)  of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  giving  notice  that
       she wished us to consider evidence that was not  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal and explaining why it had not been  submitted  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal.

   19. We decided that it was  not  appropriate  to  adjourn  the  remaking
       hearing. There had been no compliance with Rule 15(2A) and  even  at
       this stage there was no explanation as to why the evidence  had  not
       been sought  and  provided  earlier.  Directions  had  informed  the
       claimant and her  solicitors  that  she  should  expect  a  remaking
       hearing to follow any finding of an error of law,  and  this  was  a
       case where an appropriately experienced solicitor  would  have  been
       aware that a finding of an error was  very  likely.  No  expert  was
       identified with respect to the report on the  marriage  certificate.
       Ultimately fairness did not require an adjournment as  none  of  the
       evidence would show that the claimant had been  in  the  UK  for  20
       years and thus assist her case that she had this period of residence
       in the UK and her appeal on private life grounds; and whilst some of
       it might have  enhanced  the  contention  that  she  had  a  genuine
       relationship with her partner none of it went to the second issue in
       any  family  life  appeal,  namely  showing  that  there  would   be
       insurmountable obstacles to family life taking place in Nigeria.

   20. As such we proceeded with the remaking hearing.

Submissions and Evidence Remaking

   21. The claimant adopted her  written  statement  as  her  evidence  and
       confirmed that she had signed the statement, and that it  was  true.
       In her written statement the claimant continues to assert  that  she
       came to the UK in May 1995 and has not left  since  this  time,  and
       that she stayed here because her husband, whom she married  in  1992
       in Nigeria, was present here. She says that Mr Tijani is her husband
       and has supported her during her time in the UK as she has  not  had
       permission to work, and that she has now has no family  or  material
       possessions in Nigeria. She says that she and Mr  Tijani  previously
       applied to remain singly, as opposed to as a couple,  as  a  Nigeria
       lawyer, who has now returned to that country, advised that this  was
       the correct way to proceed and she now realises that this was  wrong
       and that they were mislead in taking this approach.

   22. The oral evidence of the claimant started with  her  being  able  to
       answer some questions but after some initial questions from Ms Allen
       she ceased to be able to continue and seemed not able to  understand
       the questions put to her. We asked that Ms Allen  take  instructions
       outside of the Tribunal hearing room  as  to  whether  the  claimant
       needed an interpreter but after doing  so  Ms  Allen  said  she  was
       instructed that the claimant did not need  an  interpreter  but  was
       having some sort of panic attack  type  reaction  to  being  in  the
       Tribunal. It was clear  that  the  claimant  was  very  nervous  and
       uncomfortable, and so we tried to address this matter in a number of
       ways. We were informed that  the  claimant  had  been  having  these
       problems for the past year, and Ms  Allen  made  no  application  to
       adjourn the hearing on the basis of any ill health of the  claimant.
       We gave  the  claimant  a  break  from  questioning  by  taking  her
       partner's evidence, and then returning to her evidence but this  did
       not assist, and cross-examination had to be abandoned.

   23. The information the claimant communicated prior to  becoming  unable
       to answer any further questions was as follows. Her brother had sent
       the registrar's certificate to  the  UK  for  her  as  the  marriage
       certificate had been questioned by Judge Finch as not being  genuine
       due to the 1st May 1992 stamp. She  could  not  say  when  this  had
       happened and was unclear when she last had contact with her brother.
       Her brother was her only relative in Nigeria.  She  had  a  daughter
       who now lived in the USA, and had  gone  to  live  there  after  her
       mother died and been taken there by her  husband's  cousin  at  that
       point. She did not know when any of these events  had  taken  place,
       bar that she had been in the UK when her mother died.

   24. Mr Tijani's statement is very similar to that of  the  claimant  but
       includes the information that he is 61 years old and  would  not  be
       able to obtain employment in Nigeria or get  the  medical  treatment
       for arthritis, high blood pressure and an  eye  condition  which  he
       gets in the UK because he would not have the money to pay for  these
       treatments. He reiterated these medical issues  as  reasons  why  he
       could not have family life in Nigeria in his  oral  evidence,  along
       with the fact that he would not be able to get work in  Nigeria  due
       to his age - now 62 years.

   25. In oral evidence Mr Tijani was  asked  to  explain  why  he  used  a
       different surname in the UK to the one on his marriage  certificate,
       where his surname is given as Badmus, the same name as the  claimant
       uses as her surname. He said that  he  used  Tijani  to  please  his
       father and it was his father's name, where as Badmus is his  family.
       He confirmed he and the  claimant  have  a  daughter  born  on  12th
       January 1993 who lives in the USA. Mr Tijani also explained that  he
       had worked for Network Rail until 2006 and thereafter  for  Proactiv
       Resources maintaining trains. He is not working as much now as he is
       studying civil engineering. He said he had  been  in  the  UK  since
       1992, and that his daughter had gone to the USA in 2008 when she was
       15 years old, following the death of his mother-in-law who had cared
       for her until she died in 2007.  A  cousin  of  his  had  taken  his
       daughter from Nigeria to the USA.

   26. Mr Tijani said the claimant had one brother and no sisters, and that
       when she is recorded as having referred to a sister at  the  hearing
       before Judge Finch this must have  been  his  sister  who  lives  in
       Plaistow. It was also not correct that his  mother-in-law  had  sent
       the marriage certificate to the UK, as is recorded in  the  decision
       of Judge Finch, as she had died and  the  document  was  sent  by  a
       friend.

   27. The claimant's bundle also includes GP medical notes for Mr  Tijani,
       which stretch from 2002 to 2011 giving  his  address  as  9  Perkins
       Square, and which contain references to his having a wife or partner
       and other medical papers for Mr Tijani from 2016 concerning his  eye
       problems with glaucoma with the address  6  Newhaven  Road;  undated
       photos of a Nigerian wedding; witness letters and statements from CA
       Oderinde, Olawale Samuel Adetoro and Abiodun Ibrahim  Agboluaje  all
       dated in 2013 and all of which were before Judge Finch; Mr  Tijani's
       Halifax current account statements  which  show  his  address  as  6
       Newhaven Road and regular payments in by Pro Active  Recruitment;  a
       letter from the University of East London dated  2016  regarding  Mr
       Tijani's course in civil  engineering  and  construction  management
       giving his address as 6 Newhaven  Road;  an  invitation  to  an  eye
       examination from an optician for the claimant giving her address  as
       6  Newhaven  Road  dated  June  2016;   the   Nigerian   Registrar's
       Certificate for the marriage of the claimant and Mr Badmus.

   28. The respondent's bundle includes  a  DVLA  letter  addressed  to  Mr
       Tijani for 2016 at 6  Newhaven  Road;  evidence  that  the  claimant
       applied to vote from 6 Newhaven Road in July  2013;  a  British  Gas
       bill for the claimant at 15 Diana House in  2002;  one  page  of  GP
       notes for the claimant giving an address of 34 Bellingham Green from
       2006 to 2015; a letter from Philips Oyerinde dated April  2015,  who
       says he is the landlord of 6 Newhaven Road and that the claimant and
       Mr Tijani are a couple and his tenants; marriage certificate of  the
       claimant and Mr Badmus; grant of ILR to Mr Tijani; passport copy for
       the claimant issued in the UK in February 2010; the  FLR  (FP)  form
       giving the claimant's address in April 2015 as 6 Newhaven Road;  and
       the notice of appeal which gives the claimant's address as  care  of
       225A The Grove (her solicitor's address) in August 2015.

   29. The respondent contends in the refusal letter that the appellant has
       not shown that she has cohabited with her partner Mr  Kehinde  Alade
       Tijani for the past two years as insufficient documentation had been
       submitted to show this. It is  accepted  that  Mr  Tijani  had  been
       granted indefinite leave to remain in July 2012. It is accepted that
       the appellant had shown she had been in the UK since  December  2002
       as she had a document with her name and  address  on  it  from  this
       year.  It  is  not  accepted  that  the  appellant  could  meet  the
       Immigration Rules at Appendix FM as she has not shown that  she  had
       cohabited with her partner for two years. It is  not  accepted  that
       the appellant can meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
       as she had not shown she would have very  significant  obstacles  to
       integration in Nigeria as she had lived  in  that  country  for  the
       majority of her life  and  is  still  familiar  with  the  language,
       culture and customs. It is accepted that  the  appellant  had  shown
       sufficient evidence that she and Mr Tijani have a  relationship,  as
       there is some evidence that they shared an  address,  but  not  that
       they were married as she had said she was single in  an  application
       made for indefinite leave to remain in 2009.  This  relationship  is
       not an exceptional circumstance which persuades the respondent  that
       it would be a disproportionate breach of Article 8  ECHR  to  refuse
       permission to remain to the appellant. It is open to  the  appellant
       to return to Nigeria and apply for entry clearance to re-enter as  a
       partner if she so wishes.

   30. Mr Kotas submitted that the starting point was  the  refusal  letter
       and the findings of Judge Finch in her the determination of February
       2014. The oral evidence of the claimant and  Mr  Tijani  had  caused
       further doubt as regards which relatives remained  in  Nigeria,  for
       instance with respect to the claimant's mother, and so there was  no
       credible evidence that the claimant  and  Mr  Tijani  did  not  have
       relatives they could turn to in Nigeria. There was no  new  relevant
       documentary evidence which would  displace  the  findings  of  Judge
       Finch. There was no  evidence  of  two  years  cohabitation  and  no
       evidence of insurmountable obstacles to family life taking place  in
       Nigeria. Mr Tijani was working and studying in the UK  and  had  not
       shown that he could not do the same in  Nigeria.  The  claimant  had
       hairdressing skills according to the evidence in the  appeal  before
       Judge Finch. They were both in fairly  good  health,  and  could  be
       expected to return to Nigeria given there were no children and  they
       would have family support there. The fact that the  claimant  speaks
       English is just a neutral matter, and she  had  not  shown  she  was
       financially independent as she was reliant on Mr Tijani. The  appeal
       should be dismissed.

   31. Ms Allen submitted that the claimant had shown she had been  in  the
       UK for 20 years. The Secretary of State accepts she  has  been  here
       since 2002, and there was little challenge to the oral  evidence  of
       the claimant  and  her  spouse,  and  it  was  difficult  for  those
       illegally present to have  documentary  evidence  to  support  their
       claims of residence. Somethings in the decision of Judge  Finch  had
       been potentially misunderstood or were poorly expressed.

   32. Ms Allen submitted that the claimant and Mr Tijani are in a  genuine
       relationship, which is clear from their attendance together  at  all
       of the appeal hearings; the fact that the  respondent  accepts  they
       have  a  relationship;  and  their  evidence  of  cohabitation.  She
       submitted that they could not live together in Nigeria due to issues
       of ill-health and the difficulties Mr  Tijani  would  have  starting
       again aged 62  years  and  obtaining  work.  The  appeal  should  be
       allowed.

Conclusions - Remaking

   33. The starting  point  on  the  issue  of  the  claimant's  period  of
       residence is the finding of Judge Finch in the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal promulgated on 18th February 2014 that she has been in
       the UK since 2007. The respondent has  accepted  that  new  evidence
       submitted with the May 2015 application means that the claimant  has
       shown she has been here since December 2002. Judge Finch found  that
       the claimant was not a credible witness as she did not  believe  her
       history of marriage and cohabitation with Mr Tijani, and found  that
       she had submitted documents  that  should  be  seen  as  false.  The
       claimant's written and oral evidence before us does not lead  us  to
       the conclusion that she should be treated  as  a  credible  witness.
       There is no comprehensive statement setting out her history  in  the
       UK. She was clearly very nervous and distressed by giving  evidence,
       but despite being given the opportunity to consult in  private  with
       Counsel no application was made to adjourn the hearing  for  her  to
       seek medical help or to present evidence to  us  in  an  alternative
       way, for instance through a more detailed statement.

   34. The evidence of Mr Tijani does not assist the claimant's case on her
       period of residence either. Once again his statement is not  a  full
       descriptive account of the claimant's period of residence. We  start
       from the findings of Judge Finch that Mr Tijani and the claimant had
       not shown that they were genuinely married  or  had  a  genuine  and
       subsisting cohabiting relationship due to having both said they were
       single/ not disclosed their relationship in earlier applications  to
       the Secretary of State to remain in the UK; due to the lack  of  any
       detailed  witness  evidence  about  their  relationship;  due  to  a
       discrepancy between the date of the marriage and the official  stamp
       on the marriage certificate; and the lack of  genuine  documentation
       placing them at the same address. Mr  Tijani  gave  evidence  before
       Judge Finch that they were  genuinely  married  and  cohabiting  and
       regarding the claimant's stay in the UK and it follows that  he  was
       not found to be a  credible  witness  by  Judge  Finch  either.  The
       evidence that Mr Tijani gave before our Tribunal was also discrepant
       with that recorded as being given before Judge Finch by the claimant
       with respect to who sent the marriage certificate to the UK and  the
       date of death of the claimant's mother.

   35. We therefore find that the claimant cannot show that she has been in
       the UK for 20 years at the time of application as  it  is  correctly
       accepted by her counsel that there is no documentary evidence  prior
       to 2002 and we find that the witness evidence  before  us  does  not
       satisfy the burden of proof on the claimant to show that this is  so
       on the balance of probabilities. The claimant cannot therefore  meet
       the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  (1)(iii)  of  the  Immigration
       Rules. For clarity we find that it shown that the claimant has  only
       been in the UK since December 2002.

   36. The  starting  position  with  respect  to  the  claimant's  claimed
       relationship with Mr Tijani  is  the  decision  of  Judge  Finch  in
       February 2014 that the claimant had not shown she was married to him
       or had any sort of  family  life  relationship  with  him.  This  is
       however taken forward by the Secretary  of  State  in  the  decision
       under appeal of July 2015 who now accepts that the  claimant  has  a
       relationship, but not one  with  two  years  cohabitation,  with  Mr
       Tijani.

   37. We find there is no evidence which leads us to any  more  favourable
       conclusion on this issue than that of the Secretary  of  State.  For
       the reasons set out above the witness evidence of the  claimant  and
       Mr Tijani can be given little weight as they have been found not  to
       be credible witnesses in the past,  and  their  evidence  before  us
       gives no reason to change that view. The documentary evidence before
       us does not support their having  any  period  of  cohabitation:  it
       places Mr Tijani at Perkins Square and then at Newhaven Road in  the
       period 2002 to 2016. There is no evidence of the claimant  being  at
       Perkins Square but there is evidence of her being at Diana House and
       Bellingham Green in the period  2002  to  2015.  No  explanation  is
       offered for these different addresses in the witness evidence. There
       is only scant documentary evidence of the claimant being at Newhaven
       Road: two pieces of mail, one regarding voting in 2013 and one  from
       an Optician in 2016 and a landlord's handwritten letter  from  2015.
       In these circumstances we do not accept that the claimant has  shown
       any period of cohabitation with Mr Tijani.

   38. We can see no reason to find that Judge  Finch's  doubts  about  the
       marriage certificate were not well founded. The fact that a  further
       document relating to the preparation  for  marriage,  a  registrar's
       certificate, has been produced  does  not  mean  that  the  marriage
       certificate with a stamp one day before the date of the marriage  is
       genuine. We further find that the two documents do  not  assist  the
       claimant as we also have doubts about  whether  the  Mr  Tijani  who
       appeared before us is the Mr Badmus on the certificate as  he  could
       not give an explanation which made sense to us as to as  to  why  he
       got married using one surname (Badmus) and then very soon afterwards
       got a passport using another one (Tijani).

   39. As we find that the claimant has not shown two years cohabitation in
       a genuine and subsisting relationship akin to marriage we find  that
       she cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  rules  at
       Appendix FM. For completeness we also find that there  would  be  no
       insurmountable obstacles to any family life which may exist  in  the
       form of the non-cohabiting relationship between the claimant and  Mr
       Tijani taking place in Nigeria. Both are Nigerian citizens  who  are
       entitled to live in that country and who have historically had  long
       periods of residence there. We do not accept that the claimant  does
       not have any relatives in  that  country:  the  evidence  about  her
       mother's death is inconsistent and  the  claimant  would  appear  to
       accept she has a brother and Mr Tijani a cousin in that country.  We
       find that the claimant and Mr  Tijani  have  continuing  linguistic,
       cultural and family ties to Nigeria. We find that the  claimant  has
       not shown on the balance of probabilities that  she  and  Mr  Tijani
       would not be able to obtain work in that country given his  ability,
       despite his medical complaints, to do so in the UK and the obviously
       marketable and transferable skills he has in  engineering,  and  the
       claimant background in hairdressing as explained in evidence  before
       Judge Finch. There was no supporting country of origin evidence that
       Mr Tijani would not be able  to  afford  any  medical  treatment  he
       requires in Nigeria either.

   40. We must finally consider whether the claimant  could  succeed  under
       paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules on the  basis  she
       could show very significant obstacles to integration if returned  to
       Nigeria. For the same reasons as set out above  we  find  that  this
       would not be the case given her cultural, linguistic and family ties
       to Nigeria and her ability to earn money through hairdressing.

   41. Thus, we find that the claimant cannot show that she  can  meet  the
       family  and  private  life  Immigration  Rules  at  Appendix  FM  or
       paragraph 276ADE. When looked at more  broadly  on  Article  8  ECHR
       grounds we find that there are no compelling  compassionate  matters
       to weigh against the  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
       control because little  weight  can  be  given  to  the  appellant's
       private life ties to the UK when considering the proportionality  of
       her removal as all of these have been formed  whilst  she  has  been
       unlawfully present; and likewise little weight can be given  to  her
       relationship with Mr Tijani, even if he were seen  as  a  qualifying
       partner which we have found he is not, as that relationship has been
       formed whilst she has been unlawfully present,  see  s.117B  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The claimant's ability
       to speak English and Mr Tijani's ability to support her  financially
       are only neutral matters.  Nothing  further  has  been  advanced  to
       balance in her favour against the weight that must be given  to  the
       public interests in the maintenance of immigration control,  and  so
       we find therefore that the removal of the appellant is proportionate
       and does not constitute a  breach  of  the  UK's  obligations  under
       Article 8 ECHR.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  all  of  the
      findings.

   3. We remake the appeal dismissing it on human rights grounds.



Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   13th  December
2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley





