
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03154/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 20 February 2018                   |On 28 February 2018                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                              NANCY ROBI MAKURI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Maku-Kemi, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born on 3 June 1984.  She  came  to
    the UK in order to study but  remained  following  her  marriage  to  a
    British citizen, Mr Dema Mandiangu ("the  sponsor").  She  was  granted
    leave to remain as a spouse from 1 February 2013 until 1 February 2015.
    The decision now appealed resulted from the refusal of  the  respondent
    to grant her indefinite leave to remain. That decision was made  on  19
    January 2016.

 2. The reasons for refusal letter explained that  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor were invited to attend marriage interviews on 14 January  2016.
    The respondent was  satisfied  that  information  obtained  from  those
    interviews cast doubt over the genuineness  of  the  relationship.  The
    discrepancies  between  the  respective  answers   provided   did   not
    demonstrate the level of familiarity that  would  be  expected  from  a
    genuine couple. Examples are set out  in  the  letter.  The  respondent
    relied on paragraph 287(a) of the Immigration Rules and also  paragraph
    322(2)  because  it  was  considered  the  appellant  had  made   false
    representations regarding her relationship.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal arguing her  marriage
    was genuine and subsisting and therefore the  decision  amounted  to  a
    breach of article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. The  appellant  and
    the  sponsor  gave  oral  evidence  at  the  appeal  hearing  and  they
    maintained that their marriage was subsisting.

 4. In a decision promulgated on 29 June  2017,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Traynor dismissed the appeal. In a lengthy decision containing
    a thorough assessment  of  the  evidence,  he  came  to  the  following
    conclusions in paragraph 65:

         "It was submitted that  the  Appellant  has  always  respected  the
         Immigration Rules and, therefore, there was no reason why she would
         seek to contravene those Rules. However, in circumstances where she
         and the person who she married know little of each  other,  I  find
         that the Respondent was entitled to conclude that on the balance of
         probabilities they are not involved in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship,  but  rather  that  they   have   entered   into   an
         arrangement, namely a marriage of convenience, so as to enable  the
         Appellant to remain in this  country  in  circumstances  where  she
         would not otherwise be entitled. It is accepted that the  Appellant
         held leave to remain as a student until 13 November 2012 and  that,
         following her marriage in April of that year, she applied  in  July
         for leave to remain as a spouse. It is therefore accepted that  she
         has always held lawful leave to remain. Nevertheless, that does not
         mean that the arrangement she has had with the person who  she  has
         married is such that they are involved  as  a  genuine  couple  who
         share a common home and a common domestic way of life. I find  that
         there are significant discrepancies  in  their  knowledge  of  each
         other which lead me to conclude that they have  failed  to  provide
         credible explanations as to why they would withhold information  or
         not have knowledge of each  other's  families,  particularly  where
         they come from different countries. The fact that she  was  granted
         leave to remain as a spouse in 2012 was based solely upon the  fact
         that the parties had only recently married. I acknowledge  that  in
         May 2015 the first application was refused  because  the  Appellant
         was not able to provide evidence of English language proficiency as
         required by the Immigration Rules. Whilst the  Respondent  has  not
         explained why the Appellant was not interviewed at that  time,  the
         fact remains that when she and her spouse  were  interviewed  their
         answers  were  both  discrepant  and  inconsistent.  All  of   this
         satisfies me that the  application  does  not  establish  that  the
         parties are involved in a genuine and subsisting relationship  and,
         therefore, the refusal under the Rules was entirely correct."

 5. The judge concluded that he could  not  be  satisfied  that  there  was
    subsisting family life  and  he  dismissed  the  appeal  on  article  8
    grounds.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds but permission
    to appeal was granted only on the second of them. Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson noted the argument that  the  judge  had
    arguably erred in law  in  that  he  misapplied  the  burden  of  proof
    concerning a marriage of convenience  by  placing  the  burden  on  the
    appellant, not the respondent. She found it was arguable the judge  had
    misdirected himself on this point which  could  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome or the fairness of the  proceedings  in  this
    regard.

 7. The respondent has not filed a rule 24 response.  I  heard  submissions
    from the representatives on the  question  whether  the  judge  made  a
    material error of law in his decision.

 8. Mr Maku-Kemi relied on the points made by Judge Grant-Hutchinson in her
    order. He suggested that there had been unfairness in  the  proceedings
    as result of the judge directing himself incorrectly  that  the  burden
    rested on the appellant. Mr Bramble noted that the  judge  had  made  a
    decision under paragraph 287 of the rules but not paragraph 322. In the
    latter case, the burden did rest on the respondent  to  establish  that
    false representations had been made. He said  the  judge  had  made  an
    error in his self-direction at paragraph 49  but  this  error  was  not
    material. Clear reasons had been given in the decision as to why he did
    not accept the marriage was subsisting and the threads had  been  drawn
    together in paragraph 65  of  the  decision.  In  reply,  Mr  Maku-Kemi
    emphasised his view that the matters relied on by  the  judge  did  not
    entitle him to come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  marriage  was  not
    subsisting.

 9. At the end of the hearing, I indicated that  I  did  not  consider  the
    judge had made a material error of law and the appeal was dismissed. My
    reasons are as follows.

10. Firstly, the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  are  misguided  in
    their reliance on the concept of a marriage of convenience. Of  course,
    I recognise the judge used those words in paragraph 65 of his decision.
    However, a marriage of convenience is  a  concept  applicable  only  in
    European law and this appeal contains no element of European law.  When
    paragraph 65 is read as a whole it is clear that the judge had  at  the
    forefront of his mind the correct test which lay at the heart  of  this
    case, namely, whether the appellant and the sponsor were in  a  genuine
    and subsisting marriage. His reference to  a  marriage  of  convenience
    appears to be an inference drawn from his primary finding that, in  the
    past, the couple entered into an arrangement. However,  that  does  not
    mean that  the  judge  erred  in  his  primary  finding  regarding  the
    subsistence of the relationship. His self-direction at paragraph 49  of
    his decision, that  the  burden  of  proof  was  on  the  appellant  to
    establish on a balance of probabilities that she and the  sponsor  were
    involved in a genuine and subsisting relationship, was correct.

11. Secondly, I agree with Mr Bramble that the error on  the  part  of  the
    judge in failing to direct himself that the burden of establishing  the
    general discretionary ground for refusal applied in this case could not
    be  material.  He  did  not  make   a   clear   finding   about   false
    representations. He did not have to given that a finding that there was
    no subsisting relationship effectively put an end  to  the  appeal.  If
    there was no relationship of the kind relied on, the appellant had  not
    shown article 8 was engaged.

12. Thirdly, I disagree with Mr Maku-Kemi that the reasons provided by  the
    judge for  his  decision  were  inadequate.  The  judge  gave  numerous
    reasons, based on the evidence, for his decision. He took into  account
    the explanations offered for discrepant answers but rejected  them,  as
    he was entitled to do. He did not approach the respondent's  challenges
    uncritically. Among the numerous reasons given by the judge, two  stand
    out.  Noting  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  been  undergoing
    fertility treatment in order to have a  child  with  the  sponsor,  the
    judge was entitled to find it inconsistent that  the  sponsor  had  not
    told her that he had successfully fathered  a  child  from  a  previous
    relationship until the eve  of  the  marriage  interview  and  that  he
    admitted he had never provided a sperm sample. These  are  very  strong
    reasons.

13. There is no error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal and the decision shall stand.

14. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and his decision dismissing the appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
