
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03499/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24 January 2018                       |On 05 April 2018                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR RAJA INDERKUMAR THAKUR
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Ahmad
For the Respondent:    Mr Subramanian


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1983.  He appealed against
      a decision of the Secretary of State made on 14 January 2016 to refuse
      his application for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of  ten
      years continuous residence.

   2. The Secretary of State considered that the requirements of  paragraphs
      276B, R-LTRP, EX1 and 276ADE of the Immigration Rules were not met and
      there were no exceptional circumstances justifying a  grant  of  leave
      under Article 8.


   3. For convenience, I retain the terms as they were before the First-Tier
      Tribunal, namely Mr Thakur is the appellant and the Secretary of State
      the respondent.


   4. The immigration history is that he entered the UK with entry clearance
      as a working holidaymaker in June 2005.  He then made a series  of  in
      time applications to obtain further leave, the last of which  (Tier  1
      highly skilled post-study migrant) expired on 14 August 2014.  On that
      date he made an in time application for  a  further  (Tier  2  skilled
      worker) leave.


   5. On 16 August 2014 he had an accident which required surgery and he was
      discharged with limited mobility on 19 August 2014.  As a  result  his
      employer informed him that he  could  not  continue  to  sponsor  him.
      Hence he was unable to submit a certificate of sponsorship within  the
      given time and his application made on 14 August 2014 was  refused  on
      23 October 2014 as invalid.


   6. On 19 November 2014 when still incapacitated he made an  out  of  time
      application for LTR which was refused with no appeal on 16 April 2015.
       On 12 May 2015 he made a Judicial  Review  application  (subsequently
      dismissed on withdrawal) challenging the validity of the 16 April 2015
      refusal.  On 16 July 2015 he made an out of time application  for  ILR
      on the basis of long residency which was refused on  14  January  2016
      and is the subject of the current appeal.


      First tier hearing


   7. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 21 September 2017 Judge of  the
      First-Tier Burns allowed the appeal which was  only  on  human  rights
      grounds.


   8. He was clear that the appellant did  not  have  ten  years  continuous
      lawful residence.  Section  3C Immigration Act 1971 leave extended his
      lawful residence from the date of his last refusal until no later than
      the end of October 2014 [10].


   9.  However,  the  judge   considered   that   there   were   exceptional
      circumstances not within the reasonable control of the appellant.  One
      of the exceptional circumstances found was that the  appellant  should
      have been granted a right of appeal on 16 April 2015 and so  he  would
      not have been an overstayer until the appeal was determined [19].


  10. Second, he considered it to be an exceptional circumstance that  there
      was no evidence but  that  the  appellant  would  have  had  continued
      sponsorship were it not for his serious accident.


  11. The judge went on to find that the relationship between the  appellant
      and his partner, Miss Lewis, a British citizen,  was  loving,  genuine
      and subsisting and that they had family life together.   He  found  it
      not reasonable to expect them to continue their relationship in either
      India  or  the  Philippines,  the  country  from  which   Miss   Lewis
      originated.


  12. He found that the exceptional circumstances to which he  had  referred
      were critical to the outcome of  the  appeal  such  that  less  weight
      should be given to the objective of effective immigration control.

      Error of law hearing


  13. The respondent sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  on  9
      November 2017.


  14. At the error of law hearing before me Ms Ahmad's major point was  that
      the judge erred in finding that the appellant had been  unlawfully  in
      the UK only since April 2015 rather than October 2014.  He had created
      section 3C extension leave where none existed.


  15. Her secondary submission was that the judge failed  to  make  a  clear
      finding on whether there  is  an  existing  relationship  between  the
      appellant and Miss Lewis and that if he had, in finding  that  private
      and family life considerations outweighed the public interest.


  16. In response Mr Subramanian emphasised that the  appellant  had  always
      obeyed the Immigration Rules.  The judge's  findings,  in  particular,
      that he would have attained the  ten  year  requirement  but  for  his
      serious injury and that such amounted to an  exceptional  circumstance
      was one that was open to him.  His findings on the  relationship  were
      clear.  Looked at in the round his decision was sustainable.  He asked
      me to uphold the decision.


  17. I reserved my decision.


      Consideration


  18. In considering this matter I find that the  decision  shows  error  of
      law. The judge referred  (at  [21])  to  Home  Office  Guidance  'Long
      Residence and Private Life' which informs  Home  Office  workers  that
      'when refusing an application  on  the  grounds  it  was  made  by  an
      appellant who has overstayed by more than 28 days, you  must  consider
      any  evidence  of  exceptional  circumstances  which   prevented   the
      applicant from applying within the first 28 days of overstaying.'


  19. One of the exceptional circumstances the  judge  found  was  that  the
      appellant should have been granted a right of appeal on 16 April  2015
      and so he would not have been an  overstayer  until  that  appeal  was
      determined [19].


  20. The problem is that the appellant did not have leave when he made  the
      application which  was  decided  on  16  April  2015.   If  a  further
      application is made within  28  days  it  is  not  section  3C  leave.
      Instead, if the application succeeds  then  the  late  application  is
      disregarded as it was made during a grace period.  It does not  create
      leave in itself.  Accordingly, even if he had been granted a right  of
      appeal in the 16 April 2015 decision  he  would  still  have  been  an
      overstayer when he made the application for ILR.


  21. It is clear that the judge did  go  on  to  make  findings  about  the
      relationship between the appellant and Miss Lewis.  He found it to  be
      loving,  genuine  and  subsisting  and  that  they  have  family  life
      together.  Such was a finding open to him on the evidence.


  22. However, I consider that in erring in his finding that  the  appellant
      should have been granted a right of appeal to the April 2015  decision
      and that if he had he might not have been an overstayer  at  all,  and
      that such amounted to  an  exceptional  circumstance  must  taint  his
      conclusion that less weight  should  be  given  to  the  objective  of
      immigration control.


  23. I set aside the decision to be remade.


      Remaking of decision


  24. Mr Subramanian indicated that in such event there would be no  further
      evidence. Ms Ahmad had nothing else to add.


  25. In reaching my decision I see no reason to doubt  that  the  appellant
      and Miss Lewis have a  loving,  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
      which began when he was here lawfully. They have been living  together
      in a  close  personal  relationship  since  mid  2015.  There  was  no
      challenge by Ms Ahmad that it would not be reasonable for  Miss  Lewis
      and the appellant to try to continue their life in either India or the
      Philippines.  I see no reason to reach a different view from  that  of
      the First-Tier Tribunal.  Miss Lewis is a British citizen who has been
      here for many years.  She has not been to her country of origin  since
      2001.  She has never been to  India.   She  cannot  speak  any  Indian
      languages.  She is nearly 60 years of age.  The appellant's family  in
      India do not approve of the appellant's relationship with Miss  Lewis.
      Miss Lewis in  addition  has  significant  physical  disabilities  and
      relies on the appellant for moral and physical support.


  26. The appellant until the difficulties caused by his serious injury  had
      been lawfully in the UK since 2005 and productive.   Like  the  First-
      Tier Judge I find that there is no evidence to suggest  that  but  for
      his serious accident in August 2014 he would not  have  been  able  to
      enjoy continued sponsorship so as to obtain a further period of  leave
      in October 2014 which, had he obtained it, would have  given  him  his
      ten years continuous lawful residence.


  27. I note also the evidence, again not challenged, that the appellant has
      accommodation with Miss Lewis and receives remittances from his family
      in India.  Also that he has worked in the UK in the past, has  degrees
      in business management and administration  and  if  granted  leave  is
      likely to get work promptly.


  28. In SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 (at  [56])  it  was  held
      that the fact that a case was a 'near miss' in relation to  satisfying
      the requirements of the Rules would not show that  compelling  reasons
      existed requiring the grant of leave outside the Rules.  However, if a
      claimant could show that there  were  individual  interests  at  stake
      covered by Article 8 which  gave  rise  to  a  claim  that  compelling
      circumstances exist to justify the grant of leave outside  the  Rules,
      the fact that the case was a 'near miss' might be  a  relevant  factor
      which tipped the balance in his favour. In MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10
      the Supreme Court when allowing the appeal of the appellant SS from SS
      (Congo) said at [103] the issue was not  whether  there  was  a  'near
      miss' [from the maintenance figures in the Rules] but the weight to be
      given to any factors weighing against the policy reasons relied on  by
      the respondent to justify an extreme interference with family life.


  29. I consider the appellant's family circumstances as detailed above  and
      his falling some months short of achieving ten years continuous lawful
      residence through no fault of his own,  to  tip  the  balance  in  his
      favour.


  30. I conclude that in the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case  the
      public  interest  is  outweighed  by  the  private  and  family   life
      considerations and that refusal is disproportionate.


  31. The appeal succeeds.


Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal showed error  of  law.   It  is  set
aside and remade as follows:-

      The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity order made.


Signed                                             Date  29 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

