
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/03800/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2017                            |On 23 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               mr zubair shah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Currie, Counsel, instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes (the judge), promulgated on 8 February  2017,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of entry clearance, dated 30 July 2015.   The  application  for
    entry clearance had been on the basis that the Appellant wished to join
    his wife, a British citizen,  in  this  country.   The  refusal  notice
    raised two issues: the nature of the  relationship  and  the  financial
    requirements under Appendix FM.




The judge's decision

 2. There was no Presenting Officer at the  hearing  (an  occurrence  which
    makes nobody's life any easier).  The judge makes a number  of  adverse
    findings in respect of the relationship.  These findings relate to  the
    absence of photographs of the couple together,  the  inclusion  of  the
    Appellant's name on a utility bill, the failure of the sponsor to visit
    the Appellant in Pakistan, and the unclear  nature  of  telephone  call
    records.  The judge also finds that specific financial evidence was not
    provided and therefore  the  appeal  would  have  failed  in  light  of
    Appendix FM-SE in any event.




Grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 3. The grounds in essence make two points.  First,  the  judge  failed  to
    consider an explanation provided by the sponsor as to why she  had  not
    visited the Appellant in Pakistan (she was  unable  to  take  time  off
    work).  Second, that the judge had  failed  to  raise  at  the  hearing
    certain concerns relating to the evidence before him, specifically that
    connected with photographs, the telephone records and the utility bill.
     The issue relating to the financial requirements is  also  challenged.
    It is said that the judge failed to  have  regard  to  the  declaration
    contained  in  the  application  and  replicated  at  page  26  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.

 4. Sitting as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, I granted permission  to
    appeal on 5 September 2017 on the basis that all of  the  grounds  were
    arguable.




The hearing before me

 5. At the outset of the hearing Mr  Clarke  helpfully  confirmed  that  he
    conceded  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  respect  of  the  financial
    requirements.  The relevant declaration had in fact been  contained  in
    the application form, as claimed. Therefore, if there  were  errors  in
    respect of the relationship issue, the decision of the judge should  be
    set aside.

 6. Ms Currie relied on the grounds.  In respect of the visits  issue,  she
    submitted that the sponsor had clearly said that she could not get time
    off and this was the main reason as to why she was unable to visit  the
    Appellant.  This evidence had been provided orally at the hearing.   In
    respect of the telephone  records,  these  had  been  provided  to  the
    Respondent with the application and there was nothing  in  the  refusal
    notice which took any material issue with their  contents.   The  judge
    had not raised any concerns at the hearing.  Ms Currie  submitted  that
    if the judge had raised  the  concerns  subsequently  set  out  in  his
    decision, there were reasonable  explanations  which  could  have  been
    provided in respect of the dates, the period of time which they covered
    and the numerous 00.00 duration calls.  There was evidence  before  the
    judge as to who the relevant telephone numbers belonged  to.  Although,
    as Ms Currie accepted, some of the evidence may have appeared  somewhat
    confusing, the substance of it was material to the genuineness  of  the
    relationship.  The points taken by the judge were technical in  nature.
    In respect of the utility bill, the judge had failed to take account of
    the evidence that the Appellant did not know in advance that  he  would
    be leaving the United Kingdom in April 2012.  He left as  a  result  of
    his college being closed down at that time, and therefore the fact that
    his name had been put onto a utility bill in March of that  year  could
    not be seen as contrived in any way contrary to what the judge  appears
    to have found.  In respect of a lack of photographs of  the  couple  in
    the United Kingdom, the judge had failed to appreciate that the  couple
    had only lived together from March to April 2012, a very  short  period
    of time.   Ms  Currie  submitted  that  cumulatively  the  errors  were
    sufficient to have the decision set aside.

 7. Mr Clarke submitted that there were no material errors of  law  by  the
    judge.  In respect of the lack of visits,  there  had  been  more  than
    enough savings for these to have occurred and the judge was entitled to
    find that it was implausible that the sponsor had been  unable  to  get
    enough time to visit over the course of  some  three  years  since  the
    wedding.  In respect of the telephone evidence,  it  was  down  to  the
    Appellant to explain this clearly, and this had not been  done.   There
    was no evidence of any contact between the couple in the period 2007 to
    2014.  There was no evidence contained in a witness statement as to the
    nature of contact or any explanations  as  to  the  itemised  telephone
    bills.  It was clear from the  Respondent's  refusal  notice  that  the
    genuineness  of  the  relationship  was  not  being  accepted.   In  so
    concluding, the Respondent had had regard to the telephone  bills  that
    had  been  previously  submitted.   There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had voluntarily departed the United Kingdom and in any  event
    this was only one finding amongst several others.  In reply, Ms  Currie
    emphasised that the point taken on the utility bill  was  misconceived,
    and that the judge should have had regard to the evidence  relating  to
    the telephone bills as a whole.  It was clear that  the  person  making
    the calls was the sponsor and that she was  ringing  telephone  numbers
    belonging to  the  Appellant.   The  period  of  time  covered  by  the
    telephone bills and irregularity of contact was significant evidence.




Decision on error of law

 8. This has not been an easy case to decide.  The  evidence  presented  to
    the judge was in many respects unsatisfactory.   I  would  particularly
    note the extremely poor  witness  statement  (if  it  can  be  properly
    described as such) submitted on behalf of the sponsor.   This  document
    reads much more  like  quasi-legal  submissions  than  a  statement  of
    factual information.  There is no attempt to explain the history of the
    relationship or any of the evidence being adduced  in  support  of  the
    appeal.  It  does  nothing  to  address  the  concerns  raised  in  the
    Respondent's  refusal  letter.   The  judge  was  fully  justified   in
    criticising this document at paragraph 12 of his decision.

 9. In addition, the manner in which the telephone evidence was provided in
    the Appellant's bundle was confusing.  The chronology is muddled and it
    seems as though printouts obtained by the sponsor herself were inserted
    in amongst evidence from the relevant mobile phone  provider.   I  also
    bear in mind the simple fact that it was for the Appellant to prove his
    case before  the  Tribunal  and  that  he  had  the  benefit  of  legal
    representation at all material times.

10. On the other hand, it does appear as though certain matters of  concern
    which were  not  expressly  raised  in  the  refusal  notice  were  not
    highlighted by the judge at the hearing.  It might be that the  absence
    of a Presenting Officer did not help the judge with the presentation of
    the case as a whole.

11. Having weighed up the submissions made before me, and having viewed the
    judge's decision sensibly and in the round, I conclude that  there  are
    no material errors of law.  My  reasons  for  this  conclusion  are  as
    follows.

12. First, I refer back to what I have  already  said  in  paragraphs  8-9,
    above.

13. Second, in respect of the lack of visits by the sponsor to Pakistan, it
    was open to the judge to conclude that she had sufficient savings, over
    and above those needed to meet the requirements under Appendix  FM,  to
    make (at the very least) a single visit to see  her  husband  following
    the marriage in August 2014.  I have been referred to the relevant bank
    statements and there was clearly a very significant amount in excess of
    the required sum at all material times.  Furthermore, it  was  open  to
    the judge not to believe the sponsor's evidence that she had simply had
    no opportunity whatsoever to visit Pakistan due  to  work  commitments.
    The judge recognises that it might not be easy for visits to be made by
    a working person.  However, as Mr Clarke rightly pointed out, the judge
    was considering a significant period of time between  the  marriage  in
    August 2014 and the hearing before him in January 2017.  This period of
    course would have included periods of  statutory  holiday  entitlement,
    and there was no explanation as far as I can see from  the  sponsor  to
    the effect that she was being denied what would otherwise be legitimate
    leave from her employment.

14. Third, in respect of the absence of photographs of the couple  together
    in the United Kingdom,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  take  this  into
    account.  Although Ms Currie submitted that  the  period  during  which
    they in fact cohabited was only brief, (which I accept to be the case),
    the fact is that they had known each other  since  2007,  a  much  more
    significant period of time.  There is nothing in paragraph  16  of  his
    decision to suggest that the judge was seeking evidence of  photographs
    relating only to the period of cohabitation.

15. Fourth, in the same paragraph, the judge was  fully  entitled  to  take
    into account the absence of any evidence from either family members  or
    friends,  which  might  have   supported   the   subsistence   of   the
    relationship.

16. Fifth, turning to the telephone records, it is the case that there  was
    evidence before the judge to link the relevant numbers to the Appellant
    and the sponsor.  It is apparently also the  case  that  Skype  records
    going back to October 2014 were included in the Appellant's bundle  but
    had not specifically been considered by the judge (although  the  final
    sentence in paragraph 22 does indicate that he had seen  and  borne  in
    mind this additional evidence).  The judge was entitled  to  find  that
    there was no  evidence  which  predated  October  2014  in  respect  of
    electronic contact between the sponsor and Appellant.   The  judge  was
    taking this into account in the context of  a  relationship  which  had
    included cohabitation as long ago as 2012.  In my view  Mr  Clarke  was
    right to point out that this was a significant gap and  the  judge  was
    entitled  to  take  cognisance  of   the   absence   of   evidence   of
    communications between 2012 and 2014.  The judge was also  entitled  to
    conclude that no explanation for the absence of such evidence had  been
    forthcoming.

17. As to the format of the telephone evidence, the judge found  it  to  be
    unsatisfactory, as I have  done  (see  above).   It  was  down  to  the
    Appellant and his representatives to present all relevant evidence in a
    clear and comprehensible way with explanations for any issues  arising,
    whether they cold be described as substantive or "technical".  The fact
    that the Respondent's refusal letter had not  expressly  raised  issues
    related to the telephone evidence did not of itself mean that this  was
    accepted as showing a genuine relationship.  It is quite  obvious  that
    the Respondent had concluded that that the relationship was not genuine
    and subsisting.  This really should have  put  the  Appellant  and  his
    representatives on notice as to the nature and quality of any  evidence
    provided to the Tribunal on appeal.  There was  no  explanation  before
    the judge as to why so many of the calls had a duration time of  00.00.
    The judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    chronology of the evidence did not make sense.  He was entitled to take
    into account the absence of any evidence from  the  Appellant  and  the
    sponsor as to how their relationship developed (in  the  context  of  a
    previous divorce).  The point raised by the judge at paragraph  23  has
    not actually been challenged in the grounds.

18. Sixth, turning to the utility bill, I see some  merit  in  Ms  Currie's
    submission that the Appellant left the United Kingdom at  short  notice
    and that this would tend to show that his inclusion on the utility bill
    was not contrived.  Having said that I cannot see  any  evidence  which
    shows precisely when the Appellant's college was closed down  and  when
    he in fact  made  the  decision  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    reference to the word "when" in paragraph 15 does not necessarily  mean
    that the college closure and the Appellant's departure all occurred  in
    April 2012.  Again this appears to be a case of the evidence  presented
    to the judge being generally unclear and unsatisfactory.  Even  if  the
    judge has proceeded on a false premise in this respect, such  an  error
    would not, taking everything else into account, be material.  In saying
    this I also note the judge's finding in paragraph 18 that the  presence
    of the Appellant's name on the bill does not inevitably  show  that  he
    was living at the address, and that there was no evidence to show  when
    the sponsor was put onto the relevant bill.

19. Seventh, in overall terms, the findings made by the judge were open  to
    him, as was his general conclusion in paragraph 25:

         "Given the concerns that I have expressed above about the  evidence
         and surrounding matters, I am not satisfied that  the  relationship
         between the Appellant and  sponsor  can  properly  be  regarded  as
         either genuine or subsisting.  They may be legally married  but  it
         is not sufficient  to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  this
         fundamental issue the evidence provided has  significant  gaps  and
         evidence that would have assisted is conspicuous  by  its  absence.
         The Appellant and sponsor have had  ample  time  to  address  these
         issues and the benefit of legal advice on how to go  about  it  but
         have not taken that opportunity."

20. There are no material errors of law and the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands.




Notice of Decision

There are no material errors of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 22 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor







TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 22 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
