
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03070/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 October 2017                            |On 12 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born in 1984.  He is said  to
    have arrived in the UK in 1986, although the respondent  has  expressed
    doubt about that claim.

 2. A decision was made on 8 July 2015 to refuse leave to remain, based  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR, the emphasis in the  application  being  on  the
    appellant's family life.

 3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M.R. Oliver ("the FtJ") on 2  December  2016.
    The FtJ dismissed the appeal.  The further context  of  the  appeal  is
    best illustrated with reference to the FtJ's decision.

    The decision of the FtJ

 4. The FtJ referred to the appellant's claim to have  arrived  in  the  UK
    illegally with the help of an agent on 10  June  2006,  using  a  false
    passport, and that he had remained ever since without leave.   He  then
    referred to other aspects of the appellant's immigration history.  That
    included that it appeared that on 2 December 2014 he applied for  leave
    to remain on the basis of family and private life, when he was  in  the
    process of finalising his divorce from his present wife,  and  his  new
    partner was also going through a divorce.  She had three children  with
    whom the appellant had now formed a relationship.

 5. He referred to the  respondent's  conclusion  that  the  appellant  had
    formed his new relationship in an attempt to circumvent the Immigration
    Rules.  It was not accepted that he and his partner were in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship.

 6. The FtJ stated that the appellant's immigration history called for very
    close scrutiny.  He noted the appellant claimed that he paid �2,000 for
    the false passport with which he entered the  UK  in  2006,  the  false
    passport thereafter being disposed of by the appellant.  He  said  that
    the first verified date of the appellant's presence in the UK was  that
    of his religious marriage to his first wife [FC] on 18  November  2012.
    She originated from Bangladesh but was by the time of  the  marriage  a
    naturalised British citizen.

 7. The FtJ said that on 16 May 2013 the appellant  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of that relationship.  The application was refused.
     Although the appellant requested a reconsideration of  that  decision,
    by the time of the further refusal on 19 September 2013, the  appellant
    and [FC] married  in  a  civil  ceremony.   On  28  November  2013  the
    appellant made further  submissions,  but  those  were  rejected  on  4
    December 2013.

 8. Next the FtJ referred to the fact  of  the  appellant's  arrest  on  21
    November 2014 when he was found to be working illegally.  He was served
    with a notice of liability  to  removal.   At  [7]  he  said  that  the
    application dated 2 December 2014 made no mention of the person said to
    be his new partner, [SA], a woman born in Bangladesh but naturalised as
    a British citizen.  He referred to the fact that she has  two  children
    by her husband, the children having been born on [ ] 2009 and [ ] 2011.
     They were both born in the UK and at the date of the hearing were aged
    7 and 5, respectively.

 9. At [8], the FtJ said that in an accompanying letter  dated  2  December
    2014, reference was made  to  an  application  made  only  four  months
    earlier by the appellant, to remain on the basis  of  his  relationship
    with his previous wife ([FC]).  The solicitors had apparently explained
    that the appellant was then in the process of finalising  his  divorce.
    His new partner was referred to, although  not  by  name,  and  it  was
    erroneously stated that she had three children.

10. At [9] the FtJ referred to the appellant having informed the respondent
    on 15 January 2015 that he was nearly divorced from his first wife  and
    intended to marry his new partner.  They married on 11 June 2015.   The
    respondent's decision, which is the subject of the appeal, was made  on
    8 July 2015.

11. The FtJ set out the main features of  the  appellant  and  his  current
    wife's evidence, in terms of the  witness  statements  and  their  oral
    evidence.  He noted the contention that they had been  living  together
    for some time and were in a genuine and subsisting  relationship.   The
    evidence was that the appellant was attached to his wife's children and
    looked after them as if they were his own.  He also noted the  evidence
    that his wife has learning disabilities and the appellant had  provided
    a social worker's report confirming that he was her main carer.

12. The appellant's evidence was that as  she  was  dependent  on  him  for
    support, he could not leave her behind if he was forced  to  leave  the
    UK, and it would not be reasonable to expect her to uproot  herself  to
    accompany him.  It was further said that she would not receive the help
    and support that she has in the UK, if she moved to Bangladesh.

13. In relation to the children, the evidence was that they had now started
    school and it would be harsh on them to relocate, so it was said.   The
    appellant's case was that he had no strong family  ties  in  Bangladesh
    and he has a circle of friends in the UK.

14. The FtJ referred to a letter from the appellant's wife's GP  which  was
    to the effect that not only does the  appellant's  wife  have  learning
    disabilities, but also one of the children does.  The FtJ  referred  to
    "evidence from school and social workers" that the appellant  was  good
    with the children, who currently had only indirect contact  with  their
    biological father while an assessment was being carried out.

15. At [15] one finds the FtJ's express  conclusions.   He  said  that  the
    appellant's  personal  circumstances  and  history  do  not  suggest  a
    capacity for a sustained relationship, and he has not  shown  that  his
    current  relationship  is   any   more   stable   than   his   previous
    relationships.  He said that the appellant had married his current wife
    without waiting for approval from the respondent.  He said that he  was
    satisfied that his haste was  occasioned  by  his  wish  to  obtain  an
    immigration status to which he was otherwise not  entitled  because  of
    his very poor immigration history.  His history showed, the  FtJ  said,
    that he has done whatever he could in an effort to avoid removal.

16. In the same paragraph he said that  whilst  he  accepted  that  he  has
    shared  some  of  his  wife's  parental  responsibilities  towards  her
    children, he was not satisfied that he had shown that he has a deep and
    lasting relationship with them.  Neither she nor the children  have  to
    leave the UK if he is removed and any help that they  require  is  help
    they are entitled to in the United Kingdom.

17. The FtJ concluded that the appellant could not satisfy the requirements
    of Appendix FM, under either the parent or partner route.  He said that
    he gave little weight to the private life that he had developed in  the
    UK, with reference to paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.

18. Finally, he concluded that  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances
    warranting consideration of Article 8 outside the  Rules,  but  in  any
    event the public interest in  maintaining  fair  but  firm  immigration
    (control) outweighed such rights as he may possess, in  any  assessment
    of proportionality.

    The grounds and submissions

19. The grounds contend that the FtJ's conclusions were irrational in terms
    of the suggestion that the appellant's relationship is unstable  simply
    because he has had previous failed relationships.  The grounds refer to
    evidence said to support the contention that there was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship, namely that they had married in 2013 and  have
    accrued four years of marriage, that he is the primary  carer  for  his
    wife because of her learning difficulties, that he is stepfather to her
    two children who barely have contact with their biological father,  and
    that they have continued to reside together since their marriage.

20. It is  asserted  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  had  "two"
    previously unsuccessful relationships was not a  sufficient  reason  to
    disregard his current relationship.

21. Furthermore, it would be unreasonable to expect the appellant's partner
    to leave the UK, given her  British  citizen  status,  her  family  and
    private life here, the fact that she has learning difficulties, as does
    one of her children, and that both children  have  contact  with  their
    father,  albeit  not  often.   Removing  them   would   prevent   their
    relationship from continuing.

22. The grounds contend that the children are qualifying children and  rely
    upon the  care  provided  both  by  the  appellant  and  their  mother.
    Reference is also made in the grounds to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children, with the overarching contention being  that  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights were not properly considered, in terms of his parental
    relationship  with  two  qualifying  children  and  his   genuine   and
    subsisting relationship with a partner.

23. In submissions on behalf of the appellant the grounds were  relied  on.
    It was submitted that there was no proper consideration of s.117B(6) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  The
    FtJ had made speculative findings at  [15].   I  was  referred  to  the
    decision in R (On the application of RK) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department (s.117B(6); "parental relationship")  IJR  [2016]  UKUT
    0031, in terms of the extent to which a person who is not a  biological
    parent can be one who nevertheless has a parental relationship  with  a
    child, for the purposes of s.117B(6).

24. It was further submitted that the FtJ's conclusion that  the  appellant
    does not have a "deep and lasting relationship" with the  children,  is
    perverse in the light of the evidence.  It is  also  inconsistent  with
    the FtJ having concluded in the same sentence that the appellant shared
    some of his wife's parental responsibilities with the children.

25. I was referred  to  evidence  in  the  appellant's  bundle  as  to  the
    appellant's relationship with the children, that  evidence  being  from
    children's services, the school, the GP and a Children In Need plan.

26. In terms of the respondent's 'rule 24' response, the FtJ had  not  made
    any finding in relation to the requirement for the appellant  to  leave
    the UK and make an application for entry clearance.   Furthermore,  any
    such consideration would need  to  take  into  account  the  effect  of
    temporary separation on the appellant's wife and her children.  It  was
    submitted that the decision of the Supreme Court in Agyarko v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 dilutes the  import  of
    the decision in Chen v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).

27. Ms Aboni relied on the rule 24 response that is to the effect  that  it
    was open to the FtJ to conclude that given  the  appellant's  appalling
    immigration history, he had not shown that his current relationship  is
    any more (stable) than his previous relationships.

28. Furthermore, it was open to the appellant to seek  entry  clearance  to
    the UK on the basis of his relationship with his current  partner.   No
    evidence had been produced to show that his current partner's  children
    would be detrimentally affected by  temporary  separation.   A  further
    point is made about the precariousness of the appellant's family  life.



29. It was accepted that a parental relationship can exist where  a  person
    is not the biological parent.  Here, the FtJ had  accepted  that  there
    was some involvement by the appellant with the children,  but  the  FtJ
    doubted the appellant's motives.  It was open to him to  find  that  it
    was not intended that  this  was  a  permanent  relationship.   He  was
    entitled to find that there was no genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with the children.  Accordingly, s.117B(6) had no application.

30. Although the issue of making an application for  entry  clearance  from
    Bangladesh was not raised at the  hearing,  that  was  nevertheless  an
    option for the appellant.

31. In reply, Mr Gajjar submitted that if the FtJ  intended  to  find  that
    there was no genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  the  children,
    more would need to have been said than was said at [15].  The  fact  of
    previous relationships was not  indicative  of  a  lack  of  a  present
    genuine relationship with his wife and children.  The FtJ had not  gone
    so far as to say it was not a genuine and subsisting relationship.

    Conclusions

  32. Insofar as it is asserted that the FtJ failed to take into account the
      documentary evidence of the appellant's involvement with  his  current
      wife's two children, any such complaint has no merit.  The FtJ gave  a
      detailed summary of the witness statements of the  appellant  and  his
      wife and referred at [10] to a social worker's  report.   At  [13]  he
      referred to a letter from the appellant's wife's GP, and in  the  same
      paragraph to evidence from the children's school and  social  workers.
      He noted that that evidence indicated that the appellant  is  involved
      with the children. He was aware of, and referred to, evidence that not
      only the appellant's wife, but one of the  children,  had  a  learning
      disability.

33. At [15] he said that he accepted that the appellant has shared some  of
    his wife's parental responsibilities towards the  children.   In  other
    words, the FtJ was aware of the evidence of the appellant's involvement
    with his wife's children, and what was said about his relationship with
    them.

34. I do not accept that there is any inconsistency in [15]  of  the  FtJ's
    decision in the following sentence:

         "While I accept that he has shared  some  of  his  wife's  parental
         responsibilities towards her children, I am not satisfied  that  he
         has shown that he has a deep and lasting relationship with them."

35. There is no inconsistency between the FtJ accepting that the  appellant
    has shared some of his wife's  parental  responsibilities  towards  the
    children, and his nevertheless concluding that the  appellant  had  not
    shown that he has a deep and lasting relationship with them.   The  one
    does not necessarily follow from the other.

36. The grounds of appeal in relation to the FtJ's decision cite  a  number
    of factors which it is said suggest that the FtJ was wrong to  conclude
    that the appellant and his wife are not in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  One of those factors is said to be that they married  in
    2013 and have accrued four years of marriage.  However, that is  not  a
    correct statement of fact.  Both the appellant  and  his  wife  say  in
    their witness statements that they registered their marriage on 11 June
    2015.  The appellant married his first wife on 24 July 2013,  according
    to the marriage certificate in the  respondent's  bundle.   The  decree
    nisi in relation to the appellant's first marriage with [FC] is dated 2
    January 2015.  The appellant's present wife's decree nisi  in  relation
    to her marriage to her first husband is  dated  16  August  2013.   The
    appellant and his present wife were not therefore married in  2013  and
    had not, as the grounds suggest, had four years of marriage at the time
    of the  hearing  before  the  FtJ,  or  indeed  even  until  now.   The
    respondent's decision also refers to the marriage as having taken place
    on 11 June 2015.

37. Furthermore, and related to the duration  of  the  appellant's  present
    marriage,  the  FtJ  referred  to  a  letter   from   the   appellant's
    representatives dated 2 December 2014 which refers  to  an  application
    made not four months earlier for leave to remain on the  basis  of  his
    relationship with his first wife.  This is a further indication that at
    that time, as late as August 2014, the appellant and his  present  wife
    were not together.

38. In addition, the FtJ also noted at  [8]  of  his  decision,  that  that
    letter dated 2 December 2014 referred to the  appellant  being  in  the
    process of finalising his divorce, with reference  being  made  in  the
    letter to the appellant having a new partner, his current wife, who was
    also going through a divorce and who has three children.   She  is  not
    named in the letter, as the FtJ pointed out, and the letter erroneously
    states that she has three children.  Indeed,  when  one  looks  at  the
    application which accompanied that letter,  being  an  application  for
    leave to remain on Article 8 grounds, and dated the same  date  as  the
    letter, 2 December 2014, there is no reference to the appellant  having
    a partner in the UK or any dependants.  The application at section 2 of
    the form is on the basis of private life in the UK.  At  section  3  he
    states that there are no dependants applying with him.

39. It is apparent therefore, that as at the date of the hearing before the
    FtJ, the appellant's marriage to his present wife  had  only  subsisted
    for about 18 months.  Although it  is  said  in  the  letter  from  the
    representatives dated 2 December  2014  that  the  appellant  is  in  a
    relationship with his (unnamed) current partner,  even  accepting  that
    there was a relationship at that date, it was still a relatively recent
    event in terms of an assessment of its genuine and subsisting nature.

40. At [15] the FtJ said that the appellant's  personal  circumstances  and
    history do not suggest a capacity for a sustained relationship.  It may
    be that a judgement about the  appellant's  capacity  for  a  sustained
    relationship, as a statement of fact, is premature.  Nevertheless,  the
    point that the FtJ was plainly making was that the  appellant  had  not
    established that he was in a committed relationship  with  his  current
    wife, or that he was committed to the children  either.   That  is  the
    whole import of what he said at [15] about the appellant's relationship
    with his wife and her children.

41. It is not the case, as the grounds and submissions  suggest,  that  the
    FtJ concluded that simply because the  appellant  had  previously  been
    divorced, or had been in a relationship that only endured for  a  short
    time, this meant that his  current  relationship  was  not  genuine  or
    subsisting.  There was much more depth to the FtJ's decision than that.
     One sees that relatively early on in the FtJ's decision, where at  [4]
    he said that the appellant's immigration history called for very  close
    scrutiny.  He then set out that history.   At  [15]  he  said  that  he
    married  his  current  wife  without  waiting  for  approval  from  the
    respondent, and he concluded that his haste was occasioned by his  wish
    to obtain an immigration status to which he was not otherwise entitled,
    because of his very poor immigration history.  It  is  undoubtedly  the
    case that he does  have  a  very  poor  immigration  history.   He  was
    arrested whilst working in November 2014 and served with  a  notice  of
    liability  to  removal.   Less  than  a  month  later  the  appellant's
    representatives wrote to the respondent  stating  that  he  had  a  new
    British citizen partner (his current wife), the letter to which I  have
    previously referred.

42. The FtJ was entitled to conclude that the appellant's actions have been
    in an effort to avoid his removal.

43. Furthermore, it is evident that the appellant and his current wife  did
    not start living together, in their own accommodation at  least,  until
    about November 2016, a month before the hearing  before  the  FtJ.   So
    much is clear from the letters  in  the  appellant's  bundle  that  was
    before the FtJ. For example, the CIN Network Meeting  report  dated  21
    September 2016 on page 1 states that the appellant's wife had recently,
    at that time, been successful on bidding for a two-bedroom property and
    that she and the children are due to move in as soon as the electricity
    and water supply had been  sorted  out.   The  letter  from  Children's
    Social Work Services, dated 10 November 2016 states that until recently
    the appellant had not lived in the family home and had resided with his
    brother in London, the reason being stated as that  his  wife  and  her
    children have been living with her brother and his family in  a  three-
    bedroom property.  Therefore, the suggestion in the appellant  and  his
    wife's witness statements stating that they had  been  living  together
    for "some time" as at the date of their witness statements in  December
    2016 cannot be accurate.

44. In all these circumstances, the FtJ was entitled to conclude  that  the
    appellant had not established that he has shown  "a  deep  and  lasting
    relationship" with the appellant's wife's children, or indeed that  his
    current relationship was a stable one.   In  those  circumstances,  the
    appellant had not established that he had  a  "genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship" with a qualifying child, either under the Rules,
    or for the purposes of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

45. The FtJ having without legal error concluded that the  appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of the Rules in any respect, and  that  there
    were no exceptional circumstances warranting consideration of Article 8
    outside the Rules, he was bound to dismiss the appeal.

Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because this decision refers to children, unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family.  This direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Upper                Tribunal                Judge                 Kopieczek
                                10/01/18
