
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03982/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Oral decision given following hearing  |On 10 October 2017                   |
|On 19 September 2017                   |                                     |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                             mr barrington laing
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mold, Counsel instructed by LB & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national  of  Jamaica  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his mother and siblings in March 2001 being granted  leave
    to enter as a visitor, which leave expired at the  end  of  the  month.
    Prior to that leave expiring his mother applied  for  leave  to  remain
    with the appellant as a dependant, which application was granted on  18
    September 2001 and expired on 31 December 2001.   It  is  not  entirely
    clear whether before the  expiry  another  application  was  made,  but
    either then or very shortly thereafter his  leave  to  remain  expired.
    His mother and he and his siblings remained  thereafter  without  leave
    and  this  continued  to  be  the  position  until  in  March  2007  an
    application was made which included an application by the appellant for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.   He  was  ultimately  granted
    discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  2012  until  6  September   2015.
    Accordingly, the technical position is that although the appellant  has
    been in this country since March 2001, he has only had leave to  be  in
    the UK for between three and four years in total, being  from  2012  to
    2015 and the few months between March and December 2001 or thereabouts.
     Although the discretionary leave to remain which was granted  in  2012
    was pursuant to an appeal  against  the  respondent's  refusal  of  the
    application which had been made in 2007, neither the appellant nor  his
    mother or  siblings  had  3C  leave  during  this  period  because  the
    application had been  made  when  they  were  all  overstayers.   In  a
    decision letter which is  the  subject  of  this  appeal  and  will  be
    referred to below, the respondent stated  at  paragraph  42  that  "the
    period in which you have been lawfully in the  UK  and  held  Leave  to
    Remain equates to only 8 years and you are now 18 years of age".   This
    is incorrect for the reasons I have already given.  On  behalf  of  the
    appellant, Mr Mold suggests that by so stating the respondent indicated
    that she intended to treat the appellant as if he had had lawful  leave
    from 2007  when  the  application  was  made,  but  an  equally  likely
    explanation in my judgement is that the respondent's caseworker who  is
    responsible for writing this letter made a mistake.

 2. Regrettably and shamefully, from a very young  age  the  appellant  has
    committed a succession of offences.  His first conviction  was  in  May
    2009 when he was 11 years old and he has continued  offending  to  this
    day.  By the time that he  received  the  sentence  which  led  to  the
    decision under challenge, he had amassed some eighteen convictions  for
    23 offences.  These are set out in the refusal letter and I do not need
    to set them out in detail here.  They are very numerous,  and  what  is
    more, the respondent on  investigation  considers  also  that  she  had
    reliable information that he  was  a  member  of  a  "gang"  which  had
    committed a number of anti-social and criminal activities in his  local
    area.  His offending escalated and on 20 May 2014 he was  convicted  at
    Kingston-upon-Thames Crown Court for  a  robbery  involving  two  other
    defendants.  He was sentenced  to  30  months  in  a  young  offenders'
    institution.   The  commission  of  this   offence   was   sufficiently
    significant, being the culmination of his very long record of offending
    that the respondent wrote to the appellant on 9  March  2016  notifying
    him that because of his criminal convictions/behaviour in  the  UK  the
    respondent had decided to make a deportation order  against  him  under
    Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 because his presence in the UK
    was not conducive to the public good.  In response to that decision the
    appellant submitted representations dated 4 April 2016 setting out  why
    he should not be deported, which were essentially that  for  Article  8
    purposes this was not proportionate, but in a decision dated 31  August
    2016 the respondent rejected the appellant's human  rights  submissions
    founded on his family and private life under Article 8.  I note at this
    stage that the reason why the offence did  not  trigger  the  automatic
    deportation provisions set out within Section 32 of the UK Borders  Act
    2007 is because exception (2) (set out at Section 33(3)  of  that  Act)
    applied because the defendant was under the age of 18 at  the  date  of
    conviction.  He had been born in 1997 and he  was  convicted  in  2014.
    However, the provisions of  the  1971  Act  with  regard  to  conducive
    deportations did apply  for  which  purpose  the  respondent  (and  the
    Tribunal considering any appeal) is required  to  have  regard  to  the
    relevant Immigration Rules which are set out within paragraphs 398, 399
    and 399A.

 3. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman sitting at Harmondsworth  on  14
    June 2017, but in a decision which was signed  on  3  July  2017  (some
    three weeks after the hearing) and promulgated shortly thereafter,  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 4. The appellant now appeals against this decision, permission having been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Gibb  on  24  July  2017.   When
    granting permission, Judge Gibb stated that the  appellant  had  become
    subject to  deportation  "following  various  convictions  including  a
    twelve month detention and training order in 2014 of robbery", which is
    in fact incorrect, because, as already stated and as is clear from  the
    judge's sentencing remarks, the sentence was in fact 30  months'  youth
    custody.  It is clear from the sentencing remarks that this was a  very
    unpleasant offence indeed involving a woman with a child  in  a  buggy.
    The judge remarks at page  2  of  the  sentencing  remarks,  at  F,  as
    follows, when setting out the details of the offence:

         "The robbery was a nasty robbery.  It involved  a  woman  with  her
         child in a buggy.  That buggy was pushed over with the 18 month old
         child still strapped in  it,  fortunately  not  hurt  in  any  way.
         Naturally, the mother went to the child's assistance and it was  at
         that stage that between the two of you, you wrenched off  her  gold
         necklace worth �4,500, something which  was  of  sentimental  value
         which she has not got back".

 5. So far as this appellant's convictions are concerned,  even  though  he
    was still at a very young age, by that time, when he was  only  16  his
    extensive  criminal  history  involved  various  offences  of  robbery,
    grievous bodily harm, burglary, possession of a knife  and  at  various
    times he had provided a false address for a home address  search.   Had
    it not been for his youth, he would undoubtedly have been sentenced for
    the various offences of grievous bodily harm, robbery and  burglary  to
    substantial prison sentences.  The information  which  the  police  had
    obtained indicated, as I have already noted, that he was a member of  a
    gang, and certainly the robbery of which he was convicted was committed
    with two others, although that in itself does not prove  membership  of
    any particular gang.  However, the respondent took the view in light of
    the huge number of serious offences culminating  in  the  very  serious
    street robbery that it was  conducive  to  the  public  good  for  this
    appellant now at last to be deported.

 6. The submissions contained within the grounds  on  which  permission  to
    appeal was granted was that the judge had not taken  into  account  the
    relevant Immigration Rules, being paragraphs 399 and 399A, and had also
    failed to give adequate reasons for finding these  paragraphs  did  not
    apply.  It was also submitted that the judge had not provided  adequate
    reasons for his findings,  in  particular  when  he  found  that  being
    involved  in  a  joint  enterprise  robbery  was  equivalent  to  "gang
    membership" or that he had been brought up within "Jamaican culture".

 7. The complaint was also made that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
    adequately the position of his daughter who  was  a  baby  whom,  as  a
    matter of fact, the appellant had practically never seen.

 8. In oral arguments before me, on behalf of the appellant, Mr Mold relied
    upon these grounds and expanded on them.  He accepted  that  the  judge
    had indeed set out within the decision what was said within  paragraphs
    399 and 399A, but it was claimed the judge had not referred to them  in
    terms within his findings.  This, it was said, was a material error and
    the judge did not address the fact that the appellant had been  in  the
    UK for the bulk  of  his  life  when  making  his  findings.   Although
    initially Mr Mold suggested that the appellant had been in this country
    lawfully for nearly ten years, which would have been over half his life
    at the time the decision to deport him  was  made,  ultimately  he  was
    obliged to accept that from a technical point of view at any rate  that
    was not the position.

 9. I set out as the judge did the relevant provisions of  paragraphs  398,
    399 and 399A of the Rules, which provide as follows:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
             country to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
             in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
         applies if -

         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
         his life; and

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

10. So far as 398 is concerned, it is clear that the appellant does  indeed
    fall within these provisions because under 398(b) it is  provided  that
    deportation of a foreign criminal from  the  UK  is  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public interest where they have  been  convicted
    of an offence for which  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of between  twelve  months  and  four  years,  which  this
    appellant has.   Accordingly,  any  argument  based  on  a  failure  to
    consider this provision in terms cannot succeed because 398(b)  clearly
    applies.

11. With  regard  to  paragraph  399(a),  it  was  accepted  and  is  still
    apparently the case, that although the appellant has a very young child
    born when he was in custody, he has barely seen her, does not live with
    her, and there was no evidence even that he  is  still  in  an  ongoing
    relationship with that child's mother.  Judge Wyman, in  her  decision,
    stated as follows with regard to that relationship:

         "The appellant is not married and has never been so.  It is unclear
         if he is  in  an  ongoing  relationship  with  Miss  Kaysia  Smith,
         although he is clearly the father of Miss Smith's young child.  The
         letter from Miss Smith does not state that they are in  an  ongoing
         relationship - only that they have known each other  since  primary
         school and that he is a good person".


    Miss  Smith's  definition  of  a  "good  person"  is  clearly   not   a
    conventional one, bearing in mind the appellant's criminal history, but
    in the absence of any evidence, even of an ongoing relationship, or  of
    any ongoing subsisting parental relationship that the  appellant  could
    be said to have with his child (which clearly the judge did  consider),
    it is hard to see how an appeal could possibly have  succeeded  founded
    on the relationship with the child.  In any event,  it  is  clear  that
    this was indeed considered properly by the judge.   At  paragraph  110,
    the judge specifically considered Exception 2 set  out  within  Section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  which  was
    added by Section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014  which  sets  out  the
    additional  considerations  that  apply  in  cases  involving   foreign
    criminals.  Exception 2 is set out at 117C(5) and:

         "applies where C has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
         qualifying  partner,  or  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with  a  qualifying  child,  and  the  effect  of  C's
         deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh".


    Given the factual background in this case the  judge's  finding  within
    paragraph 110 that "There is no  evidence  that  a  further  separation
    would have unduly harsh consequences on  [the  appellant's  child]"  is
    entirely sustainable.

12. So far as paragraph 399(b)  is  concerned,  which  applies  where  "the
    person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who  is
    in the  UK  and  is  a  British  citizen",  in  the  first  place,  the
    relationship was not formed at a time when the appellant was in the  UK
    lawfully and his immigration status was not precarious;  and  secondly,
    in any event, there is no evidence that there  is  indeed  any  genuine
    subsisting relationship at all.  As the judge noted,  even  though  she
    provided a witness statement, the mother of his child did not claim  to
    be in a subsisting ongoing  relationship.   In  any  event,  given  the
    appellant's background, it is hard to see how it could be  said  to  be
    unduly harsh for her to remain in the UK without the appellant.

13. So far as paragraph 399A is concerned, all three sub-sections  set  out
    in (a), (b) and (c) have to be satisfied and, as already noted (a)  was
    not satisfied because the appellant has not been lawfully  resident  in
    the UK for most of his life, having been lawfully resident for somewhat
    under four years.  Also, it must be doubted whether a person  with  his
    criminal record could be truly said  to  be  "socially  and  culturally
    integrated in the UK", but for present purposes I will accept  that  he
    was and that the judge certainly acknowledged that he had been here  as
    a child and that he had built  up  a  private  life  in  this  country.
    However, even if (a) and (b) were satisfied, the appellant would  still
    need to establish that "there will be very significant obstacles to his
    integration [to Jamaica]".  The judge clearly understood that this  was
    the test because Section 399A was set out  within  paragraph  40.   She
    also considered this aspect because at paragraph 111  she  referred  to
    his family background being from Jamaica, from which she considered  it
    could be inferred that he would have been brought  up  within  Jamaican
    culture, but she also at paragraph 102 noted that he was physically fit
    and well and "more than capable of looking after himself".  He  had  an
    apprenticeship in mechanics, a positive reference  and,  as  the  judge
    noted, "This will assist him either continuing with  an  apprenticeship
    in Jamaica or alternatively in finding employment as a trainee mechanic
    in Jamaica".  In the course of discussion, Mr Mold  was  asked  by  the
    Tribunal as  to  what  he  said  were  capable  of  constituting  "very
    significant obstacles" to his integration into Jamaica,  to  which  the
    highest that Mr Mold suggested that this could be put was that  he  had
    not been in Jamaica for nearly all his life, had  a  lack  of  ties  in
    Jamaica, not knowing anybody there, and that his relationship with  his
    family was in this country.  In my  judgement,  whatever  approach  the
    judge took (and I consider he did consider  this  thoroughly),  on  the
    facts of this case there is absolutely no arguable basis upon which  it
    can be suggested that there would be "very  significant  obstacles"  to
    the appellant's integration into Jamaica once he is deported there.

14. It is also suggested that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  adequately
    whether (as he was required to do within paragraph 398) there "are very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A", although again it is hard to discern from the  facts  in
    this case what such "very compelling circumstances"  can  possibly  be.
    The judge clearly did consider  proportionality  properly,  finding  as
    follows at paragraph 107:

         "107.    The ultimate issue in this appeal is proportionality.   In
                the Tribunal's view, the appellant  falls  within  paragraph
                396 and 398 of the Immigration Rules.  It is clear that  the
                public interest outweighs the appellant's and  his  family's
                private interests by a considerable margin".

15. The judge  set  out  all  the  arguments  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, including his family life in this country, the private  life
    he has and the fact that he had a young baby, but was impelled  to  the
    view after taking account of his extensive criminal history,  which  is
    exceptionally bad, that the public interest outweighs such private  and
    family interests as he may have "by a  considerable  margin".   On  the
    facts of this case it is difficult to see how any judge could  possibly
    have come to any other conclusion.

16. Accordingly, I am entirely satisfied that there was no  material  error
    of law in Judge Wyman's decision and accordingly this  appeal  must  be
    dismissed.

Decision

There being no material error of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Wyman, this appeal is dismissed and her decision is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 9 October 2017
