
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03755/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2019                      |On 19 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                            irfan sardar muhammad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, of Counsel, instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 26 June 1980. He arrived
    in the UK on 14 March 2004 with entry  clearance  conferring  leave  to
    enter as a student. He subsequently  made  applications  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (Student) Migrant with leave granted until 17 August
    2012. He then applied for leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant and subsequently on the  basis  of  long  residence;  the  last
    application in that category being made on 5 April 2018.

2.   The application was refused by the Respondent in a  decision  dated  13
    February 2019. The Appellant appealed and his appeal came before  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal E B Grant.

3.   In a decision and  reasons  promulgated  on  21  May  2019,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that the Respondent was justified  in
    refusing the application with reference  to  paragraph  322(2)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, on the basis of the evidence that the Appellant  had
    utilised a proxy test taker in respect of his test taken at the  London
    College of Media and Technology on 21 August 2012.

4.   An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  made
    in time on the basis of the following grounds: first,  that  the  judge
    failed to  apply  a  three-stage  process  to  her  assessment  of  the
    allegation of  dishonesty.  It  was  said  that  the  judge  failed  to
    distinguish between  the  legal  and  evidential  burden  of  proof  as
    identified in Muhandiramge (section S-LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT  675  (IAC).
    Second, it was argued that the judge's approach placed  the  burden  on
    the Appellant to prove his innocence.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien
    in a decision dated 24 June 2019 noting, in  particular,  that  it  was
    arguable that "the judge set too high  a  standard  of  proof  for  the
    Appellant."

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

6.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Sharma sought to  rely  on
    the grounds of appeal. In amplification of them, he submitted that  the
    judge failed to apply the three-stage approach as  enunciated  in  Shen
    [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC) by eliding stages 1 and 3 at [34]. In particular,
    it was asserted that  the  judge  failed  to  distinguish  between  the
    Respondent bearing an evidential burden as well as a  legal  burden  of
    proof.

7.   Next, Mr Sharma submitted that the judge set too  high  a  standard  of
    proof on the Appellant in assessing his explanation. He referred to the
    Appellant's  explanation  at  [35]  which  had  a  minimum   level   of
    plausibility. He submitted that the judge's findings at [43], [49]  and
    [50] were  not  open  to  her.  The  Appellant  had  sought  the  voice
    recording, accepted it was not him, and had invited the  Respondent  to
    provide continuity  evidence  in  respect  of  it.  The  Appellant  had
    discharged the burden of providing  an  innocent  explanation  and  the
    judge failed to properly take all of this into account. Further, it was
    said that the judge placed a higher burden of proof  on  the  Appellant
    than that required, and that, this was further evidenced at  [54]  when
    the judge referred to the Appellant's explanation as  not  "reasonable"
    which was not the correct test.

8.   Mr Kotas, on the  other  hand,  submitted  that  the  judge  took  into
    account the Appellant's  submissions.  The  ETS  "Look-  up  tool"  was
    sufficient to discharge the initial burden. Mr  Kotas  stated  that  at
    [34]  and  [35]  the  judge  was  assessing  the  Appellant's  innocent
    explanation. At [54] the judge referred to  the  conclusions  "overall"
    and there was no  misdirection.  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the  judge
    assessed the evidence and noted  that  in  2012,  he  obtained  maximum
    scores, but two years later the evidence  showed  that  his  linguistic
    abilities were not as high. He submitted that the judge was entitled to
    say that this was inconsistent. There was  no  evidence  as  the  judge
    noted at [49] that the Appellant's degree in  Pakistan  was  taught  in
    English.

9.   As for the second ground, Mr Kotas submitted that obtaining  the  voice
    recordings placed the Appellant in a "win-win" situation and  that  the
    judge took into account all the evidence.

10.  In reply Mr Sharma submitted that at [51] it was unclear what  evidence
    the Appellant could provide in 2019 that  would  reflect  back  to  the
    position in 2012. The judge's criticism was unfair  and  there  was  no
    requirement to provide that evidence. He submitted that  the  Appellant
    had dealt with the "fraud factory argument" in  the  skeleton  argument
    and further criticised the judge for failing  to  properly  assess  the
    evidence of the witness. The judge at  [51]  had  referred  to  "cogent
    evidence" and this was not the correct test.

Findings and Reasons

11.  While I do not accept all of Mr  Sharma's  criticisms  of  the  judge's
    reasoning and, while Mr Kotas said everything he could  in  defence,  I
    have concluded that the judge's decision does contain  material  errors
    of law in her findings and reasons.

12.  The judge was ceased of the "generic evidence" in this  case  from  the
    Respondent which included  witness  statements  from  Rebecca  Collins,
    Peter Millington and a  Senior  Caseworker,  Gopen  Sethukavalar.  This
    evidence was supported by the relevant extract from the  "ETS  look  up
    tool" in respect of the Appellant for a test undertaken  on  21  August
    2012 with a respective speaking and writing score of 200.

13.  The Appellant, on the other hand, had provided inter  alia  a  detailed
    witness statement in rebuttal supported by witness testimony. The judge
    at [8] set out in full the relevant extracts of the Appellant's witness
    statement from paragraphs (4) to (49). Therein the  Appellant  robustly
    denied using a proxy and gave a detailed explanation  of  events  upto,
    during and after  the  test.  In  respect  of  the  latter  events  the
    Appellant further explained how he had requested a copy  of  the  voice
    recording and how he sought to obtain evidence from the  Respondent  as
    to the provenance of that recording.

14.  The judge then addressed the case law. The judge is criticised for  her
    observation that Mr Sharma's skeleton argument did  not  refer  to  the
    case of MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 450 when, in fact,
    it did but nothing in my view turns on this. It is clear  however  that
    the judge set out relevant extracts from  applicable  jurisprudence  at
    [13] to [21].

15.  I set out the judge's material findings below:

         "49. Two years after the invalidated test  the  appellant  achieved
         level B1.1 Merit at Trinity College London  indeed  he  achieved  a
         higher level than that achieved in March 2018. I am  not  satisfied
         that a test taken two years after the invalidated test is  credible
         evidence that the appellant's English language skills are such that
         he had no reason to use a proxy test  taker  in  August  2012.  The
         appellant's case before this tribunal has been that he had no  need
         to use a proxy test taker because he had  been  proficient  in  the
         English language throughout. He has referred to examinations  taken
         in Pakistan and allege that he was taught in the English  language,
         but I note that his degree  certificate  is  written  in  Urdu  and
         English and there's no  actual  evidence  from  the  University  in
         question that he was taught throughout in the medium of English  as
         claimed.

         50.  I find that the certificate issued to the  appellant  in  2012
         and invalidated by ETS does not reflect any test allegedly  sat  by
         the appellant and I find  that  ETS  have  not  made  an  error  in
         attributing the voice of another person to his  test  nor  has  the
         appellant shown that the test centre have manipulated his  file  or
         deliberately substituted his voice recording for  that  of  another
         person; the marks are too high for his genuine level of  attainment
         and this is shown by his  most  recent  test  at  page  53  of  the
         appellant's bundle. This is a CEFR graded mark of B1.1 which is two
         grades below the CEFR equivalent  for  the  TOIEC  tests  allegedly
         taken by the appellant in 2012 which correlates to C1.

         51.  Furthermore, the look up tool for the London College of  Media
         and Technology shows that on 21 August 2012 82% of the tests  taken
         were subsequently  invalidated  by  ETS  and  18%  were  marked  as
         questionable. It is in that context, together  with  a  failure  to
         provide any cogent evidence of his actual English ability  at  that
         stage that I have concluded that  neither  the  appellant  nor  his
         friend who has given written evidence that he dropped  him  off  at
         the test centre, has shown any innocent explanation  for  his  test
         results  and  has  failed  to  demonstrate  that   the   subsequent
         invalidation of his test by ETS was incorrect.

         52.  I remind myself that ETS do not know the appellant and have no
         reason to single him out and have no interest in his specific  test
         results other than to maintain the  integrity  of  the  examination
         system.

         53.  I have considered whether, as the appellant claims, there  had
         been some form of deception by test centre staff in relation to his
         test in the manner suggested by Professor Sommers, but the look  up
         tool data and the overall number of tests invalidated together with
         those marked questionable has led me to  conclude  that  all  tests
         taken on 21 August 2012 were fraudulent  and  that  there  were  no
         genuine tests taken in the examination  centre.  I  find  that  the
         appellant resorted to using a proxy taker to ensure that he reached
         the required grade so as to ensure the successful  outcome  of  his
         Tier 1 entrepreneur visa application and for no other reason.

         54.  Overall, I am satisfied that on the  specific  facts  of  this
         appeal, that the respondent has discharged the burden of proof  and
         the appellant has not given any reasonable explanation. I find that
         the appellant has sought to brazen  out  his  description  in  this
         case. I therefore find as a matter of fact that he cannot meet  the
         suitability criteria of the immigration rules for the reasons given
         by the respondent in the refusal."

16.  Ground one contends that the judge misdirected herself  in  failing  to
    consider the issue of deception as a three-stage  test  by  essentially
    eliding the legal and evidential burden. The judge specifically set out
    the three-stage test as identified in Shen (op.cit)  and  Munhandiramge
    (op.cit) at [10] and, while the terminology used at [34] and [35] could
    have been clearer, I am satisfied that on a  holistic  reading  of  the
    decision that the judge was aware of the three-stage test to be applied
    in such cases and considered each stage accordingly.

17.  In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that ground one is made out.

18.  I am satisfied however that ground two is made out.  I  find  that  the
    judge, in reaching her conclusions did not properly apply the  guidance
    set  out  in  relevant  jurisprudence  and  her  conclusions  give  the
    appearance that she set too high a standard for the Appellant.

19.  There are difficulties with the judge's assessment of  the  Appellant's
    explanation. The judge was required to consider whether the Appellant's
    innocent explanation satisfied a minimum level of  plausibility.  I  am
    not satisfied that the judge applied that standard consistently to  the
    Appellant's explanation. While the  judge  refers  to  the  Appellant's
    failure to provide an "innocent explanation for his  test  results"  at
    [51], she appears to have applied a test of reasonableness at [54], and
    at  [51]  referred  to  the  Appellant's  failure  to  provide  "cogent
    evidence". I cannot be satisfied that this is simply a matter  of  form
    over substance when the decision is read as a whole and I agree with Mr
    Sharma that there  is  a  strong  inference  that  the  judge  has  not
    considered whether the Appellant's explanation met with a "basic  level
    of plausibility"- the applicable test - which is not referred to during
    the course of her reasoning.

20.  The context to the judge's reasoning was, unsurprisingly, that  82%  of
    the tests taken at the London College of Media  and  Technology  on  21
    August 2012 were invalidated [51]. Whilst the  judge  was  entitled  to
    take this evidence into account, this does not  necessarily  mean  that
    the Appellant was party to any fraud being perpetrated by or on  behalf
    of the college. Nor does the extent of the fraud or the absence of  any
    cogent  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  linguistic  abilities  in  2012
    demonstrate that the Appellant's explanation, the expert  evidence  and
    the evidence of his friend all fell to be rejected for that  reason.  I
    agree with Mr Sharma that it is not clear what evidence could have been
    capable of meeting the judge's expectation in this regard.

21.  Further, I find, in light of  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  obtained
    copies of the audio files of the test, which were not of his voice, and
    sought to obtain evidence from the Respondent  of  detailed  data  that
    would conclusively show that the recordings were from his test and  not
    someone else's (a possible scenario  in  light  of  the  evidence  from
    Professor Sommer) that the judge did not properly take account of  this
    evidence in making her adverse findings against  the  Appellant.  These
    are clearly considerations relevant to the question of whether it would
    have been unnecessary or illogical for him to have cheated.

22.  It is essentially for these reasons that I am satisfied that there  has
    been  an  inadequate  and  flawed  consideration  of  the   Appellant's
    explanation.



Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal. The appeal  will  be  reheard  de  novo  by  the  First  tier
Tribunal at Hatton Cross before a judge other than Judge E B Grant.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral  17 February 2020

