
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03614/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11 December 2018                                |On 31 January 2019             |
|                                                   |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                    RTSY
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Okunowo of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  in  1975.   She  has  two
    children, a son born in Nigeria in 2002 and a daughter born in  the  UK
    in 2004 during a visit by her mother.

 2. In an application made on 17 July 2015 the appellant applied for  leave
    to remain on human rights grounds (Articles 3 and 8) with her  children
    as  dependents.   The  basis  of  the  application   was   the   family
    circumstances, in particular, the physical and  mental  health  of  her
    daughter who has epilepsy  and  cerebral  palsy  with  severe  learning
    difficulties.  The daughter was also exposed to  degrading  or  inhuman
    treatment within her community in Nigeria.  There were  lacerations  on
    her body, she having at a young age been cut with a knife to  "exorcise
    evil spirits."

 3. The application was refused on 13 December 2017 on the basis that there
    is treatment for cerebral palsy in Nigeria where the family  had  spent
    much time, and there was no evidence  the  daughter  was  subjected  to
    exorcism rituals.  In any event they could relocate.  It was reasonable
    to expect them to leave the UK.

 4. She appealed.

    First tier hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 14 May 2018 Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Monson dismissed the appeal.

 6. His findings are at paragraph [29] ff.  Medical  evidence  of  multiple
    scarring had been provided which was consistent with the account of the
    daughter having been the victim of an exorcism ritual between the  ages
    of two and six years.

 7. However, that claim was undermined  by  the  fact  that  the  issue  of
    scarring was only raised in 2015.  It was not relied on  in  an  appeal
    against an earlier decision to refuse leave in 2012.  Further, not only
    had the appellant not claimed asylum in 2011 when she said she had come
    to the UK in fear of her husband's  family,  but  she  had  voluntarily
    returned to Nigeria with her children on  earlier  occasions.   In  any
    event there was a sufficiency of protection from  the  authorities  and
    they could relocate.

 8. Turning to the other limb of Article 3, namely  medical  treatment  the
    evidence was that the daughter had been diagnosed  with  epilepsy  when
    they returned to Nigeria after the child's birth.  There was no  reason
    to suppose she did not receive adequate medical treatment there in  the
    first seven years of her life.

 9. Further, it was a reasonable inference  that  having  obtained  various
    visit visas despite on her own admission  having  overstayed  for  five
    months in 2004, the ECO must have been satisfied that the appellant was
    sufficiently affluent  and  settled  in  her  family  circumstances  in
    Nigeria.

10. Moreover, the medical evidence did not support the proposition that the
    daughter's condition had significantly got worse since arriving in  the
    UK in 2011.  Her problems  are  chronic  rather  than  acute.   As  she
    becomes more mature the challenges in providing her  with  day  to  day
    care become more onerous.  She needs the full-time care of  her  mother
    at home as she has always done.

11. Turning to Article 8 under the Rules neither child  had  accrued  seven
    years residence at date of application or indeed at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.

12. As for Article 8 outside the Rules, turning to proportionality most  of
    the appellant's residence in the UK has  been  as  an  overstayer  thus
    unlawful. Accordingly, little weight was given to her private life.  As
    for the best interests of the children such were to remain  with  their
    mother in the UK.  However, (at [44,45]) in light of  his  findings  on
    the Article 3 claim it was not "overwhelmingly" in the daughter's  (and
    son's) best interests to remain here. He also found that  the  children
    were not "qualifying children," that the  appellants  were  overstayers
    and that their "continuing presence in the UK  is  a  very  significant
    burden on the UK taxpayer," further  that  they  failed  to  return  to
    Nigeria after an appeal was dismissed in 2012. He  concluded  that  the
    proportionality assessment fell on the side of the respondent.

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was refused but granted
    on 7 November 2018 following reapplication to the Upper Tribunal.

    Error of law hearing

14. At the error of law hearing before me Mr  Okunowo  made  three  points.
    First, the judge appeared to accept that the daughter  had  scaring  on
    her body inflicted as part of an exorcism ritual but failed to  make  a
    finding as to whether Article 3 was engaged by that finding.   Further,
    he had erred in stating that the appellant did not raise the  issue  of
    her daughter's scarring until 2015.  An assessment,  which  was  before
    him, indicated that the appellant reported the scarring in 2012.

15. Second, the judge misunderstood  and  underplayed  the  extent  of  the
    significant health issues.  It was not in  dispute  that  the  daughter
    received treatment for her epilepsy in Nigeria.  The judge appeared  to
    have confused the treatment of epilepsy with the treatment she received
    and is ongoing in  the  UK  for  cerebral  palsy  and  severe  learning
    difficulties.  The judge failed to appreciate that medical personnel in
    Nigeria were not able to diagnose her cerebral  palsy.   The  condition
    was only diagnosed in the UK in 2012 therefore to conclude  that  there
    was treatment for a condition that the authorities could  not  diagnose
    lacked detailed reasoning.

16. Third, the judge failed to have adequate regard to the  fact  that  the
    children, who came to the UK in June 2011, by the date of  the  hearing
    were only one month short of being "qualifying children" (section 117D,
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

17. Mr Kandola's response was that  there  was  no  error  in  the  judge's
    finding of no risk on the basis of exorcism.  Second, any error in  the
    judge's understanding of the medical situation was not  material.   The
    daughter's conditions are chronic not acute.  Under  the  jurisprudence
    they could not succeed under Article 3.  Third, the judge had noted the
    length of time the children had been in the UK  but  did  not  find  it
    determinative.  It was a matter for him.  He was entitled to find  that
    the compelling public interest factors prevailed.

    Consideration

18. I reserved my decision.


19. I agree with Mr Kandola.

20. On the issue of risk from exorcism rituals  it  does  appear  that  the
    scarring on the daughter's body was mentioned in an  assessment  letter
    from  the  Disabled  Children's  Service  in  2012  rather  than  first
    disclosed in February 2015.  It also appears that the judge  (at  [29])
    found that the account of the scarring being inflicted at a  young  age
    as part of an exorcism ritual was consistent with the medical evidence.
     However, the judge went  on  to  find  against  credibility  that  the
    appellant had failed to claim asylum on that basis  in  2011  when  she
    claimed to have come to the UK in fear of her husband's family and that
    she voluntarily returned  to  Nigeria  with  the  children  on  earlier
    occasions and that such adversely affected the claim of risk.  Further,
    and in any event, there would be a sufficiency of  protection  and,  if
    necessary, they could relocate.  These were  conclusions  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence.

21. On the medical issues it is undisputed that the daughter  suffers  from
    cerebral palsy and epilepsy.  The judge  noted  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD
    [2018] EWCA Civ 64 which decided that the ECHR in Paposhvili v  Belgium
    [2016] ECHR 1113 had not ruled that on the medical evidence adduced  it
    would have been a violation of Article 3 to  remove  Mr  Paposhvili  to
    Georgia, rather that Belgium would have violated the procedural  aspect
    of Article 3 had they removed him without consideration of his  medical
    condition.  Whilst N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 was binding authority up  to
    Supreme Court level, the Court of Appeal opined that Paposhvili relaxed
    the test only to a very modest extent.  The  applicant  would  have  to
    face a real risk of  rapidly  experiencing  intense  suffering  to  the
    Article 3 standard because of their illness  and  the  non-availability
    there of treatment available to them in the removing state  or  face  a
    real risk of death within a short time in the receiving state  for  the
    same reason.  The boundary had simply shifted  from  being  defined  by
    imminence of death in the removing state even  with  treatment  to  the
    imminence  of  intense  suffering  or  death  in  the  receiving  state
    occurring because of the lack of treatment previously available in  the
    removing state.

22. As indicated the daughter has two chronic conditions.   The  judge  set
    them out at some length in his decision. As  he  found  (at  [34])  the
    daughter had received treatment  for  her  epilepsy  when  in  Nigeria.
    Whilst the judge did not specifically mention  treatment  for  cerebral
    palsy I do not find that to be material. He did  find  that  in  coming
    here on visit visas the appellant must have satisfied the ECO that  she
    was "sufficiently affluent and settled in her family  circumstances  as
    to have an adequate incentive to return to Nigeria  with  her  children
    ..." I take that to be a reference to the ability to access specialised
    centres for children with cerebral palsy which the respondent  referred
    to in the refusal letter.

23. The finding that the appellant has funds and a support network was  one
    open to him on the evidence.

24. His finding that the appellant cannot  satisfy  Article  3  on  medical
    grounds was unassailable.

25. As for Article 8, in GS (India) and Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 40 it was  held
    that if the Article 3 claim failed, Article 8 could not prosper without
    some separate or additional factual  element  which  brought  the  case
    within the Article 8 paradigm:  the  core  value  protected  being  the
    quality of life not its continuance.  That meant that  a  special  case
    must be made under Article 8.  Although the UK courts have declined  to
    state that Article 8 could never be engaged by the health  consequences
    of removal from the UK,  the  circumstances  would  have  to  be  truly
    exceptional before such a breach could be established (per paras  [45],
    [85 - 87] and [106 -111]).  Underhill LJ said this: "First, the absence
    or inadequacy of medical treatment, even life preserving treatment,  in
    the country of return, cannot  be  relied  upon  at  all  as  a  factor
    engaging Article 8: if that is  all  there  is  the  claim  must  fail.
    Secondly, where Article 8 is engaged by other factors,  the  fact  that
    the claimant is receiving medical treatment in this country  which  may
    not be available in the country of  return  may  be  a  factor  in  the
    proportionality exercise; but that  factor  cannot  be  treated  as  by
    itself giving rise to a breach since  that  would  contravene  the  'no
    obligation to treat' principle." [111]

26. More recently in SL (St Lucia) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1894 the Court of
    Appeal commented that they were unpersuaded  that  Paposhvili  had  any
    impact on the approach to Article 8  claims.   An  absence  of  medical
    treatment in the country of return would not of itself  engage  Article
    8.  The only relevance would be where that  was  an  additional  factor
    with other factors which themselves engaged Article 8.

27. Whilst the circumstances of a child may (though not must) more  readily
    engage Article  8.1,  in  assessing  proportionality  and  taking  into
    account as a primary consideration a child's best interests the  public
    interest must be weighed bearing in mind that, even under Article 8 and
    in cases involving children,  the  public  interest  reflected  in  the
    economic wellbeing of the country remains a powerful and weighty factor
    in "health" or "welfare" cases.

28. In this case the judge was clearly alert to the fact that the  daughter
    and the other child were minors.  He correctly noted that they were not
    "qualifying children."  The fact that a case may be a  "near  miss"  in
    relation to satisfying the requirement of the Rules does not show  that
    compelling reasons exist requiring  the  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Rules.

29. He properly considered the children's best interests but  weighing  the
    various factors (at [45]) concluded that the public interest in removal
    outweighed the rights and interests of the appellant and her  children.
    In that regard he noted that the appellants' status, which initially as
    visitors had been precarious, had since about 2012 been unlawful. Also,
    their failure to leave despite the dismissal of their appeal against  a
    decision to refuse them leave made in respect of an application made in
    2012. Further, that their continuing presence is  a  "very  significant
    burden on the UK taxpayer."

30. Such was a conclusion which for the reasons he gave was one  which  was
    open to him on the evidence.

31. Whilst a different tribunal might have reached a different conclusion I
    do not consider that the judge's decision shows material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows no material error of law.
That decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

An anonymity order is made.  Unless and until a tribunal or court directs
otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  Failure to comply with this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                             Date 24 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway



