
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03824/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th February 2019                |On 14 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                Muhammad [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, Nasim & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter originally came before me on 4th December  2018.   I  found
    that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  so  far  as  they
    relate to the  ETS  issue  and  the  finding  that  the  Appellant  had
    previously used deception by submitting a fraudulently  obtained  TOEIC
    certificate was maintained but that I found that the decision disclosed
    a material error of law so as to:

      i) the judge's failure to analyse and consider Section 117B(6) of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;

     ii) to undertake any analysis of the question  as  to  whether  it  was
         reasonable to expect the Appellant's qualifying British children to
         leave the UK; and

    iii) as to  the  relevance  of  nationality  within  the  reasonableness
         assessment constituted material errors of law.

    I consequently retained the matter reserved to myself within the  Upper
    Tribunal and directed that the matter be relisted for  hearing  on  the
    first available date 28 days hence at Field House.

 2. It is that rehearing of the matter that comes before me.  The Appellant
    appears by his instructed Counsel Mr Plowright.  The Secretary of State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Ms Jones.

Documents and Evidence

 3. I had given previously directions that there be leave to  either  party
    to file an up-to-date bundle of evidence.  The Appellant's  instructing
    solicitors have provided a very detailed bundle extending to  over  500
    pages and attaching photographs.  The principal documents  therein  are
    however a witness statement from the Appellant and a witness  statement
    from his partner Ms [SA].  Both witness statements are signed and dated
    19th February 2019.  Both the Appellant and Ms [A] attend before me and
    give evidence and confirm and adopt their witness statements.   I  note
    that they were married under Islamic law back in 2014.

 4. In addition, Ms Jones provides me with two authorities  SR  (subsisting
    parental relationship - section 117B(6) Pakistan [2018] UKUT 334  (IAC)
    and KO (Nigeria) and others v the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53.  I am further provided  with  an  up-to-date
    extract from the Home Office guidance as to whether it is reasonable to
    expect a child to leave the UK.  The only  other  document  that  I  am
    provided with, and I am asked to consider, is  an  up-to-date  skeleton
    argument provided by Mr Plowright.  I have read and considered all  the
    principal documents to which I am referred.

The Issue

 5. It has been found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err in law
    in finding that the Appellant had previously submitted  a  fraudulently
    obtained TOEIC certificate with a previous application.  I note however
    that the Appellant both in all previous evidence and again in  response
    to questions put to him by Ms Jones refutes that finding.   In  essence
    the issue that  is  before  me  is  whether  or  not  that  finding  is
    sufficient to make it reasonable for the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
    circumstances of this particular case to remove the Appellant  back  to
    his home in Pakistan and to request either for the Appellant's  partner
    and their children to go with him or to separate the Appellant from his
    children if they choose not to leave with him.





Evidence

 6. The Appellant  confirms  and  adopts  his  witness  statement  of  19th
    February 2019.  He accepts that he arrived in the UK on 18th April 2012
    with valid leave on a Tier 4 (General) Student  visa  valid  from  21st
    March 2012 until 26th August  2013.   In  2014  he  was  married  under
    Islamic law and he and Ms [A] have two children from their relationship
    born respectively on 9th January 2015 and  5th  September  2017.   Both
    children are British citizens.  Further,  the  Appellant's  partner  is
    currently pregnant and is expected to give birth to their  third  child
    in May 2019.

 7. The Appellant's case is that it would be a breach of his  human  rights
    to remove him from the UK having established a private and family  life
    and also by contending that he is a well-known and respected member  of
    his local community.  His evidence is that he has a close  relationship
    with his two children and his stepdaughter and that he plays a key role
    in their upbringing.   Further,  he  contends  that  his  eldest  child
    suffers  from  autism   spectrum   disorder   and   requires   constant
    supervision.  He also provides evidence that he suffers  from  learning
    and speech difficulties and requires constant one to one  support.   He
    states that he regularly takes him to appointments and plays a key role
    in his upbringing.  It is his contention that his son is actually  more
    attached to him than his mother.

 8. He further submits that with his partner  and  children  being  British
    citizens there are insurmountable  obstacles  for  him  being  able  to
    continue his family life if removed to Pakistan and that his partner is
    from Afghanistan and that she was initially granted refugee  status  in
    the UK.  It is his evidence that his removal would lead to the complete
    breakdown of their family and would separate two innocent children from
    their father for no fault of their own.  He further contends that since
    living in the UK he  has  become  accustomed  to  British  society  and
    culture, that he volunteers at his local mosque and that he  has  tried
    to live his life as  an  exemplary  citizen  and  never  committed  any
    criminal wrongdoing.

 9. Under cross-examination from Ms Jones he rejects the  finding  that  he
    had fraudulently  obtained  a  TOEIC  certificate  and  when  taken  to
    documents within the bundle relating to the taking  and  collection  of
    his son from nursery and for  medical  appointments  that  he  plays  a
    substantial part in such activities and the support of his children.  I
    am particularly referred to letters from the nursery manager  and  from
    the consultant paediatrician who treats the Appellant's elder son.   He
    further advises that his partner works as a receptionist five  hours  a
    day, five days a week and that he believes  that  her  maternity  leave
    will start in April.

10. Ms [A] gave evidence confirming and adopting her witness statement  and
    confirming the hours in which she works.  There were no  contradictions
    between the evidence of her the  Appellant.   She  confirmed  that  she
    sometimes takes her  eldest  son  to  nursery  and  endorses  the  view
    expressed by the nursery manager that both she and  the  Appellant  pay
    close attention to all aspects of her son's  development  and  learning
    and that they are supportive towards his education.



Submission/Discussion

11. Ms Jones relies on the Notice of Refusal and expanding  on  the  cross-
    examination submits that the documents produced and referred  to  above
    along with evidence of attendance  for  medical  appointments  indicate
    that the Appellant is not the children's  sole  carer  and  it  is  not
    accepted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  there  is  a  particular
    dependency for the children upon their father.   Further,  she  briefly
    submits  that  had  the  Appellant  not  received  a  fraudulent  TOEIC
    certificate then  family  life  would  not  have  taken  place  as  the
    Appellant would not have had grounds to remain in the UK and that  that
    should be held against the Appellant, albeit that she agrees that  that
    should not necessarily be held against the children.

12. In response, Mr Plowright starts by addressing that  latter  contention
    submitting that to indicate that there is a causal relationship between
    where we are now and the fraudulent TOEIC certificate is  in  his  view
    too remote and that the reason that we are here today is because of the
    Appellant's relationship and his children.  He refers to the  case  law
    and points out that the question that I have to ask myself  is  whether
    the public interest factors justify the removal of  the  Appellant  and
    that it is a balancing exercise.  He points out  that  the  only  issue
    which creates a stain on the Appellant's character is the finding  with
    regard to the TOEIC certificate.  He reminds  me  that  to  remove  him
    would leave Ms [A] as a single parent with two children,  one  who  has
    autism and that family life would quite simply be ruined.  He asked  me
    to allow the appeal.

The Law

13. KO sets out general principles emanating from the Supreme Court, all of
    which I have considered.  There are however two other authorities which
    have a bearing on this matter.

14. SR (subsisting parental relationship - section 117B(6)) Pakistan [2018]
    UKUT 334 (IAC) is authority for the following.

         "1.  If a parent ('P') is unable to demonstrate he / she  has  been
             taking an active role in a child's upbringing for the purposes
             of E-LTRPT.2.4 of the Immigration Rules, P may still  be  able
             to demonstrate a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child for the purposes of section 117B(6) of
             the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ('the  2002
             Act').   The  determination  of  both  matters  turns  on  the
             particular facts of the case.

         2.   The question of whether it would not be reasonable to expect a
             child to leave the United Kingdom ('UK') in section 117B(6) of
             the 2002 Act does not necessarily require a  consideration  of
             whether the child will in  fact  or  practice  leave  the  UK.
             Rather, it poses  a  straightforward  question:  would  it  be
             reasonable "to expect" the child to leave the UK?"

    Further, the approach to Section 117B(6) where  British  children  were
    involved was considered in SF and others  (Guidance  -  post-2014  Act)
    Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC) which states:

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, providing there is satisfactory evidence  of  a  genuine
         and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.

         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

           . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;

           . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

         In considering whether refusal  may  be  appropriate  the  decision
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation."

Findings

15. The starting point is whether or not there is a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship between the Appellant and Ms [A].   That  is  not
    challenged by  the  Secretary  of  State.   I  find  that  there  is  a
    subsisting relationship and that the parties live as a family unit  and
    have done  so  since  2014.   Ms  [A]  and  the  two  children  are,  I
    understand, British citizens, and presumably so will the third child be
    when he or she is born in May 2019.

16. The next question is whether or not the Appellant is the primary carer.
     It is clear from the questions posed by Ms Jones in  cross-examination
    that she seeks to maintain that the Appellant is not the primary carer.
     I am satisfied that there is effectively in this instant matter normal
    family care i.e. both the Appellant and Ms [A] care for  the  children.
    I also accept that due to her advanced stage  of  pregnancy  a  greater
    responsibility falls upon the Appellant and  that  that  is  likely  to
    continue bearing in mind the ages of the children  and  the  fact  that
    from May onwards Ms [A] will have a baby to look after.  That is not to
    say that the Appellant will not carry out his  normal  and  anticipated
    responsibilities in caring for his third child.

17. The question then arises as to the reasonableness of  removal  and  the
    first issue I address is  the  special  and  exceptional  circumstances
    relating to the elder child's autism.  There is a  considerable  amount
    of documentation in the bundle  relating  to  this  condition  and  the
    considerable amount of time that is given by the Appellant  to  looking
    after and assisting his son.  I consider that that is a  factor  I  can
    take into account.  It is appropriate to give due consideration to  the
    relevant case law  which  clearly  is  supportive  of  the  Appellant's
    position and poses the important question as to  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect a child in this instance to leave the UK.  I  find
    that it would not.

18. The Appellant and Ms [A] have a close family relationship.  That is not
    challenged by the Secretary  of  State.   The  Home  Office  guidelines
    indicate clearly that an assessment must take into  account  a  child's
    best interests as a primary consideration.  I am satisfied, looking  at
    the factors considered that firstly there is a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship.  Secondly that the children are British citizens
    and thirdly that it would not be reasonable to expect the  children  to
    leave the UK.  As has been mentioned to  me  by  Mr  Plowright  in  his
    submissions and skeleton arguments, the Supreme Court in KO found  that
    reasonableness is to be considered in the real-world context  in  which
    the  child  finds  themselves.   Whilst  accepting  that  the  parents'
    immigration status is a relevant factor I find that there  are  as  set
    out above special circumstances where it would be appropriate  for  the
    children to remain in the UK and for their parent to also remain.

19. I am not satisfied in this instant case that this is one of those cases
    where the Appellant should be required to leave.   I  do  not  consider
    that the threshold has been reached whereby the finding  on  the  TOEIC
    certificate alone should be sufficient in this instant case to ask  him
    to leave.  He is in a settled relationship.  He has two to three  young
    children who are British citizens.  He has considerable  responsibility
    for the bringing up of those children.  One of the children has  autism
    and requires special attention which  I  am  satisfied  he  provides  a
    substantial amount of time and input into.

20. In all the circumstances I am consequently satisfied that it would be a
    disproportionate interference  with  the  Appellant's  family  life  to
    remove him from the UK  and  consequently  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
    allowed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 12 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date 12 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

