
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03671/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 July 2019                      |On 01 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr Waqr Hyder Shah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow  (Home Office presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Turner  (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The Secretary of State appeals the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Borsada) (FtT)  promulgated  on
      29 October 2018 in  which  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
      grounds was allowed. I shall refer to the parties as the Secretary  of
      State and the Claimant.

   2.   The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds. The FtT  found  that
      paragraph 322(5) Immigration Rules did not apply as it found that  the
      Claimant had not been dishonest in declaring a false income figure  to
      HMRC for the purposes of obtaining leave to remain.  The FtT concluded
      that the Claimant met the Immigration rules and allowed the appeal  on
      human rights grounds.

Grounds of appeal

   3.   The Secretary of State ("SSHD") argued in grounds of appeal that the
      First-tier Tribunal  erred by making a material misdirection of law to
      the extent that the First-tier Tribunal Judge absolved the Claimant of
      any blame for  discrepancies  in  his  declared  income  to  HMRC,  by
      accepting the Claimant's account that his accountant was to blame  for
      the discrepancy.  The SSHD relied on R (on the application of  Samant)
      v SSHD [2017] UKAITUR JR/6546/2016 and Abbasi JR/138/07/2016.

   4.   It was further argued that in reaching its decision  the  First-tier
      Tribunal erred by placing significant emphasis on the  fact  that  the
      Claimant had not been penalised or prosecuted by HMRC.

Permission to appeal

   5.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rimington
      on 17 June 2019.  Judge Rimington found that it was arguable that  the
      FtT  erred  in  concluding  that  the  Claimant  was  not   personally
      responsible for his tax returns [5.1] and further  arguably  erred  by
      placing significant emphasis on the lack of action by HMRC.

Hearing
Submissions

   6.   At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds  of  appeal
      and submitted that the FtT was wrong to find that the Claimant was not
      dishonest and further erred by placing too great weight on the absence
      of any punishment by HMRC.

   7.   Mr Tarlow however did concede that the grounds of  appeal  had  been
      somewhat superseded by the decision in Balajigari v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA
      Civ 673.

   8.   Mr Turner responded by submitting that there was no error of law  in
      the decision.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rimmington  granted  permission
      based on a misunderstanding of the  Tribunal's  decision  and  reasons
      with reference to paragraph 5.1.  The reasons for granting  permission
      given did not accurately  reflect  what  is  in  fact  stated  in  the
      decision at 5.1 and at no place in the decision did the FtT find  that
      the Claimant was not personally responsible for his tax  returns.   Mr
      Turner argued that had the Upper Tribunal Judge not made this  mistake
      it  is  likely  that  permission  would   not   have   been   granted.
      Nevertheless he argued that the FtT had regard to  all  the  documents
      fully, appraised the reasons given by the Home Office, considered  the
      Claimant's evidence and taken into account that he had been subject to
      rigorous cross-examination and reached findings that the Claimant  had
      not been dishonest.  The reference to the lack of action on  the  part
      of HMRC was an aside rather than a matter upon which  the  FtT  placed
      significant emphasis.  Mr Turner further submitted that  the  FtT  was
      correct to take an holistic approach to paragraph 322(5) and  that  it
      was appropriate for the FtT  to  look  at  the  Claimant's  character,
      immigration history etc. rather than confining itself to the one issue
      in relation to dishonesty.

   9.   Mr Turner submitted that the Court of Appeal in  Balajigari  clearly
      stated that the failure to take any action by HMRC was a  matter  that
      could be taken into account and therefore the SSHD was no longer in  a
      position to pursue the grounds on that point.

   Decision Re Error of Law

  10.  I heard the submissions from Mr Tarlow and from  Mr  Turner.   I  was
      satisfied that there was no material error of law in the decision made
      by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Borsada.   I  therefore  dismissed  the
      appeal by the Secretary of State.

  11.  I was satisfied that the FtT fully  considered  the  Claimant's  oral
      evidence and found him  to  be  an  entirely  credible  witness.   The
      Tribunal found that the Claimant's reasons for acting as he  did  with
      regard to his accounts were entirely plausible and consistent with his
      character, his mental ill-health and the evidence that he gave  as  to
      his background in Pakistan.  The FtT  provided  reasons  for  why  the
      Claimant was not dishonest and one factor that was taken into  account
      was that the HMRC had taken  no  action.   This  was  by  no  means  a
      significant matter as indicated in the determination by  the  Tribunal
      Judge saying "I note".


  12. The FtT had the benefit of hearing the Claimant give oral evidence and
      that  he  was    subject  to  rigorous  cross-examination.   The   FtT
      considered other relevant issues with regard to paragraph  322(5)  and
      reached a sound and sustainable decision on the evidence before it.

Decision

     13. There is no material error of  law  in  the  decision  which  shall
    stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 31.7.2019

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.



Signed                                  Date  31.7.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

