
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03743/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10th November 2017                |On 6th December 2017                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE FARRELLY OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                              MR.AZAM MUHAMMAD
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr.O'ODusanya of Gracefields Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. Although both parties are appealing I will continue to refer to  them
       as they were in the first Tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 11  August  1987.  He
       came to the United Kingdom as a  student  in  2010.He  then  obtained
       further leave until March 2016. He had  also  applied  for  leave  to
       remain as the spouse of Ms Nabi, a settled  person,  following  their
       marriage on 16 September 2013. This was granted  from  November  2013
       until May 2016.

    3. In an application the appellant had  submitted  an  English  language
       certificate relating to a test taken on 3 April 2013 at Eden College.
       This college was  the  subject  of  investigation  and,  using  voice
       recognition software, ETS concluded the appellant's  certificate  had
       been obtained by fraud: using a proxy test taker.

    4. The appellant was interviewed on the 30 July 2015 and  said  that  he
       had travelled to London to take the test. He was unable to  name  the
       test centre or say how long the test took. He  could  not  state  how
       much it cost to take the  test  nor  what  the  subject  matter  was.
       Following this his leave to remain was cancelled on the basis of  the
       English   language   certificates   submitted   was    invalid.    He
       unsuccessfully pursued a judicial review.

    5. On 23 December 2015 he made an application for leave on the basis  of
       his family and private life. This was refused on 22 January 2016. The
       application was considered under the immigration rules and refused on
       the basis of suitability, namely, that his presence was not conducive
       to the public good because of his conduct and  the  English  language
       certificate submitted. The respondent so no other basis either within
       the rules or without whereby he should be allowed to remain.

The First tier Tribunal

    6. His appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Fox on 14  March  2017.  The
       appellant was represented by Mr O'Odusanya, as he is now.  Judge  Fox
       allowed the appeal,  making  a  full  fee  award  in  favour  of  the
       appellant. The judge indicated that the respondent had not discharged
       the evidential burden in respect of  the  certificate  and  concluded
       that the appellant was entitled to leave to  remain  as  he  met  the
       immigration rules. However, the judge went on to say that  there  was
       no evidence that the appellant could  not  continue  his  family  and
       private  life  from  Pakistan  and  found  the  respondent's  refusal
       decision was proportionate.

    7. The respondent sought permission to appeal on 23 March 2017.  It  was
       contended that  the  judge  had  not  applied  the  burden  of  proof
       correctly and had misunderstood the evidence of deception. Permission
       to appeal was granted on 18 September 2017.

    8. Inexplicably, the appellant also sought  permission  to  appeal  even
       though the appeal was successful. The grounds  take  issue  with  the
       judge's conclusion of family and private life continuing in Pakistan.
       Permission to cross appeal was granted.





The Upper Tribunal

    9. At hearing I asked Mr. O'Odusanya  why  he  was  appealing  when  the
       appeal had been successful. He referred me to his skeleton  argument.
       Whilst I can understand disagreement with the judge's conclusion that
       family life could be enjoyed in Pakistan I still could  not  see  why
       the positive outcome was being appealed.

   10. The appellant has a limited right of appeal: it is confined to  human
       rights issues (Section 84(1) (c) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002. If a protected human  right  is  engaged  then  when
       considering the final stage of  the  Razgar  approach  the  judge  is
       looking at matters through the prism of any relevant immigration rule
       (see Mostafa (article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112.).  There
       is also a requirement to have regard to the provisions of section 117
       B.  In an in-country appeal, assessment  of  the  facts  relating  to
       private and family life within the meaning of  Article  8(1)  of  the
       ECHR has to be made at the date of hearing, not the date of decision.



   11. At paragraph 8 Judge Fox correctly sets  out  the  basic  burden  and
       standard  of  proof.  Paragraph  11  indicates  the  judge  correctly
       understood the shifting burden of proof: where the respondent has led
       evidence to call into question the English language  certificate.  At
       paragraph 18 onwards the judge makes  findings  in  relation  to  the
       appellant's explanation about not recalling details of the test.  The
       judge accepted some of  the  explanations  and  rejected  others.  At
       paragraph 22 the judge refers to the generic evidence  used  in  such
       cases and the test results and did not find a link  to  the  claimant
       proxy testing. The judge also commented on the absence of a report of
       the interview of 30th July 2015. Having considered the  evidence  the
       judge concluded the respondent had not made  an  evidential  link  to
       establish deception.

   12. The application was a human rights application  initially  considered
       under appendix FM. The stumbling block  for  the  appellant  was  the
       suitability requirement on the basis is English  test  was  taken  by
       proxy.  It  was  accepted  he  was  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
       relationship with a British citizen.  It  was  accepted  he  met  the
       eligibility requirements. Judge Fox concluded the test was not a bar.
       This however was not the end of the matter.

   13.  In  considering  EX  1  the  respondent  concluded  there  were   no
       insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing with his  wife  in
       Pakistan. From paragraph 26 on Judge Fox agreed with this. From  this
       and the conclusion that the decision was proportionate a dismissal of
       the appeal could have been anticipated.

   14. The judge does not deal with the  considerations  in  section  117  B
       beyond the reference to English. The judge did not find private  life
       affected.

Conclusions

   15. The decision of First-tier Judge Fox is confusing and  contradictory.
       I find the judge materially errs  in  law  in  the  approach  to  the
       article 8 question. The decision lacks  a  structured  approach.  The
       issue must first be approached through the prism  of  the  rules.  In
       this case this primarily is appendix FM  and  the  question  was  the
       appellant's suitability. If this was overcome the  other  aspects  of
       the rules have to be considered.

   16. The respondent's grounds for permission  set  out  the  case  law  in
       relation to the evidence used in cases of alleged proxy testing.  The
       Court of Appeal decision in SSHD -v- Shezad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA
       Civ 615 focused upon whether the evidence of  Mr  Millington  and  Ms
       Collings satisfied the evidential burden on the  respondent.  In  the
       instant case there was also the spreadsheet as  evidence.  The  court
       repeated that the Secretary of State  bears  the  initial  burden  of
       furnishing proof of deception and that this is an evidential  burden.
       If the Secretary of State provides prima facie evidence of  deception
       the burden shifts onto the individual to provide a plausible innocent
       explanation. If the individual does, then the burden shifts  back  to
       the respondent. The decisions of MA (Pakistan and others) [2016] EWCA
       705 and the judicial reviews, R (on the application of Nawaz)  [2017]
       UKUT 00288 and Abas [2017] EWHC 78 (Admin) have  contributed  further
       to  the issue.

   17. First Tier Judge Fox at paragraph 13 questioned the claim  on  behalf
       of the appellant that information from ETS had  been  sought  on  his
       behalf. The judge then found some features in favour of the appellant
       and some features against him. However, at  paragraph  22  the  judge
       says that the respondent has not provided information  that  directly
       links this appellant with proxy test taking. This appears  to  ignore
       the screen print of the results showing of 67 tests taken on the  day
       62 were deemed  invalid.  The  respondent's  investigation  into  the
       college found of 2439 tests taken between  March  2012  and  February
       2014, 1878 or 77% were deemed invalid.  There  was  also  the  expert
       evidence of Prof French of a 1% error margin in the voice checks  for
       proxy tests. Finally, there is a screen print referred to as annex  A
       showing the appellant scored 190 in speaking  and  reading  with  the
       result declared invalid. The judge's comment of no link would suggest
       he did not appreciate this aspect of  the  evidence.  There  is  also
       married with the criticism of the judge for  placing  weight  on  the
       fact the appellant could  recall  some  details  of  the  examination
       process. The practice was for candidates to attend at the centre  and
       then the proxy test taker took over. The appellant's ability to speak
       English at hearing is also open to objection as a test mechanism.  In
       SM and Qadir it was pointed out that apparent fluency by an appellant
       before the tribunal had to be treated with caution given the  passage
       of time and the fact judges are not linguistic experts.

   18. The judge does not appear to  have  looked  at  matters  through  the
       complete prism of the rules. The central  issue  has  been  the  test
       taking and his suitability. However, the other aspects of  the  rules
       have to be taken into account. The statement that the appeal succeeds
       and yet the decision is proportionate is incompatible.

   19. For the above reasons the decision  allowing  the  appeal  materially
       areas in law and cannot stand. The matter is  remitted  for  de  novo
       hearing before the First tier Tribunal.

Decision

   20. A material error of law has been established. The decision of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Fox allowing the appellant's appeal cannot stand.
       The matter is remitted for a  hearing  de  novo  in  the  First  tier
       Tribunal.


Deputy Judge Farrelly of the Upper Tribunal
10th November 2017

