
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03322/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 February 2016                          |On 7 October 2016             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ROLAND PETERS
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sesay, Solicitor, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio given on 11  November  2015  whereby  he
    allowed the respondent's appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State that he should be deported  following  his  conviction  of  an
    offence  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  two  and  a  half   years'
    imprisonment so that by  virtue  of  Section  32(5)  of  the  2007  Act
    deportation was required unless there were reasons which are set out in
    the material Rules why such deportation should in  an  individual  case
    not take place.

2.   The respondent was born in November 1958 and so is now  some  57  years
    old.  At the time the decision was made he was just  56.   He  came  to
    this  country  in  February  1974  to  join  his  parents,  they  being
    Dominican.  He was granted indefinite leave to remain in this  country.
    Unfortunately he has a very poor criminal record.  It is set out in the
    decision by the Secretary of State and it involves  eleven  convictions
    for 21 offences.

3.   It started in 1977 taking motor vehicles without consent  and  then  in
    1980 we have burglary and theft and  a  sentence  which  was  community
    service of 80 hours.  There was obstruction of police in 1982, handling
    stolen goods also in 1982 when he received a suspended sentence of  two
    years but far more seriously in July 1983 he was convicted of having  a
    firearm with intent  to  commit  an  indictable  offence,  robbery  and
    conspiracy to rob and breach of the suspended sentence and he was  then
    sentenced to a total of six years' imprisonment.  He  could  of  course
    then have been the subject of deportation but it was not  decided  that
    he should be deported.  Of course one has to  bear  in  mind  that  the
    automatic removal provisions were not then in force.

4.   Following  his  release  he  continued  to  commit  offences.   He  was
    convicted  of  criminal  damage  in  1989,  he   received   conditional
    discharges and there was an offence of driving whilst  disqualified  in
    the same year.  He  then  gets  two  years'  imprisonment  for  violent
    disorder in November  2003.   That  again  could  have  resulted  in  a
    deportation decision but did not.  Then he receives  in  2011  eighteen
    months for possessing cannabis with intent to supply and  finally,  and
    this is the conviction which triggered the deportation decision, on  24
    January 2014 he was convicted of possession of a firearm and  sentenced
    to 30 months' imprisonment.

5.   We think it is important to bear in mind what the judge sentencing  him
    said in relation to that because there is a requirement for  possession
    of a firearm to impose a minimum sentence of five  years'  imprisonment
    unless there are truly exceptional circumstances in a given case  which
    justify the imposition of a lesser sentence.  The  weapon  in  question
    was an adapted starting pistol.  The judge bore in  mind  the  previous
    firearm offence but that was some 30 years old by  then  and  what  the
    judge said was, so far as material:

         "I take account of the fact that you were  caught  in  a  situation
         which was not of your own making.  You had no  obligation  to  help
         the police but you volunteered to help the police when they came to
         search your premises after your son  had  been  arrested,  and  you
         provided when you spoke to the  police  all  the  evidence  against
         yourself.  I take account of what is said that in the circumstances
         you felt you couldn't go to the police  with  this  weapon  because
         this would have placed you in danger"


    It was not suggested that he had handled the weapon because it was in a
    bag but he did appreciate,  indeed  suspect  that  it  was  a  firearm.
    However, instead of handing it in he was handing it on to someone  else
    and that meant that it was still a serious  matter.   It  is  we  think
    important to take that into account because it goes to the  seriousness
    of the offending in question and the seriousness of the  offending  and
    the seriousness overall of his conduct in this country is of importance
    in considering whether  there  are  proper  reasons  why  in  his  case
    deportation should not take place.  What has to be considered  in  this
    context is paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules.   It  follows  from
    paragraph 398(a) which provides:


         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
         Convention, and


         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         (b)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of less than  4 years but at least 12
             months"

         and of course it is 398(b) that is material  for  the  purposes  of
             this case.

    One then goes to 399A which provides:


         "This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies  if
         -

         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
             his life;

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

6.   Paragraph 399AA is not in issue but what is in  issue  is  whether  the
    judge was correct in deciding that 399(a),  (b)  and  (c)  availed  the
    respondent.  We say correct because of course the appeal  depends  upon
    there being an error of law when the decision was made  and  the  error
    which is identified by the judge who granted leave was that  the  judge
    had not dealt with  the  public  interest  in  deportation  other  than
    superficially, and not explained why the deterrence  of  offending  was
    not significant, and in  all  the  circumstances  it  was  said  to  be
    arguable that the appellant's circumstances did not outweigh the public
    interest in his deportation and it was said that there  was  no  reason
    why, even if he had no family and no accommodation  in  Dominica  there
    were not  the  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Dominica which were required by 399A.

7.   The judge's conclusions are found so far as material in paragraphs  37,
    38 and 39 of his decision.  So far as [37] and [38] are  concerned  the
    judge  deals  there  with  whether  he  was  socially  and   culturally
    integrated into the United Kingdom.  He made the point  that  he  lived
    here for 41 years, he knows no other country and the only occasion that
    he left this country was in 2008 when he  went  on  a  short  visit  to
    Dominica in order to attend his father's funeral.  The judge  made  the
    point that no decision was made to deport following the  conviction  in
    1983 and he approached the matter on the basis that one effectively did
    not look to that particular sentence in  assessing  whether  there  was
    cultural integration and social integration.  He of course  came  here,
    attended school for two and a half years here,  has  received  training
    here and has worked various ways.  He has his family here, his children
    are now grown up and his whole life effectively since  he  was  16  has
    been in this country.   Social  and  cultural  integration  within  the
    meaning of 399A and 399B is not achieved necessarily by the  length  of
    residence here because if there has been criminal behaviour to such  an
    extent that shows effectively an entirely anti-social approach to being
    here and indeed a blatant disregard for fellow citizens that can negate
    the cultural and  social  integration  so  far  as  399A  and  399B  is
    concerned.  That was the approach that was decided by this Tribunal  in
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department v Bosade [2014] UKUT 415
    (IAC), a decision by Judge Storey and Judge Dawson.  That involved a 29
    year old who came to this country when  he  was  4.   He  had  numerous
    convictions culminating in a 42  month  sentence  of  imprisonment  for
    robbery.  The history of his offending showed  repeated  robberies  and
    that the Tribunal in Basade decided was a "serious discontinuity in his
    integration in the UK especially because it shows blatant disregard for
    fellow citizens".


8.   It is as it seems to us essentially a question of  fact  in  any  given
    case whether an individual can be shown, albeit he has  committed  what
    may be serious offences, a cultural and social integration.  It must be
    obvious that a line has to be drawn somewhere and it is not every  sort
    of offending which can result in a decision that there is  no  cultural
    or social integration however long  an  individual  has  been  in  this
    country.  We have set out the offending by this respondent.  It  is  of
    course serious and it does show that he has regularly  broken  the  law
    but the seriousness  of  his  offending  is  particularly  in  the  two
    firearms offences and there were clearly a number of mitigating factors
    to which we have referred in the offence which triggered  the  decision
    that he be deported.  The other one in  1983  again  very  serious  but
    committed a long time ago.   His  other  offences,  comprise  two  that
    perhaps we can regard as  serious,  in  2003,  two  years  for  violent
    disorder which must have indicated quite a serious violent disorder and
    possessing cannabis with intent to supply in 2011.  Again  we  have  in
    our papers the judge's observations in relation to  that  offence.  The
    total amount was just under three kilograms of cannabis  for  which  he
    was convicted.  It is to be noted that he said that he was  a  cannabis
    user as part of his lifestyle.  That of course was an offence but  that
    was the culture in which  he  was  involved.   That  certainly  is  not
    something in any way in his favour.


9.   The question we have to ask ourselves in the circumstances  is  whether
    the judge, having looked at the whole of the  history,  could  properly
    decide that he was socially and culturally  integrated  notwithstanding
    the offences.  As we have said it is essentially a  question  of  fact.
    It is important of course to recognise that it is regarded  as  in  the
    public interest and clearly indeed is in the public interest that those
    who come here and who commit offences should not, if they  are  serious
    offences, generally speaking, be allowed to remain here but as  we  say
    it is a question of fact and in our judgment  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge could not be said to have erred in law in reaching the conclusion
    that he did.


10.  We turn then to the other  question  under  399A(c)  which  is  whether
    there would be very significant obstacles to his integration  into  the
    country to which he is to be deported, Dominica.  The judge  found  and
    there is no issue as to these findings of fact that he has no  ties  in
    Dominica, he has not been there since he arrived in this country  other
    than the short visit to attend his grandfather's funeral.   He  has  no
    family or other links to people who he could turn to  in  Dominica,  he
    has no property there and there is no one there  who  can  in  any  way
    assist him.  That is not of course in a given  case  necessarily  fatal
    and we go back to Basade when this issue was considered.  The  Tribunal
    there made the point that the  adverb  "very"  had  to  be  taken  into
    account.  It was not  whether  there  were  significant  obstacles  but
    whether those obstacles were very significant that  was  material.   In
    Basade's case he was 29 and had been here since he was 4 and he had  no
    family connections in the Democratic Republic of the  Congo  which  was
    the country which was in issue there.  The Tribunal decided that it was
    reasonable to infer that his mother and other relatives here would seek
    to help him financially, at least until he had had time to find his own
    feet.  There was no physical or mental disability preventing  him  from
    developing social and cultural ties in the DRC and he was young,  able-
    bodied and of an adaptable age.  Those  clearly  were  highly  material
    findings of fact which persuaded the Tribunal in that case that despite
    the fact that he had been here since the age of 4 and had no  relations
    in the DRC, there were no  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  being
    returned there.  So far as this respondent is concerned he is  now  57,
    he has no links there, there is no suggestion that there is anyone here
    who can assist him financially and he will have to  find  somewhere  to
    live.  It is incidentally to be noted that Dominica has been damaged by
    a hurricane and so there are problems which result from that.   As  the
    judge said, he only has an abstract link with Dominica.  It seems to us
    in all the circumstances that the judge was entitled  again  to  decide
    that he did meet the provisions of 399A(c).


11.  We must emphasise that this Tribunal is only able to interfere  with  a
    decision of a First-tier Tribunal Judge if persuaded that there was  an
    error of law in the decision that was made.  Provided  that  a  factual
    decision was open to the judge we are not able to intervene.  Of course
    we recognise and we would  affirm  the  importance  of  protecting  the
    public from those who commit serious offences and the  need  to  remove
    such offenders but Parliament in approving the Rules has  set  out  the
    reasons which may apply in deciding whether,  in  an  individual  case,
    notwithstanding that  serious  offences  have  been  committed,  it  is
    appropriate to say that deportation cannot take place and if  a  First-
    tier judge decides that those conditions  are  met,  then  unless  that
    decision is in some way wrong in law,  this  Tribunal  cannot  properly
    intervene.  In those circumstances this appeal must be dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]



Signed                                  Date: 25th February 2016


Mr Justice Collins

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]



Signed                                  Date: 25th February 2016


Mr Justice Collins

