
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/03676/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly           |Decision and Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                   |
|On 20 December 2016                      |On 03 January 2017            |
|                                         |                              |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                  LONG LIN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Markus counsel instructed by Silverdale Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Malik  promulgated  on  17  May  2016  which  allowed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to refuse leave
   to remain in the UK on the basis of his family and private life.
Background


4. The Appellant was born on 10 June 1985 and is a national of China.
5. The Appellant entered the UK in 2002 and claimed asylum. His  application
   was refused but he was granted leave until 9 June 2003.
6. On 29 June 2009 the  Appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain  and  his
   application was refused. He appealed this decision on 1 November 2013 and
   his appeal was allowed by the First tier Tribunal on 11 March 2014.
7. The Appellant was granted leave outside the  Rules  on  14  October  2014
   until 13 April 2015.
8. On 14 April 2015 the Appellant applied for further leave to remain.
9.  On  17  July  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application on the basis that having been  convicted  of  an  offence  of
   fraud in 2009 and common assault in 2012 his presence was  not  conducive
   to public good. He could not benefit from EX.1 as there was  no  evidence
   of his children's nationality.


The Judge's Decision
10. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Malik ("the Judge") allowed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision. The Judge found:
   a) This was an appeal against a refusal of a human rights claim.
   b) She was obliged to take into account those factors set out in  section
      117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in  assessing
      the public interest in Article 8 assessment of proportionality.
   c) The Respondent conceded that the Appellants child and his mother  were
      British citizens and that there was a family court order in  pace  for
      access to the child.
   d) She assessed Article 8 by reference to the questions posed  in  Razgar
      and found that at paragraph 33 that the Appellant had  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with his child and although the  evidence  was
      contradictory she resolved it  in  his  favour  finding  that  he  has
      contact with the child  albeit not in accordance with the Court Order.
   e) At paragraph 38 she addressed  the  question  of  proportionality  all
      other questions having been answered.
   f) She found that this was a case where section 117B 6 of  the  2002  Act
      applied and at paragraph 42 that it was not reasonable for the British
      Citizen child to be removed. She found it in the child's best interest
      to  have  contact  with  the  child  and   therefore   that   it   was
      disproportionate to remove the Appellant.
11. Grounds of appeal were lodged  arguing  that  there  was  no  basis  for
   consideration of Article  8  outside  the  Rules;  the  Judge  failed  to
   consider the Appellants convictions in relation to the public interest or
   the best interests of the child; the Judge  failed  to  consider  whether
   there were insurmountable obstacles to family life resuming in China.
12.   On  27  September  2016  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie  gave
   permission to appeal.

13. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Bates  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that:

   a) He conceded in that  the  grounds  of  appeal  where  misconceived  in
      suggesting that an Article 8 assessment was not appropriate given  the
      right of appeal in this case is pursuant to Section 82(1) (b)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the  2002  Act')  which
      provides that a person may appeal to the Tribunal where the  Secretary
      of State has decided to refuse a human rights claim. S84  of  the  Act
      provides that an appeal under s82(1)(b) must be brought on the  ground
      that a decision is unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
      1998.

   b) He asserted that the judges had  failed  to  factor  into  the  public
      interest and assessment of the Appellants criminal history given  that
      that the convictions were not  spent  for  immigration  purposes:  she
      could have found that the criminal convictions are outweighed by other
      factors but there is no reference to them in in her findings.

   c) He relied on the case of R (on the application of  MA  (Pakistan)  and
      Others) v UT (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 to suggest that the best
      interests of the children and the issue of reasonableness could not be
      viewed in isolation.

14. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Markus submitted that :

   a) He did not accept that there was a material error of law.

   b) He argued that  the  Respondent  argued  their  case  as  set  out  in
      paragraph 28 the Judge's decision and the only issue  he  pursued  was
      whether there was a genuine and subsisting relationship with the child
      and the Judge decided the case and on the basis of that  it  has  been
      argued before her.

   c) The simple fact what was the Home Office  pursued  this  case  on  the
      narrow point relating to his relationship with the child and they  had
      not challenged any of the findings made in relation to the issue  that
      they argued before her.

   d) Even if the judge did not referred to the  previous  convictions  this
      was not an a material error.   The  two  convictions  were  relatively
      minor  and  the  Appellant  had  clearly  completed  a  rehabilitation
      programme; there was no risk to the child found by  the  family  court
      and the family court had also determined  that  it  was  in  the  best
      interests of  the  child  for  access  to  take  place  and  therefore
      factoring in those convictions would not have made any  difference  to
      the outcome of the case.

   e) The offences were at the lowest end of  the  spectrum  and  could  not
      justify a separation.

15. In reply Mr Bates on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

     a) The fact that  the  convictions  were  not  spent  for  immigration
        purposes suggests that they were relevant to the public interest.

     b) The HOPO had not made any concession about the Appellants  criminal
        offending not being relevant as he relied  on  the  refusal  letter
        which referred to criminality.

The Law

16.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

17. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law.

Finding on Material Error

18. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

19. The grounds of appeal as set out  in  writing  by  the  Respondent  were
   largely misconceived.  Clearly this was an appeal  where  the  Judge  was
   required to consider Article 8 as the only basis for the appeal was  that
   a human rights application had  been  refused.   The  grounds  were  also
   misconceived in suggesting that the test  under  Article  8  was  whether
   there were insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  being  resumed  in
   China. Neither of these matters were pursued by Mr Bates.

20. It is clear that the Judge  in  this  case  made  no  reference  in  her
   findings to the criminal convictions. The Judge correctly identified that
   in this case the principal issue given that this was a refusal of a human
   rights application was whether this was a case to which s117B  6  applied
   and what factors were relevant to the  decision.  The  fact  of  criminal
   convictions was a factor that the Judge could have taken into account had
   it been argued that these should outweigh the provisions of s117B 6  that
   the public interest did not require removal of an Appellant where he  had
   a genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child and it  was
   not reasonable to remove that child from the UK.

21. It was accepted by the home office that  the  Appellant's  child  was  a
   British citizen and therefore a qualifying child.  I am satisfied that on
   any reading of the decision while the HOPO may have relied on the  reason
   for refusal letter which in relation  to  the  refusal  under  the  Rules
   referred to the criminal convictions it  is  very  clear  that  the  main
   thrust of the argument in this case  was  whether  the  Appellant  had  a
   genuine and subsisting relationship with his British citizen child:  that
   is clear from how the Judge summarised the  HOPOs  final  submissions  at
   paragraph 28 and how the Appellants representative responded as  recorded
   at paragraph 29.  While it is clear that the Judge was aware of the  fact
   of the convictions as these are set out  at  paragraph  15  it  does  not
   appear that they were pursued by the Respondent in  cross-examination  or
   relied on in final submissions to suggest that they outweighed any of the
   findings in relation to the child.

22. Even if it was an error to fail to  refer  to  the  convictions  in  her
   findings I am satisfied that they would not have made a material  outcome
   to the decision. The Judge would have been entitled  to  note  that  both
   convictions predated the grants of leave made by the Respondent  in  both
   October 2014 and April 2015 and had not been viewed as so serious  as  to
   justify refusal of leave. The Judge would also have been entitled to take
   into account that the convictions were known to  the  Family  Court  when
   they made the Order which reflected the fact that  it  was  in  the  best
   interests of the child to have access to her father. She would also  have
   been entitled to categorize them as relatively minor  in  that  the  2009
   conviction for using a false number plate resulted in a short  period  of
   imprisonment and  the  common  assault  in  2012  attracted  a  community
   penalty.

23. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

24. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently detailed on
   the basis of the case that was argued before  her  and  based  on  cogent
   reasoning.

CONCLUSION

25. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

26. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
2.1.2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
