
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03190/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2018                              |On 26 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                         sabirbhai ibrahimbhai patel
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jaffeji, Counsel instructed by Direct Public
Access
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for and do not make an order restraining publicity  about
    this appeal. Some of the submissions touch on the welfare  of  children
    but I have no reason to suspect that publicity would do them harm.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India. He is the subject of a Deportation
    Order and on 11 August 2008 he was deported.  On 18  December  2015  he
    applied for that order to be revoked. The application was refused on 24
    January 2017 and, in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 6 June 2017,
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissed an appeal against that decision  that
    was brought on human rights grounds.

 3. He has appealed that decision to the Upper Tribunal. I have decided  to
    dismiss that appeal and I give my reasons below.

 4. I begin by considering the decision made by the Secretary of State.

 5. This shows that the appellant came to the attention of the  Immigration
    Authorities at Heathrow Airport in October 1999.  He claimed asylum  on
    arrival.  The application was refused and he appealed.  The appeal  was
    dismissed on 4 January 2002 and his appeal rights were exhausted on  22
    January 2002.

 6. For some time he remained in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  made  further
    representations on 25 April 2002 which were rejected on 28 April 2002.

 7. On 12 August 2004 he married a British citizen and on 23 November  2004
    he applied for leave to remain as the spouse of a person settled in the
    United Kingdom.  However, on 18 October 2005,  whilst  his  application
    was still being considered, he told the Border and  Immigration  Agency
    that he wanted to withdraw his application and return to India and then
    make an out of country application.

 8. The respondent's records are unclear but the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    was shown, and accepted, evidence of entry clearance in the appellant's
    passport dated 4 January 2006  and  an  entry  stamp  into  the  United
    Kingdom dated 30 January 2006.

 9. On 5 October 2006 the appellant  was  clearly  in  the  United  Kingdom
    because he was arrested for  his  involvement  in  a  people  smuggling
    network to facilitate illegal entrants into the United Kingdom.  On  12
    October 2007 at the Crown Court sitting at Leicester, he was  convicted
    of conspiracy to do acts facilitating the  commission  of  breaches  of
    immigration law by individuals who are not  citizens  of  the  European
    Union. On 21 January 2008 he was sentenced to two years and six months'
    imprisonment and recommended for deportation.

10. On 22 January 2008 he was classified as an overstayer and served with a
    notice to an illegal entrant and on 22 July 2008 he was served  with  a
    signed Deportation Order and on 11  August  2008  he  was  deported  to
    India.

11. On 23 June 2011, by his  then  representatives,  he  applied  for  that
    Deportation Order to be revoked.  On 3 May  2012  the  application  was
    refused.  He appealed and the appeal was dismissed so that  his  appeal
    rights were exhausted on 21 December 2012.

12. As stated above, on 18 December 2015 he again applied  from  India  for
    the revocation of his Deportation Order. That application  was  refused
    on 24 January 2017 and that decision led to the present appeal.

13. The application was considered, appropriately, on human rights  grounds
    because the Rules are clear  that  a  Deportation  Order  can  only  be
    revoked under the Rules if continuing the order would  be  contrary  to
    the United Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention on Human
    Rights.

14. The Secretary of State  set  out  the  appellant's  circumstances.   In
    particular she noted that the appellant was married and had a son  born
    in April 2006 who lived with his mother (the appellant's wife)  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He had been apart from his son  for  seven  years  but
    contact had been preserved.

15. The respondent recognised too that the appellant expressed remorse  for
    his  offence  and  the  pre-sentence  report  dated  29  October   2007
    considered the risk of re-offending to be low.

16. It was the appellant's case that his wife and son could not relocate to
    India where they would not be able to adapt to  the  life  there.   His
    wife enjoyed full-time employment in the United Kingdom and had a "good
    job" and his son was in full-time education.

17. Evidence about the appellant's means and statement from  his  wife  was
    considered.

18. The respondent recognised that the appellant has a son  in  the  United
    Kingdom who has been residing there for at least seven years before the
    date of decision but the Reasons for Refusal Letter notes  that  it  is
    "not accepted you have a genuine or subsisting relationship with him in
    the United Kingdom".  In the respondent's view a:

         "...  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  means  more  than   a
         biological relationship and more than presence in a  child's  life.
         It requires a significant and meaningful positive involvement in  a
         child's life with a significant degree of  responsibility  for  the
         child's welfare."

19. No authority is given for that statement of the law.

20. Mindful  of  the  requirements  of  paragraph  399(a)  of  HC  395  the
    respondent was concerned lest  it  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  for  the
    appellant's son to live in India or to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without his father.

21. It was noted that the appellant's son had travelled to  India  in  2008
    and again in 2013 and the Respondent found no reason why  some  contact
    could not be preserved with similar visits.

22. The letter then analyses a possible  claim  based  on  the  appellant's
    relationship with his wife considering paragraph 399(b) of HC 395 which
    provided for relief when:

    (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the  person  (deportee)
         was in the  UK  lawfully  and  their  immigration  status  was  not
         precarious; and

    (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the  country
         to which the person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of  compelling
         circumstances over and above those described in paragraph  EX.2  of
         Appendix FM; and

    (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the  UK
         without the person who is to be deported".

23. It was not accepted that the appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his wife and it was noted additionally that when they
    were married there was no valid leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.



24. The appellant appealed and the case came before the First-tier Tribunal
    at Sheldon Court on 16 May 2017.

25. The judge recorded the main documents in the case and in  particular  a
    substantial bundle provided by the appellant.

26. Additionally, the appellant now has another child a second son born  in
    December 2016.

27. It was the Appellant's case that the older son  does  not  like  India,
    finding it hot and cramped and he does not speak Gujarati the way  that
    it is spoken in that part of India.  He  struggled  to  understand  the
    local accent.

28. In paragraph 12 of her  decision  the  judge  noted  the  distress  the
    appellant's wife experienced managing on her own.  The appellant's wife
    said that she lived with her mother and two brothers who did what  they
    could to give a male influence to the boys.  She said that  the  oldest
    child "is withdrawn and becoming socially nervous".

29. The judge also noted a letter from the child which is before me.

30. The judge then noted  other  evidence  about  the  appellant's  general
    character and particularly a letter from the Leicester  Muslim  Society
    noting that the oldest child "had been psychologically impacted by  the
    loss of his father".

31. The judge then considered the respondent's case.

32. Mr Jafferji represented the appellant before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    although he had not been involved earlier.  He presented the case.

33. The judge then set out the "legal position" and here she  has  directed
    herself by giving lengthy quotations from Section 32 of the UK  Borders
    Act  2007  and  paragraphs  390-392  of  HC  395.    From   this   she,
    uncontroversially, distilled the  "statutory  exception"  which  showed
    that the application to revoke could not be allowed  unless  sustaining
    the decision would be contrary to "the appellant's human  rights".   It
    is regrettable that the judge referred only to "the  appellant's  human
    rights" because that is too limiting.  The obligations under the  Human
    Rights Convention extend beyond the obligations to  the  appellant  and
    indeed in my experience on the few occasions  when  an  appeal  against
    deportation or  failure  to  revoke  a  Deportation  Order  is  allowed
    properly it is because of the impact of the decision  on  people  other
    than the appellant.  That said nothing seems to  have  turned  on  that
    error here.

34. The judge clearly and correctly looked for things that  would  make  it
    "unduly harsh" for the child to live in the country to which his father
    was deported or to remain without him.

35. Concerning the appellant's relationship with his wife the judge said:

         "Because the appellant and his wife formed their relationship at  a
         time when the appellant was in the UK unlawfully I cannot  consider
         whether the Convention exception  laid  down  in  paragraph  399(b)
         applied to Mrs Patel, namely that her  moving  to  India  would  be
         unduly harsh or her managing without her husband in the UK would be
         unduly harsh.  I need to consider the position at the date  of  the
         hearing."

36. I find that this is  an  erroneous  simplification.   Paragraph  399(b)
    applies when the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
    (deportee) "was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status was not
    precarious". The First-tier Tribunal accepted that  the  appellant  had
    left the  United  Kingdom  and  returned  to  India  before  making  an
    application for entry clearance which was granted.  It seems clear that
    the marital relationship was formed, if not started, when the appellant
    was  in  the  United  Kingdom  lawfully  but  his  position  was  still
    precarious and so although the judge may have compressed the  test  the
    apparent error is not material.

37. The judge's consideration began at paragraph 40.  She directed herself,
    correctly, that the two children involved were  "wholly  blameless  for
    the criminal behaviour of their father and its consequences  for  them"
    but added, also correctly "that their best interests can be  outweighed
    by other factors."

38. The judge's attention was drawn to a decision of this Tribunal known as
    Smith (paragraph 391(a) - revocation of Deportation Order) [2017]  UKUT
    116 (IAC).  This concerned an  approach  to  take  in  cases  involving
    revocation and deportation and noted the Tribunal's  finding  that  the
    public interest does not require continuation of  a  deportation  order
    after a period of ten years has elapsed.  I do not understand  why  the
    case of Smith was thought to be so particularly relevant.  As the judge
    pointed out, correctly, in Smith the Deportation Order was issued  more
    than ten years before the application to revoke had been made and  that
    was not the case here.

39. In paragraph 43 the judge said:

         "I move to consider  paragraph  399(a)  and  (b),  the  'Convention
         exceptions' in respect  of  the  appellant's  family  life.   I  am
         leaving U to one side because of his very young age and because  on
         that basis and the fact that he and his father have never  met  and
         cannot have had meaningful communication he cannot have established
         a subsisting relationship with his father, although I have no doubt
         the appellant loves his son very much."

40. The judge then noted that the appellant's wife  and  sons  are  British
    citizens and noted that there was evidence in addition to  the  arrival
    of U to show that the family had  maintained  "genuine  and  subsisting
    relationships" although the arrival  of  the  second  child  is  itself
    strong evidence that there is a  subsisting  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife.

41. The judge took particular interest in the letter  from  the  "Leicester
    Muslim Community" which referred to the appellant's eldest  son  "being
    psychologically impacted by the loss of his father".  The  judge  noted
    that the letter purported to come from the head teacher of the Madrasah
    but did not indicate the author  had  any  professional  qualifications
    entitling him to diagnose psychological damage. The judge  went  on  to
    say:

         "I cannot give weight to the letter beyond it saying what A himself
         says and which is not disputed; and that he misses his  father  and
         wants him to come to the UK."

42. She noted evidence that A did not wish to go to India.

43. The judge then reminded herself of the strict meaning of "unduly harsh"
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal for example in the case of ZP  (India)
    v SSHD [2016] 4WLR 35.

44. At paragraph 55 of her Decision and Reasons  the  judge  confirmed  her
    finding that  "A  clearly  misses  his  father  dreadfully  and  it  is
    difficult for him to be without his father".  She then went on to find,
    as is very often the case, that the best interests of the child lay  in
    his being brought up by both of his parents in a stable environment but
    she did note that A was able to find other male  role  models  and  had
    visited his father.

45. At paragraph 56 the  judge  made  an  observation  purporting  to  draw
    parallels between this case and  cases  where  families  could  not  be
    united because  the  spouse  in  the  United  Kingdom  could  not  earn
    sufficient money.  I am not sure that this is a helpful  diversion  but
    neither do I see how it affects the reasoning on the points of  matter.



46. At paragraph 58 the judge said:

         "In turning to the 'Convention' exception for Mrs Patel, she cannot
         benefit from it.  This is because the relationship, on the accounts
         given by each in their statements, was formed in  2002  at  a  time
         when she knew her husband was in the UK unlawfully.  She  therefore
         cannot benefit from the Convention exception in paragraph 399(b)."

47. The judge went on to find that there were no exceptional  circumstances
    to outweigh the public interest in deportation.  She made that  finding
    having accepted that Mrs Patel  was  working  extremely  hard  to  hold
    together her family and maintain it.

48. The grounds of appeal supporting the application are not  signed  by  a
    lawyer and do not benefit from having numbered paragraphs.  That  said,
    they are cogent and relevant  and  Mr  Jaffeji,  wholly  appropriately,
    based his submissions on a close analysis of the points on which  leave
    was granted.

49. The first point taken is the judge did not direct herself properly when
    considering paragraph 399(b) of HC 395.

50. This has been dealt with above.  It is quite clear that  the  appellant
    developed his relationship with his wife when  he  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom with permission even if as  seems  the  case  the  relationship
    started when he was in the  United  Kingdom  without  permission.   The
    problem for the appellant is the full text of the Rule  which  provides
    that the relationship must be formed when the deportee "was in  the  UK
    lawfully and their immigration status was not precarious".  It  follows
    that being in the United Kingdom lawfully does not  answer  the  point.
    This  appellant's  immigration  status  has  never  been  better   than
    precarious in the sense that it  was  less  than  indefinite  leave  to
    remain and therefore the  judge's  finding  was  correct  even  if  the
    explanation was streamlined.

51. The next point criticises the judge for finding that  there  is  not  a
    "subsisting relationship" between the appellant and his son  U  because
    they have never met although the judge does find that he has "no  doubt
    that the appellant loves his son very much".

52. This is clearly wrong.  The relationship is the relationship that could
    be expected between a child and an absent father.  The child is a small
    baby and not capable of making much contribution  to  the  relationship
    but the appellant clearly is involved in the life of the child as  much
    as is possible of the distances involved.  They have  "a  relationship"
    and I do not see how it can be other than subsisting.  It  may  be  the
    case that where contact is possible but does not happen or where  there
    have been positive acts to disengage  from  the  parental  relationship
    created by nature it may be permissible to find that there is  no  such
    relationship but a subsisting relationship  must  mean  far  more  than
    cohabitation in a nuclear family.

53. The Rules intend to reflect the United Kingdom's obligations under  the
    European Convention on Human  Rights  and  to  be  compliant  with  the
    obligations under the Convention and  under  the  Convention  there  is
    something very  close  to  a  presumption  that  relationships  between
    parents and minor children are within the scope of  the  protection  of
    Article 8(1) unless there is clear contrary evidence.

54. That said it is difficult to  see  what,  from  the  perspective  of  a
    balancing exercise, the relationship with U adds  to  the  relationship
    with A.

55. The next point criticises the judge for not giving  greater  weight  to
    the letter from the Madrasah.  This requires some  consideration.   The
    judge was plainly aware of the letter.  Interestingly  although  it  is
    signed by a person identified as "head teacher" that  person  gives  no
    indication of his or her qualifications.  The  writer  does  say  claim
    "first-hand experience of seeing A's development both academically  and
    morally".  I do not read this as the letter writer presuming to make  a
    diagnosis that would only be open to a psychologist but rather  I  read
    it as a person experienced in dealing with young people being satisfied
    that the child A misses his father.  The judge's suggestion of possible
    mental health issues does, I find, show an overly  literal  reading  of
    the letter but it does not undermine the points the judge  was  making.
    There is no professional expertise claimed by the letter  writer.   The
    observations of a person experienced in dealing with young  people  are
    not strictly expert evidence and are  certainly  not  medical  opinion.
    However the conclusion of the letter writer is the one accepted by  the
    judge that the chid misses his father.  The references to mental health
    support for young people are not particularly valuable.

56. However, the judge is making the point that there is no  evidence  here
    that goes beyond what might be expected of a child missing his  father.
    It is an important point but the evidence does not  support  a  finding
    that the consequences are particularly severe.

57. The next point of criticism is that the judge  has  not  mentioned  the
    positive factors set out by A and other  witnesses  that  could  follow
    from the appellant being in the United Kingdom.

58. The judge has  not  done  a  detailed  analysis  of  all  the  relevant
    witnesses.  However, it is  very  hard  to  see  that  she  has  missed
    anything of importance.

59. I have read the letter from A.  As I commented in the hearing room,  he
    has neat handwriting but it is a child's handwriting and  there  are  a
    few minor spelling mistakes and other errors which satisfy me that this
    is indeed the work of an intelligent child writing to  help  the  judge
    rather than someone who has simply been told what to say.  He sets  out
    the things that he can expect his father to do and how he  misses  him.
    I cannot see anything to suggest that these points were not  understood
    properly by the judge who was fully aware of the distress caused by the
    absence of the appellant.  She did refer to A using  the  phrase  "tore
    his heart apart".  She plainly  had  read  the  evidence.   The  faults
    suggested there is not made out.

60. The next criticism is at paragraph 56 which is described  as  "entirely
    flawed".  This is the paragraph where the judge drew analogies  between
    this case and the case where a family was apart because the  parent  in
    the United Kingdom did not earn enough money to meet the Rules.   As  I
    have indicated this is not a particularly helpful paragraph  but  I  do
    not see any material error.

61. The same  paragraph  criticises  the  judge  for  not  considering  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in MM and Others v SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  10
    but the point is not developed and I do not  understand  it.   Children
    are not entitled to have their best interests met.  Best interests  are
    something that have to be considered.  This the judge has done.

62. The grounds then criticise the judge for not having regard to paragraph
    391(a) which provides that:

         "The continuation of a Deportation Order will be the proper  course
         in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the person was
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  less  than  four  years,
         unless ten years have elapsed since the making of  the  Deportation
         Order  when,  if  an  application  for  revocation   is   received,
         consideration will be given on a case-by-case basis to whether  the
         Deportation Order should be maintained."

63. That is what the judge has done but has  done  it  in  the  context  of
    finding, correctly, that the  public  interest  remains  in  favour  of
    deportation.  This is the point at paragraph 54 of the  decision  where
    the judge recognises that  the  appellant's  risk  of  reoffending  was
    classed as low and there was no evidence before her to suggest that the
    appellant had committed any other crime other that the one that led  to
    his imprisonment and deportation.  The judge said:

         "However he committed a crime  in  respect  of  which  there  is  a
         considerable public interest in condemning.  The  strength  of  the
         public interest in the context of the offence  committed  was,  and
         remains, strong."

64. I do not see how there can be any objection to that.  The judge clearly
    was aware of the impact on the wife and children and what was best  for
    them but that did not change her view that the balancing exercise  came
    down against the appellant.

65. The grounds assert that the impact on A was underestimated but that  is
    not justified.  The judge made the point clearly that A was missing his
    father but it was not a case where  there  was  medical  evidence  that
    showed that any distress caused  by  separation  was  elevated  into  a
    higher category of illness.  The points have been considered.

66. The next point is that the judge did not have regard for the passage of
    time.  There is an arbitrariness in determining that Deportation Orders
    remain in force for ten years but such arbitrariness  is  necessary  to
    give consistency and predictability to the Rules.  Although the grounds
    rely on a passage in the Tribunal's decision in Smith at paragraph  21,
    I do not accept they make out the intended point.  At paragraph 21  the
    Tribunal said:

         "Whether there are grounds to maintain a Deportation Order will  be
         driven by public interest considerations.  However, there  will  be
         no point in providing an exception after a 'prescribed  period'  of
         ten years  if  the  balancing  exercise  remained  the  same.   The
         respondent's policy,  as  expressed  in  paragraph  391(a)  of  the
         Immigration Rules, is that the public  interest  does  not  require
         continuation of the order after a period of ten years had  elapsed.
         As the court in ZP  (India)  recognised,  the  public  interest  in
         maintaining the order will generally diminish with the  passage  of
         time.  Paragraph 391A also makes clear that  the  passage  of  time
         since  the  person  was  deported  might  amount  to  a  change  in
         circumstance to warrant revocation of the  order.   The  prescribed
         period would be rendered meaningless if the  same  public  interest
         considerations that led to the making of the  original  order  were
         sufficient to continue the order after a period of ten years."

67. Paragraph 391A of HC 395 provides in certain  circumstances  that  "The
    passage of time since the person was deported may also in itself amount
    to such a change of circumstances  as  to  warrant  revocation  of  the
    order" but paragraph 391A, following paragraph 391  which  applies  "In
    the case of a person who has been deported following conviction  for  a
    criminal offence" applies "In other cases". The relevance of  paragraph
    391A is to make clear that the regulatory effect of 391A permitting the
    passage of time, in some circumstances, to amount to a reason under the
    rules to warrant revocation of a deportation order does  not  apply  in
    cases such as this appeal where the  deportation  is  not  following  a
    criminal conviction.

68. Paragraph 391A recognises that, in the intensely fact specific area  of
    a private and family life balancing exercise, the passage of time might
    justify the revocation of the order. As is perfectly plain this is  not
    a case involving a person who was being subject to the restrictions  of
    a Deportation Order for more than ten years.  As I have indicated above
    there is no basis for saying that the public interest has diminished to
    the point where it has ceased to exist.  That time is  likely  to  come
    very soon but that is another way of saying it has not come now.

69. I find that the appellant is making too much of the decision  in  Smith
    which was dealing with the approach after ten years had lapsed.

70. If the appellant is suggesting that there is some sort of sliding scale
    and that the public interest diminishes close to nothing as a period of
    ten years is reached then it is a suggestion that I reject it.  That is
    not what the Tribunal decided in Smith.

71. The next point is that it is wrong to say that it would be  other  than
    unduly harsh for A and or U to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    their father.  The children do not deserve anything harsh to happen  to
    them at all.  However the appellant has committed an offence for  which
    he has been sent to prison for two and a half years and  for  which  he
    has been deported because the appropriate authorities have decided,  on
    a statutory basis, that his deportation is in the public  good.   There
    is nothing in this case that elevates the  distress  experienced  by  A
    beyond the distress that is to be expected in cases of this  kind.  Far
    from being "undue" the harshness is predictable and normal.

72.  Finally,  there  is  a  complaint  that  there  has  been  no   proper
    consideration of the Article 8 rights outside the Rules.   There  would
    be more merit in that point if it went beyond a technical fault.  In my
    judgment it does not.

73. I record that I have considered  Mr  Jaffeji's  additional  submissions
    although he essentially relied on the Rules.

74. I am satisfied that the judge made errors  in  the  kind  that  I  have
    indicated but also that they are immaterial.

75. I consider particularly the suggestion that the appeal should have been
    allowed outside the Rules.  I find no justification for that.  This  is
    a slightly unusual story in that the person who has done wrong and  has
    been subject to deportation left the United Kingdom very soon after  he
    realised his appeal had been unsuccessful  and  who  has  maintained  a
    meaningful relationship with his wife and child and then  their  second
    child over that period.  That might be thought to be very much to  this
    credit if marriage is to be regarded as something  to  respect  and  to
    promote but it is not a reason to disapply the Rules.  There really  is
    nothing in this case which would justify a finding  that  the  ordinary
    consequences of deportation do not follow.

76. I am satisfied that the decision taken as a whole is a careful and fair
    and thorough analysis of the rights of the children and indeed wife  of
    the appellant and that the judge reached a conclusion which was  wholly
    sustainable for the reasons given.

77. It follows that notwithstanding Mr  Jaffeji's  realistic  and  properly
    persistent submissions I dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.



|Signed                                |                                      |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal Judge|Dated: 24 April 2018                  |

