
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03789/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Leeds                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2020                            |On 28 February 2020           |
|Decision given orally at hearing              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                sandhya mula
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal, brought with permission granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to challenge the  decision  of  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal who, following a consideration on the documents in Newport  in
    July 2019, dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the
    respondent to refuse her human rights claim.

 2. The judge who dismissed the appeal was clearly extremely sympathetic to
    the appellant.  She recorded that  the  appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2016 as the spouse of a resident British citizen.  Her leave
    was valid until March 2019.  She applied in  time  for  further  leave.
    The reason why the respondent refused the appellant's  application  for
    further leave was because she had failed to  satisfy  the  respondent's
    financial  and  English  requirements.   So  far   as   the   financial
    requirements were concerned, the  judge  was  fully  satisfied  on  the
    evidence that those requirements had been met.   The  respondent  today
    takes no issue with that.

 3. The sole issue, accordingly, for the judge was whether the appeal  fell
    to be allowed  because  of  the  appellant's  failure  to  satisfy  the
    relevant English language requirement.  The appellant  had  provided  a
    Life Skills A1 Test Certificate.  It was, however, common  ground  that
    the appellant needed to provide a  Life  Skills  A2  Certificate.   She
    accepted that she had not done so.  That  was,  the  judge  found,  the
    result of a genuine mistake.  I am satisfied that that mistake  can  be
    explained, as the appellant's representative  pointed  out,  by  recent
    changes in the requirements in that regard set by the respondent.   The
    judge found that the appellant  "became  confused  about  the  required
    English language test and took and passed Life  Skills  A1  instead  of
    A2".  The judge accepted that this was, as I have indicated, a  genuine
    error.

 4. The appellant was in a position immediately to take the A2 test and the
    judge found that there would be no  issue  in  her  passing  that  test
    because of her knowledge of English.  She  is,  amongst  other  things,
    employed in a customer-facing role in a large pharmacy  in  the  United
    Kingdom,  where  she  has  to  engage  competently  in  English.    The
    difficulty, however, for the appellant,  which  the  judge  graphically
    described towards the end of her judgement as a "lobster pot", was that
    the respondent was refusing to hand back to the  appellant  her  Indian
    passport, which she needed in order to be able to sit the A2 test.

 5. The appellant has corresponded with the respondent in  respect  of  the
    return of her passport.  An email from the respondent dated 28 February
    2019 refers to section 17 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004  as  being  the  provision  under  which  her
    passport was being retained.  The  email,  having  cited  that  section
    said: "Therefore we are unable to  return  the  passport  as  you  have
    requested".  The passport would, the email continued, only be  returned
    to her if she was either granted leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    or if she chose voluntarily to depart from it.

 6.  In the circumstances, the  respondent's  stance  in  relation  to  the
    passport is, I find, extremely problematic.   The  email  reads  as  if
    section 17 imposes a duty on the  respondent  to  retain  passports  in
    certain circumstances.  In fact, if one looks at the section,  it  does
    nothing of the kind.  It gives the respondent a power to retain if  the
    person in question is suspected of being liable to be removed from  the
    United Kingdom.

 7. The judge, as I have said, was extremely sympathetic to the  appellant.
    She considered, however, in all the circumstances, that certain caselaw
    which she did not specify meant she could  not  allow  the  appeal.   I
    agree with  the  judge  who  granted  permission  that  the  judge  who
    dismissed the appeal seems to have erroneously considered herself bound
    by caselaw which she did not properly articulate.

 8. The position is, therefore, that there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.  In the circumstances, that error is one which  was  material
    to the outcome; and I set aside the decision and proceed to re-make the
    decision myself.  In doing so I adopt the unchallenged findings of fact
    in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

 9. The appellant's representative in his grounds refers  to  a  number  of
    cases including Chikwamba v the Secretary of State [2008]  UKHL  40  as
    authority for the proposition that, in certain circumstances, requiring
    somebody to go abroad  in  order  to  make  an  application  may  be  a
    disproportionate interference with their rights or otherwise  unlawful.



10. The problem for the appellant, however, it seems to me, is not the same
    as that faced by the  appellant  in  Chikwamba.   If  she  were  to  be
    required to leave the United Kingdom, the application  she  would  make
    would necessarily be a  different  application  than  the  one  she  is
    seeking to make at present for leave to  remain.   She  would  have  to
    apply for entry clearance and there is, more  importantly,  significant
    doubt as to whether it would be possible for her  to  take  an  English
    language test in India.  I say that, notwithstanding  what  Mr  Diwnycz
    has told me, based upon his instant internet research,  which  suggests
    it might be possible in certain places to take the test.   If  she  was
    required  to  return,  however,  there  would  undoubtedly  be  serious
    disruption to her employment in the United Kingdom, which would  cease.
    I am satisfied from the materials before me, which are  not  questioned
    by the respondent, that it would also be very  difficult,  to  say  the
    least, for her husband to accompany her while she made the application.



11. The point of difference between the Chikwamba caselaw and  the  present
    one is significant.  The jurisdiction of the Tribunal in a human rights
    appeal is confined to deciding whether the  removal  of  the  appellant
    would be contrary to section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.   In
    Chikwamba, the issue was whether the very form of leave that was sought
    by the appellant in that case should in effect  be  granted.   A  human
    rights appeal is very different.  The issue for me is  whether  in  all
    the  circumstances  of  this  somewhat  unusual  case   it   would   be
    proportionate for the Secretary of State to interfere  with  the  human
    rights of the appellant and her husband to by requiring her  to  leave,
    with all the difficulties that that entails, rather than granting her a
    period of leave which, compatibly with what the  power  the  respondent
    possesses under section 17  of  the  2004  Act,  would  result  in  the
    appellant obtaining her passport and thereby being  able  to  take  the
    necessary A2 test.

12. Accordingly, if I were to allow this appeal I would do so only  on  the
    basis that it would be disproportionate for the Secretary of State  not
    to grant a very short period of additional leave so as  to  enable  the
    appellant to take that test and to perfect her application.

13. The appellant's representative is concerned as to whether this might be
    effected by means of a variation of the  existing  application,  or  an
    amendment thereof, rather than a new  application.  Given  the  extreme
    difficulties that he  and  the  appellant  have  encountered  in  their
    dealings with the respondent hitherto, I  understand  his  concern.   I
    record it in this decision so that consideration should be given to  it
    by the respondent.

14. Be that as it may, however, I have concluded that in the  circumstances
    of this case, it would be disproportionate  to  remove  the  appellant.
    Proportionality requires doing no more than is necessary  in  order  to
    achieve the public aim; in this case, the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control.  Granting a short period of leave of the kind I have described
    to this appellant in order to enable her to take the A2 test  seems  to
    me to be an appropriate response.  Conversely, requiring her  to  leave
    and not granting even that short period  of  additional  permission  to
    remain would, in all the circumstances, be disproportionate.

15. I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    substitute a decision of my own, allowing the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds, so as to enable the Secretary of State to grant  a  period  of
    leave which will be sufficient to enable the appellant to take  the  A2
    test and to present  it  to  the  respondent  in  connection  with  her
    application for leave to remain.

16. I have mentioned earlier the financial issues which were found  in  the
    appellant's favour by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   Those  findings
    stand and the respondent should therefore address the matter solely  by
    reference to the requirements of the English language test.

No anonymity direction is made.


                      Signed                                 Date 20
                      February 2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber





