
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: HU/03615/2019
                                                               HU/03616/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 July 2019                      |On 9 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                  Adisa [a]
                                     and
                                    [T V]
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Solomon of Counsel instructed by Stanley
Richards Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are mother born in 1985 and  son  born  on  26  February
    2005. They are both citizens of Ghana. On 4 June 2012 they  entered  as
    visitors with leave for 6 months. In time, they sought further leave as
    visitors which on 5  March  2013  was  refused.  Appeals  against  that
    decision were withdrawn.

 2. On 27 December 2013 they sought leave to remain on the basis  of  their
    private and family life in the United Kingdom. On 31 January  2014  the
    Respondent (the SSHD) refused their applications.  Their  appeals  were
    dismissed and their appeal rights exhausted by the end of August 2015.

 3. On 4 June 2016  they  claimed  subsidiary  protection  which  the  SSHD
    refused. Their appeals were dismissed  and  they  became  their  appeal
    rights exhausted by the end of May 2017.  The  applications  for  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules based on the second  Appellant's  medical
    needs and the Appellants' exceptional  circumstances  and  private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom leading to the  subject  appeal  were
    made on 24 July 2018.

The SSHD's decision

 4. On 11 February 2019 the SSHD refused the applications. Neither  of  the
    Appellants  satisfied  the  time  critical  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration  Rules.  The  SSHD  considered  the  first
    Appellant would not face very significant obstacles on return to Ghana.



 5. The SSHD took account of the second  Appellant's  diagnosis  of  severe
    autism with chromosomal disorder and  global  developmental  delay  and
    that he was unable to speak and needed care in the ratio of 3:1 because
    of his aggression and that he was attending a special needs school  and
    it would be difficult  to  travel  to  Ghana  because  of  his  medical
    condition.

 6. The SSHD noted the Appellants were supported by the local authority and
    the first Appellant said she had ties with a  local  church.  She  also
    said that in Ghana her son, the second Appellant, would not receive the
    necessary support. The SSHD referred to the high threshold necessary to
    engage rights under Article 3  of  the  European  Convention  based  on
    medical grounds and the background evidence about the  availability  in
    Ghana of education and  medical  support  for  the  second  Appellant's
    conditions. The second Appellant's best interests were to  remain  with
    his mother and they could  return  as  a  family  unit  to  Ghana.  The
    Appellants had not identified any exceptional circumstances such as  to
    warrant the grant of leave to remain.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 7. On 21 February 2019 the Appellants lodged notice of appeal  challenging
    the  SSHD's  consideration  of  paragraph   276ADE(1)   and   asserting
    exceptional circumstances in the form of the formative years  spent  by
    the second Appellant in the United Kingdom, that he cannot speak and is
    accustomed to the standard  of  care  he  is  currently  receiving.  In
    relation to this, it was asserted the SSHD had failed to  take  account
    of his own guidance. A further ground was that the SSHD had not adopted
    the structured approach to the assessment of the claim  outlined  in  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27. The grounds continued  that  given  the
    second Appellant could not be removed, his mother, the first Appellant,
    should be permitted to stay because he needed her to care for him.

 8. By a decision promulgated on  14  May  2019  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal JWH Law dismissed the appeal on all grounds. On  21  May  2019
    the Appellants lodged notice of appeal.

 9. On 22 February 2019 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal EM Simpson granted
    permission because it was arguable the Judge had erred in  relation  to
    his assessment of the best interests of the second  Appellant  and  had
    not made clear findings of his "comparative best interests  as  between
    the UK and if returned to Ghana" and that at the date of the hearing he
    was close to have completed 7 years in the United Kingdom. Further,  it
    was arguable that despite  the  Judge's  self-direction  he  had  given
    weight to  the  first  Appellant's  poor  immigration  history  in  his
    consideration whether it was reasonable for  the  second  Appellant  to
    return to Ghana and had given inadequate consideration to his needs and
    consequential dependence on his mother.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10.  The Appellant attended the hearing. I  was  informed  that  the  second
    Appellant and a carer were in a side room and it was not proposed  that
    he should attend any part of the hearing. Mr Lindsay  acknowledged  the
    SSHD had not filed a response in accordance with Procedure Rule  24.  I
    acknowledged to Mr Solomon I was aware  of  the  Tribunal  Caseworker's
    refusal on 2 July 2019 of an application for an adjournment made on the
    basis that Counsel who had represented the Appellants in the First-tier
    Tribunal and drafted the detailed  grounds  for  appeal  could  not  be
    present. I explained to the first Appellant the purpose of the  hearing
    and procedure to be adopted who, other  than  to  confirm  her  current
    address, took no active part in the proceedings.

Submissions for the Appellants

11.  Mr Solomon relied on the grounds  for  appeal  which  were  essentially
    threefold. First, the Judge's approach to the assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the second Appellant was flawed. At paragraph  29  he  had
    accepted that he should not  be  separated  from  his  mother  but  had
    subsequently failed to find exactly what were his  best  interests.  In
    particular, at paragraph 43 he had considered the likely  situation  on
    return to Ghana but not what his best interests were if he remained  in
    the United Kingdom. His analysis of the factual  matrix  had  not  been
    sufficiently careful.

12.  The second error was at paragraph  43  where  the  Judge  accepted  the
    evidence about the second Appellant's medical conditions  and  that  on
    return his medical treatment would be  to  a  lower  standard  than  he
    currently received but he would be able to continue his medication with
    Risperidone and his mother would be able to continue her medication for
    depression. The Judge had concluded paragraph 43 by finding  the  first
    Appellant "took a gamble when she brought him and it was never  certain
    he would have indefinite access to the improved  healthcare  which  has
    been available". The effect of this was that notwithstanding the  self-
    direction at paragraph 28 the Judge had allowed  the  poor  immigration
    history of the first Appellant to infect his  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the second Appellant. The mother's immigration history  is
    an irrelevant matter when looking at her son.

13.  The third error was in the Judge's treatment of the factors  identified
    in s.117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act). He had not taken into account whether it would be reasonable
    to expect the second Appellant to leave the United Kingdom if he were a
    qualifying child under s.117D which he would  have  become  on  4  June
    2019. In the light of paragraph 46 of the judgment in R (MA and  others
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ.705  the  Judge  should  have  given
    significant weight  to  this  when  carrying  out  his  proportionality
    assessment. At paragraph 44 he had simply concluded that as at the date
    of the hearing the second Appellant was not a qualifying  child  within
    the meaning of s.117D and so  not  factored  into  any  proportionality
    assessment the  additional  security  which  being  a  qualified  child
    conferred or the prospect that  in  the  immediate  future  the  second
    Appellant would become entitled to  such  security  by  reason  of  the
    passage of time.

14.  The parties  agreed  that  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  the  second
    Appellant had spent less than 7 years in  the  United  Kingdom  and  Mr
    Solomon pointed out that at the  date  of  the  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal the second Appellant had been in the United Kingdom  for  more
    than 7 years but the issue  of  the  second  Appellant's  proximity  to
    completing 7 years' residence had never been considered nor whether  it
    might need to be treated as a new matter in the light of OA and  Others
    (human rights; "new matter"; s.120) Nigeria [2019] UKUT 00065 (IAC).

15.  Mr Solomon continued that the Judge's  assessment  under  s.117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act was flawed for the reasons identified in paragraph  31  of
    the grounds for appeal; namely that the second Appellant will have  put
    down roots and developed social, cultural and educational links in  the
    United Kingdom, that his mental health and medical conditions needed to
    be given due consideration and given the length of time he had been  in
    the United Kingdom "there  was  a  very  strong  expectation  his  best
    interests were to remain in the UK with his mother". In this light  the
    Judge had materially erred at paragraph 44.

16.  Mr Solomon referred to paragraph 33 of the grounds for  appeal  and  in
    particular the reference there to the SSHD's guidance of  January  2019
    "Family Migration: Appendix FM". This has been superseded  by  guidance
    issued on 25 July 2019 but the section  upon  which  the  grounds  rely
    remains materially the same, in particular the provision that: -

         '... The starting point is that we  would  not  normally  expect  a
         qualifying child to leave the UK. It is normally in a child's  best
         interest for the whole family to remain together ...

         It may be reasonable for a qualifying child to leave  the  UK  with
         the parent or primary carer where for example:

           . the parent or parents, or child, are a citizen of the  country
             and so able to enjoy the full rights of  being  a  citizen  in
             that country

           .  there  is  nothing  in  any  country  specific   information,
             including as contained in relevant country  information  which
             suggests that relocation would be unreasonable

           . the parent or parents or child have existing  family,  social,
             or cultural ties with the  country  and  if  there  are  wider
             family or relationships with  friends  or  community  overseas
             that can provide support:

             o    [you] must consider the extent  to  which  the  child  is
                  dependent on or requires support from wider family members
                  in the UK in important areas  of  their  life  and  how  a
                  transition to similar support overseas would affect them

             o    a person who has extended family or a network of  friends
                  in the country should be able to rely on them for  support
                  to help (re)integrate there

             o    parent or parents or a child who have lived in or visited
                  the country before for periods of more than a  few  weeks.
                  should be better able to adapt, or the parent  or  parents
                  would be able to support the child in adapting, to life in
                  the country

             o    [you] must consider any evidence of exposure to, and  the
                  level of understanding  of,  the  cultural  norms  of  the
                  country

             o    for example, a period of  time  spent  living  amongst  a
                  diaspora from the country may give a child an awareness of
                  the culture of the country

             o    the parents or child can  speak,  read  and  write  in  a
                  language of that country, or are likely  to  achieve  this
                  within a reasonable time period

             o    fluency is not  required  -  an  ability  to  communicate
                  competently with sympathetic interlocutors would  normally
                  suffice

         .    removal would not give rise  to  a  significant  risk  to  the
             child's health

         .    there are no other specific factors raised by or on behalf  of
             the child

         ...

         The parents' situation is a relevant fact to consider  in  deciding
         whether they themselves and therefore, their child is  expected  to
         leave the UK. Where both parents are expected to leave the UK,  the
         natural expectation is that the child would go with them and  leave
         the UK, and that expectation would be reasonable unless  there  are
         factors of evidence that mean it would not be reasonable.'

    Mr Solomon concluded that having regard to the  factors  enumerated  in
    the SSHD's Guidance, the Judge had erred in law finding that  it  would
    be reasonable for the second Appellant to leave the United Kingdom with
    his mother.

17.  Referring to the "Robinson"  obvious  point  raised  in  the  grant  of
    permission, Mr Solomon pointed to the findings at paragraphs 20 and  27
    of the Judge's decision that the second Appellant's behaviour had  been
    "mitigated" with Risperidone and that  his  "aggressive  behaviour  has
    been controlled since September 2017 by the use of  Risperidone".  This
    did not set well with the evidence of continuing  high  dependency  and
    the required care ratio of 3:1 or even the now reduced  ratio  of  2:1.
    His  aggressive  behaviour  was  not  controlled  but  was  made   more
    manageable with the medication but he continued to require a care ratio
    of 2:1. He referred to the letter of 14 January 2019  from  the  second
    Appellant's consultant at pages 197-198 of the Appellants' bundle filed
    on 17 July 2019.

18.  Mr Solomon submitted that in this light the Judge's evaluation  of  the
    evidence was flawed which consequently infected his assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the SSHD's decision. The second Appellant  continued
    to have multiple needs and to be highly dependent on his  care  support
    network. He had now developed substantial ties in  the  United  Kingdom
    with the special school he attended and with  his  medical  and  social
    services support teams. The Judge's reasoning was inadequate to support
    his conclusions and his decision should be set aside.

Submissions for the SSHD

19.  Mr Lindsay resisted the application and relied on the  judgment  in  KO
    and Others [2018] UKSC 53. The Judge's key finding at paragraph  44  of
    his decision was that the second Appellant was not a  qualifying  child
    and that it would be reasonable for him to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
    with  his  mother.  In  this  light,  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the decision under appeal was sound. He had referred
    at paragraph 27 to the 2014 decision dismissing an appeal based on  the
    private and family life of the Appellants. The First-tier Tribunal  had
    at that point assessed the best interests of the second  Appellant  and
    the Judge in the decision now under appeal had  correctly  applied  the
    principles of Devaseelan at paragraphs 22 and 27 of  his  decision.  He
    had noted developments or changes since 2014, namely the natural growth
    of the second Appellant (he is said now to weigh 84kg),  the  increased
    length of time he had spent  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  latest
    medical evidence.

20.  The Judge had noted the beneficial effect of the medication the  second
    Appellant was taking and that the care ratio had reduced to 2:1. He had
    noted at paragraph 11 that care facilities were available in Ghana  and
    there was no evidence that these did not extend to include a care ratio
    of 2:1. In short,  the  Judge  had  recorded  changes  since  the  2014
    decision and  considered  the  evidence  and  had  reached  sustainable
    conclusions. For the purposes of this appeal, the second Appellant  was
    not a qualifying child.

21.  The First-tier Tribunal finding  in  2014  that  the  second  Appellant
    could return with the first Appellant, his mother,  to  Ghana  had  not
    been successfully challenged. Mr Lindsay referred to  paragraphs  46-52
    of KO and  Others  as  authority  for  the  principle  that  qualifying
    children may be removed. The second  Appellant  was  not  a  qualifying
    child and so a fortiori could be removed. The SSHD relied on  paragraph
    42 of the judgment in R (MA) (Pakistan) and Others v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ. 705 in which Elias LJ  considering  the  principle  that  a  child
    should not be blamed for the moral failing of his parents stated that:-

         "... .it is not blaming the child to say that the  conduct  of  the
         parent should weigh in the scales when the general public  interest
         in  effective  immigration  control  is  under  consideration.  The
         principle that the sins of the fathers should not be  visited  upon
         the  children  is  not  intended  to  lessen  the   importance   of
         immigration control or to restrict what the court can consider when
         having regard to that matter."

    He submitted that looking at paragraph 46 of KO and Others dealing with
    the application of the findings of law made  earlier  to  the  specific
    facts of one of the appellants, there was no need for the  Tribunal  to
    provide "powerful reasons" for removal.  If  there  were  a  need,  the
    Supreme Court would have said so. The Judge's  approach  was  consonant
    with this.

22.  In the alternative, the SSHD argued that  the  factual  matrix  of  the
    subject appeal was  sufficiently  similar  to  that  of  the  appellant
    considered at paragraph 46 of KO and Others.  He  had  not  shown  that
    powerful reasons were needed and his appeal had been dismissed.

23.  The Judge had given  adequate  reasons  for  his  conclusions  and  the
    Appellants had not shown that such reasoning was perverse.  Risperidone
    ameliorated the second Appellant's condition such that the  care  ratio
    had been reduced from 3:1 to 2:1. The Judge had been cognisant of  both
    the amelioration and the  second  Appellant's  continuing  need  for  a
    substantial care network.

24.  The background evidence disclosed  there  were  specialist  schools  in
    Ghana and the Appellants had not shown any evidence that adequate  care
    arrangements for the second Appellant would not be available on  return
    to Ghana. There was no evidence there would be a significant  shortfall
    in care on return. The Judge's reasoning at paragraphs 45  and  46  was
    adequate to support his conclusions.

25.  The Appellants would return as a family unit and so there would  be  no
    breach of their right to respect for  their  private  and  family  life
    protected by Article 8 of the European Convention. The burden of  proof
    was on the Appellants and they had failed to supply evidence that their
    return together would engage the State's obligations under Article 8 in
    respect of their private and family life in the United  Kingdom.  There
    was no material error of law in the Judge's decision.

Response for the Appellants

26.  Mr Solomon submitted that the previous decisions of 2014 and 2016  were
    not binding. The Appellants had  shown  there  were  good  reasons  and
    material changes sufficient to justify conclusions different from those
    of 2014 and 2016.

27.  The Judge's assessment of the best interests of  the  second  Appellant
    had been inadequate because it had not taken proper account of where he
    is on the autistic spectrum and of the difficulties which  any  changes
    in his life would cause as identified by his consultant.  The  relevant
    yardstick was the measure of change to the circumstances of the  second
    Appellant on return to Ghana and not simply  whether  there  were  care
    facilities available for him. Careful consideration needed to be  given
    to both the availability and accessibility of such facilities.

28.  The Judge had not fully considered the case law  in  R  (MA  (Pakistan)
    and KO and Others. The requirement for "powerful  reasons"  in  R  (MA)
    remained good law and a material effect  of  the  judgment  in  KO  and
    Others had been to affirm  the  opinion  of  Elias  LJ  other  than  at
    paragraph 40 of R (MA).

29.  The Judge's understanding of the effect of Risperidone  on  the  second
    Appellant needed to be considered in the wider context of  his  medical
    conditions. The decision contained errors of  law  and  should  be  set
    aside.

30.  At the end of his response, Mr Solomon stated that he had been told  by
    the first Appellant earlier that morning  that  she  is  now  3  months
    pregnant. I enquired of her whether she  had  been  in  a  relationship
    because this might have been a relevant  factor  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  She  stated  that  she  had  never
    previously  been  in  a  relationship  with  the  putative  father  nor
    subsequently to the child's conception. Mr Solomon as a separate matter
    referred me to the letter of 20  November  2018  from  a  Primary  Care
    Mental Health Professional at page 199 of the Appellant's bundle  which
    also noted that in October 2018 she had been prescribed anti-depression
    medication. There was no subsequent medical evidence about her.

Subsequent submissions

31.   Mr  Lindsay  for  the  SSHD   referred   generically   to   the   2014
    determination. The Judge in the decision under review  had  dealt  with
    developments subsequent to 2014. The Appellants had not filed  evidence
    to show that even if the facilities in Ghana could have  provided  care
    for the second Appellant in 2014  they  could  not  now  provide  care.
    Similarly, no evidence had been submitted to show the inability of  the
    second Appellant to cope with change had deteriorated since  2014.  The
    Judge at paragraph 27 of  his  decision  had  identified  the  relevant
    changes.

32.  He referred  to  paragraph  46ff  of  KO  and  Others.  The  particular
    appellant's appeal had been dismissed and from this  could  be  derived
    the proposition that the Upper  Tribunal  similarly  may  dismiss  this
    appeal. The "powerful reasons" test was to be applied  and  there  were
    none. All that the Tribunal was required to consider would be comprised
    in an assessment of the factors identified in s.117B of  the  2002  Act
    and the matters raised in KO and Others.

33.  Mr Solomon referred to the decision in JG. There had  been  changes  in
    the second Appellant's medical condition and he had  now  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for over 7 years. The SSHD needed to demonstrate "strong
    countervailing reasons" why he should not be given leave to remain.



Findings and consideration

34.  In the 2014 determination of the Appellants' private  and  family  life
    claims the Judge made partial adverse credibility findings against  the
    first Appellant: see paragraphs 68-69, 95-98 and paragraph  24  of  the
    Judge's decision under appeal. The 2014 judge found the Appellants came
    to the United Kingdom as  visitors  with  the  intention  of  obtaining
    better medical treatment for the evident medical problems of the second
    Appellant.  In  the  event,  the  diagnosis   was   considerably   more
    devastating than expected: see paragraphs 51- 52. The  first  Appellant
    then made a claim for subsidiary protection on  the  basis  she  was  a
    lesbian. A claim  in  respect  of  which  she  was  not  believed:  see
    paragraph 29 of the 2016 decision. In the same appeal the circumstances
    of the second Appellant were considered  and  it  was  found  both  the
    Appellants could return to  Ghana.  The  first  Appellant's  additional
    claim based on her apostasy from Islam to Christianity was not pursued.

35.  The evidence noted at the time of  the  2016  determination  the  first
    Appellant claimed she became pregnant with her son after her drink  had
    been spiked at a party and while unconscious she had  been  raped:  see
    paragraph 26 of the 2019 decision under appeal and in relation  to  her
    current pregnancy, paragraph 30 above.

36.  There was no challenge to the  Judge's  conclusion  that  but  for  the
    second Appellant the first Appellant had no viable claim to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom and could  safely  and  reasonably  be  returned  to
    Ghana.

37.  The Judge's assessment of the best interests of  the  second  Appellant
    was insufficient. The Judge noted at paragraphs 27 and 29  the  changes
    in the Appellant since 2014, that he had become older, larger  and  his
    aggressive behaviour was controlled  by  medication  with  Risperidone.
    Although he had noted at paragraph 20 the medication  had  assisted  in
    reducing the care ratio by a third, he did not take account of the fact
    that the second Appellant care needs remained very extensive, including
    a care ratio of 2:1. He did not take into account  the  latest  medical
    evidence from his consultant of 14 January  2019  at  page  85  of  the
    Appellants' bundle. The consultant noted the second Appellant  required
    to be reviewed every 6 to 8 weeks because of the possible severe  side-
    effects of Risperidone and that  he  cannot  tolerate  changes  to  his
    routine or being  in  crowded  unfamiliar  environments  and  that  his
    lifelong   complex   neuro-developmental   difficulties,    challenging
    behaviour, rigidity  to  change  and  lack  of  understanding  made  it
    difficult for him to travel on public transport and this  situation  is
    likely to remain unchanged.

38.  At paragraphs 33-41 the Judge cited much case law and at  paragraph  44
    relied on the decision in Azimi-Moayed and Others (decisions  affecting
    children; onward appeals) Iran [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC). At  paragraph  27
    he referred to R (MA) but relied only on the specific circumstances  of
    the  appellant  in  that  case  and  did  not  consider  any   of   its
    jurisprudence, and in particular at paragraphs 46-52 which continue  to
    have force after the judgment in KO and Others.  Additionally,  he  did
    not take account of the SSHD's own Guidance on Appendix FM.  He  relied
    on the conclusions reached in the 2014 and 2016 decisions  but  without
    assessing whether later developments in  immigration  law  relating  to
    children and in particular the judgments in R (MA) and  KO  and  Others
    had any impact on the conclusions reached by those earlier decisions.

39.  For these reasons I find there are material errors of law in the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision such that it should be set  aside.  I  see  no
    reason why the Judge's limited findings of fact should not be preserved
    but, as already indicated, they are incomplete.

40.  Submissions for the SSHD were made that the same test applied  for  the
    application of paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules and s.117B
    of the 2002 Act. There are differences as paragraphs 13-21  of  R  (MA)
    identify. Submissions were made for the Appellants that there  must  be
    powerful reasons why it might be thought that a child who has  spent  7
    years in the United Kingdom should not be allowed to stay and  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect such a child to leave: see  paragraph  44
    of R (MA). The point is, as the Judge correctly noted, that as  at  the
    date of the hearing before him the second Appellant had not been in the
    United Kingdom for 7 years.

41.  Having found a material error of  law  and  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision so far as its conclusions are concerned, I find  it
    appropriate to re-make the decision.

Re-making the decision

42.  The first Appellant has a poor immigration history from the moment  she
    applied for a visitor visa for general purposes  rather  than  one  for
    medical purposes. She has previously been  found  not  to  be  entirely
    credible and to be willing to use deceit  or  misrepresentation  if  it
    suits her purposes. She has been found to have  family  in  Ghana.  Her
    explanation for her lack of recent contact  with  them  appears  to  be
    centred on the difficulties  faced  by  the  second  Appellant.  It  is
    reasonable for her to return to Ghana, even if  she  is  now  3  months
    pregnant. The evidence is she has no contact with the putative  father.
    In normal circumstances it would be reasonable for her to  return  with
    her son as a family unit.

43.  There can be no question but that it is in the best  interests  of  the
    second Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom where he will continue
    receiving high quality medical treatment. He is  being  educated  at  a
    special school accommodating  his  very  substantial  dependency  needs
    where there is only one other child in the class: see the letter  of  3
    October 2016 from Milton Keynes Council at page 105 of the  Appellants'
    bundle. He remains at the school: see the letter  of  16  January  2019
    from the Head Teacher at page 203 of the Appellants' bundle.  There  is
    evidence from his consultant about the impact of any change in  routine
    and issues he will experience if he needs to  travel,  particularly  by
    air. The best interests of a child are a primary consideration  but  in
    immigration matters not the paramount consideration.

44.  Given that in normal circumstances it would  be  considered  reasonable
    for the second Appellant to accompany his mother, the first  Appellant,
    to Ghana and that his best interests as a primary consideration are  to
    remain in the United Kingdom it remains  to  be  assessed  whether  the
    decision to remove him is reasonable and proportionate to the  need  to
    maintain proper immigration control for the economic well-being of  the
    State, a legitimate public objective defined in  Article  8(2)  of  the
    European Convention.

45.  The second Appellant has now been in the United Kingdom for  more  than
    7 years. He has become a qualifying child within the meaning of  s.117D
    of the 2002 Act. He has very extensive medical needs. The evidence from
    his consultant is that if only by reason of  his  autism,  he  will  be
    unable to adapt to life in Ghana. He relies on sign language.  He  will
    be particularly dependent on his existing care team and his  mother  to
    understand his simple  everyday  needs.  He  needs  help  dressing  and
    sometimes with eating: see the letter  of  12  October  2018  from  the
    Community Paediatric Team at page 90 of the Appellants' bundle.

46.  I take into account his very extensive medical  and  educational  needs
    and that the State has assumed responsibility for these over  a  number
    of years and that his interests must be considered independently of any
    failings by his mother to comply  with  the  immigration  laws  of  the
    United Kingdom. This is notwithstanding that neither of the  Appellants
    has had any right to remain in the United Kingdom since August 2013.  I
    also take into account that as at the date of  this  re-making  of  the
    decision a new matter for the purposes of s.85(5) of the 2002  Act  has
    arisen as explained by paragraph 18 of OA and Others, namely  that  the
    second Appellant is now  a  qualifying  child  within  the  meaning  of
    s.117D.

47.  In effect, this adds a significant dimension to  the  circumstances  of
    the second Appellant because the matters  referred  to  in  the  SSHD's
    Guidance on Appendix FM at page 50ff will be applicable especially  but
    not  exclusively  that  his  removal  is  likely  to  give  rise  to  a
    significant risk to his health.

48.  Taking all these matters into account, I am not of the view that  there
    is any discrete public interest  factor  which  would  still  make  the
    removal of the second Appellant proportionate. It  would  therefore  be
    disproportionate to remove him before he is reasonably able to make  an
    application on the basis that he is a qualifying child: see  paragraphs
    32 and 33 of JG. It follows that his  mother  and  primary  carer,  the
    first Appellant, should be given leave  in  line  for  the  purpose  of
    making fresh applications on the basis that the second Appellant is now
    a qualifying child.

49.  In the event that such applications are made, consideration  will  need
    to be given to what the President stated at paragraph 87ff of JG.

 Anonymity

50.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction  and  there
    was no request for such direction. Given the details of the  Appellants
    and their circumstances I find no reason to make on my own motion  such
    a direction.



SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.

    The appeals of the Appellants are allowed to the  extent  indicated  in
    paragraph 41 of this decision.

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official Crest                                          Date 02. 08.
2019


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
