
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/03967/2018
                                                               HU/09877/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2019                       |                On 8 July 2019       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                                ZAHID GHAURI
                              ISRA ZAHID GHAURI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr H Sarwar, of Counsel instructed by JJ Law
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Munonyedi) allowing the  applicants'  appeal
    against the respondent's decision of  23  Janaury  2018  refusing  them
    indefinite leave to remain as  the  first  applicant  fell  within  the
    provisions of para 322 (5) of HC 395 as amended.  In  this  decision  I
    will refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    the applicants as the appellants and the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

2.    The appellants are citizens of Pakistan, born  on  18  September  1978
    and 7 November 1982 respectively. They are husband  and  wife  and  are
    present in the UK with two daughters both born in  the  UK.  The  first
    appellant entered the UK as  a  student  on  1  July  2006  with  entry
    clearance valid until 31 March 2008. He was granted further  extensions
    of leave to remain as a student, a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant and
    then as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant until 5 July 2016. On 20  June  2016
    he applied for indefinite leave to remain based on 10 years  continuous
    lawful residence. The  second  appellant  is  dependent  on  the  first
    appellant's application.

3.    This application was refused under the provisions of  para  322(5)  as
    it was the respondent's view that it  was  undesirable  to  permit  the
    first appellant to remain in the  UK  in  the  light  of  his  conduct,
    character or associations.  In  consequence,  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of para 276B(ii) and (iii) for a grant of leave to  remain
    on the grounds of long residence.

4.    The respondent reached this decision as  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    first appellant had used deception  when  making  his  application  for
    further leave to remain on 29 March 2011 and 18  June  2013  by  giving
    figures for his earnings which contradicted  those  given  in  his  tax
    returns to HMRC for the same periods.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.    At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellants  gave
    evidence.

6.    The first appellant accepted that  there  were  discrepancies  between
    the figures declared in the applications and those declared to HMRC. It
    was the first appellant's evidence that he  made  a  genuine  error  in
    filing his returns which were calculated on a cash  basis  whereas  the
    accounts submitted to the respondent were prepared on an accrual basis.
    He also  explained  that  for  the  tax  year  2012/2013  the  accounts
    traversed two  different  accounting  periods.  He  said  that  he  had
    notified HMRC of the mistake and paid the additional tax  due.  It  was
    the second appellant's evidence that her husband was an honourable  man
    who had made a genuine mistake.

7.    The judge summarised her findings as follows:

         "13.     I found Mr Ghauri to be a credible  witness.  His  account
         had the ring of truth about it. He struck me as an intelligent  and
         hardworking man. His account that  he  only  became  aware  of  his
         mistake when  he  began  working  as  a  bookkeeper  and  receiving
         training and supervision from qualified  accountants  is  not  only
         reasonable but plausible and credible. Having  received  assistance
         from an accountant he relied  upon  their  advice  and  immediately
         notified HMRC about his mistake.

         ...

         15.      It is my finding that HMRC's  decision  not  to  impose  a
         penalty demonstrates that they accepted that Mr Ghauri had  made  a
         genuine mistake and had not acted dishonestly.

         16.      I also found Mrs Ghauri to be a credible witness.

         17.      It is the cumulative effect of all  the  factors  in  this
         case which forces me to conclude that on the balance of probability
         Mr Ghauri did not act  dishonestly.  It  is  my  finding  that  the
         difference in the  amount  of  income  was  due  to  the  different
         accounting periods used, the different accounting system  used  and
         the genuine mistakes that Mr Ghauri made in recording his income."

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

8.    In the respondent's grounds of appeal, it is  argued  that  the  judge
    erred  in  law  by  failing  to  take  into  consideration  the   first
    appellant's delay in rectifying the discrepancies and the timing of the
    same; around  the  time  he  was  due  to  submit  an  application  for
    settlement. The grounds further complain that the decision of HMRC  not
    to apply a penalty should have been regarded as irrelevant and that the
    judge failed to apply  the  guidance  in  R  (o.a.o.  Shahbaz  Khan)  v
    Secretary of State [2018] UKUT 384.

9.    Mr Kandola submitted the judge failed to have regard to the fact  that
    the first appellant rectified the accounts and applied for ILR in 2016.
    Further,  the  judge  misdirected   herself   in   law;   the   judge's
    characterisation of HMRC's decision not to impose a penalty as proof he
    did not act dishonestly; see Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673  at  paras.
    66 to 72. He submitted  that  this  infected  the  overall  credibility
    finding and so the decision was unsafe.

10.   Mr Sarwar in amplifying his rule 24  response  submitted  that  whilst
    the respondent argued that the judge failed to provide adequate reasons
    the challenge was essentially a perversity challenge. He submitted  the
    judge was tasked to  decide  if  there  was  dishonesty  or  a  genuine
    mistake. Mr Sarwar pointed out that the judge  dealt  with  the  timing
    issue at  [13]  and  [17],  and  that  the  respondent  was  simply  in
    disagreement with her findings.

11.   During  the  course  of  discussion  during  the  hearing,  Mr  Sarwar
    accepted there was an error at [15]  but  submitted  that  it  was  not
    material as the credibility findings were independent. He  referred  to
    the judge's findings of fact at [8] to [12]. The  judge's  findings  at
    [13] were based on that evidence which  also  addressed  the  issue  of
    timings.

Assessment of the Issues

12.   I will deal with the  respondent's  grounds  in  turn.  The  first  is
    pleaded as a reasons challenge. Issue is taken with the judge's failure
    to  have  regard  to  relevant  factors  such  as  the  timing  of  the
    rectification of the return(s) to  the  ILR  application,  and  to  the
    accepted fact that the first appellant paid insufficient income tax for
    a period of a decade.  Mr  Sarwar  submitted  that  this  challenge  is
    tantamount to a perversity challenge dressed-up as a reasons challenge.
    I agree. Perversity is not expressly raised in the  grounds  of  appeal
    and Mr Kandola, rightly, did not seek to pursue  such  a  challenge.  I
    shall thus deal with the first  ground  as  a  "reasons"  challenge  as
    pleaded.

13.   The judge had the benefit of hearing evidence from the  appellants  on
    the issue of deception. The judge summarised the  evidence  at  [8]  to
    [12]. This  included  a  detailed  summary  of  the  first  appellant's
    background, the extent of the discrepancies and the immediate action he
    took by instructing an accountant and notifying HMRC of the error.  The
    first ground has to be considered in this context.

14.   It is asserted that the judge at  [13]  had  "little  regard"  to  the
    accepted fact that the first appellant paid insufficient income tax for
    a period of a decade. It is then asserted that the judge had no  regard
    to the timing of the first appellant's decision to rectify his accounts
    and only did so around the time he was preparing  his  application  for
    long residence. It is clear from what the judge stated at [8] to [12] &
    [13] that she was fully aware that  the  first  appellant  only  became
    aware of the errors when he began working as a  bookkeeper  in  January
    2016. There is no reason to suppose therefore that the  judge  was  not
    aware of the timings or disregarded it. The judge's findings are  based
    on the evidence and were open to her. While the judge's  reasons  could
    have been fuller, I am satisfied that her  reasoning  is  adequate  and
    that she took all relevant factors into account.  I  find  this  ground
    does not raise an issue of law. It seeks to reargue an issue  of  fact.
    There is no merit in this ground.

15.   The real issue in this  appeal  is  a  rather  discreet  one,  namely,
    whether the judge misdirected  herself  in  law.  The  grounds  rightly
    recognise that the judge was not  obliged  to  cite  the  authority  of
    Shahbaz Khan but complain that the judge failed to have regard  to  its
    guidance, in that, no consideration was given to the first  appellant's
    knowledge that he  was  consistently  under  paying  income  tax.  This
    assertion is not borne  out  by  the  evidence  given  that  the  first
    appellant only became aware of the error in 2016. The judge was clearly
    aware of the history and chronology and there is no reason  to  suppose
    that she did not fully take these matters into account.

16.   Notwithstanding, I accept the judge fell  into  error  in  finding  at
    [15] that HMRC's decision not to impose  a  penalty  demonstrates  they
    accepted the first appellant had made a genuine  mistake  and  had  not
    acted dishonestly. In Balajigari, the  Court  of  Appeal  rejected  the
    claim that if HMRC had believed that a penalty was not payable and thus
    that it had believed that the error was innocent, it should  follow  an
    applicant had not acted dishonestly. The Court of Appeal noted that the
    statutory language  used  in  the  Finance  Act  simply  means  that  a
    liability to pay  a  penalty  arises  if  the  statutory  criteria  are
    satisfied. It does mean there is a duty on HMRC to impose a penalty  in
    every case where it might in principle be imposed, see paras 73 & 74.

17.   While the judge did not have the benefit of this  guidance,  following
    a discussion at the hearing, I did not understand Mr Sarwar to  dissent
    from the position that the judge nevertheless erred at [15]. I find she
    clearly did so. The question that I must consider  however  is  whether
    the error is material. I am satisfied that it is not. There appears  to
    have  been  no  dispute  before  the  judge  that  the  respondent  had
    established a prima facie case for dishonesty. That being so, the judge
    was ceased of a  fact-finding  task  to  determine  whether  the  first
    appellant had made a genuine mistake.  The  judge  accepted  the  first
    appellant's account that he had made an honest mistake and his claim to
    be a man of integrity was  supported  by  the  second  appellant  whose
    evidence the judge also accepted at [13] and [16].  These  findings  of
    fact are adequately reasoned,  sustainable  and  are  not  infected  by
    error.

18.   I agree  with  Mr  Sarwar  that  the  judge  reached  her  credibility
    findings at [13] independent of her finding at [15]. I acknowledge that
    at [17] the judge stated  that  she  reached  her  conclusion  on  "the
    cumulative effect of all the factors in  this  case".  However,  it  is
    clear from [17] that the factors of emphasis leading to her  conclusion
    was the "different accounting periods used,  the  different  accounting
    system used and the genuine mistakes that Mr Ghauri made  in  recording
    his income." I am not persuaded that the judge in this  case  gave  the
    decision  of  HMRC  not  to  impose  a  penalty  undue  weight   as   a
    consideration in ultimately concluding that the first appellant did not
    act dishonestly.

19.   In summary, I am not satisfied that the judge materially erred in  law
    by  finding  that  the  respondent  had  not  shown  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that the first appellant  had  acted  dishonestly.  There
    were grounds on which the respondent could properly  suspect  that  the
    first appellant had been dishonest,  but  he  provided  an  explanation
    which the judge was entitled to accept and  to  find,  in  consequence,
    that the respondent  had  failed  to  discharge  the  onus  of  proving
    dishonesty. This was a question of fact for  the  judge  to  assess  in
    light of the evidence as a whole. Whilst another judge may have reached
    a different decision, this judge reached a decision  properly  open  to
    her for the reasons she gave.

Decision

20.   The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and the decision  to  allow
    the appeal stands.


Signed:          Dated: 19 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

