
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03066/2018
                                                               HU/13010/2018
                                                               HU/13015/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 December 2019                   |On 19 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                  ABASS [A]
                                 ADEOLA [A]
                                    [A A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi, Counsel, instructed by Devine Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellants appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Hussain (the judge),  promulgated  on  3  July  2019,
         dismissing their joint appeals against the  respondent's  decisions
         dated 4 January 2018 (in respect of the 1st appellant) and  31  May
         2018 (in respect of the 2nd  and  3rd  appellants)  refusing  their
         human rights claims.

Background

      2. The 1st appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 21  March  1983.
         The 2nd appellant is a national of  Nigeria,  born  on  26  October
         1985. The third appellant is also a national of  Nigeria.  She  was
         born on 16 December 2012. The 3rd appellant is the daughter of  the
         1st and 2nd appellants. According to documents issued by  the  High
         Court of Lagos State the 1st and 2nd appellants were married on  29
         April 2012 and were divorced on 4 April 2017. The  covering  letter
         accompanying the 1st appellant's human rights claim made on  6  May
         2016 stated  that  the  1st  and  2nd  appellants  had  been  in  a
         relationship but that the relationship had ended.

      3. The 1st appellant entered the UK on 18  July  2013  pursuant  to  a
         visitor entry clearance. He overstayed. The 2nd and 3rd  appellants
         entered the UK on 19 April 2014 as visitors. They both  overstayed.
         The 2nd appellant was 1 year and 4 months old at the time. She  had
         lived in the UK for just over 5 years at the date of the First-tier
         Tribunal's decision and was 6 � years old.

      4. Following her entry into the  UK  the  2nd  appellant  commenced  a
         relationship with a British citizen and she bore his child, [M], on
         18 January 2015. At the time of [M]'s birth the 2nd  appellant  was
         still married to the 1st appellant. The  relationship  between  the
         2nd appellant and the British citizen father  of  [M]  broke  down.
         Based on their relationships with [M], who had been issued  with  a
         passport as a British citizen, the  2nd  and  3rd  appellants  were
         granted leave to remain following a human rights application. Their
         period of leave was granted on 6 April 2016 and was due  to  expire
         on 6 October 2018.

      5. On 10 May 2017 HM Passport Office, a division of the  Home  Office,
         revoked [M]'s passport on the grounds that she was  not  a  British
         citizen. This was based on the  Secretary  of  State's  reading  of
         section 50(9A) of the British  Nationality  Act  1981.  It  is  not
         necessary for me to set this  provision  out.  It  deals  with  the
         interpretation of the 1981 Act stating, at section 50(9A)(a)  that,
         for the purposes of the Act, a child's father is, inter alia,  "the
         husband, at the time of the child's birth, of the woman  who  gives
         birth to the child". Section 50(9A)(c)  indicates  that  where  the
         preceding  sub-paragraphs  apply,  a  person  who   satisfies   the
         prescribed requirements as to proof of paternity will be  regarded,
         for the purposes of the Act,  as  a  child's  father.  As  the  2nd
         appellant was married to the 1st appellant at  the  time  of  [M]'s
         birth HM Passport Office considered that, by operation of law,  the
         1st appellant was [M]'s  father  and  not  her  biological  British
         citizen father.

      6. Following the revocation of [M]'s passport the leave granted to the
         2nd and 3rd appellants was curtailed in a decision dated 7 November
         2017 so as to expire on 13 January 2018. On 5 January 2018 both the
         2nd and 3rd appellants made human rights claims.

      7. The 1st appellant's human rights claim was primarily based  on  his
         claimed relationship with the 3rd appellant. The respondent refused
         the human rights claim under Appendix FM as the 3rd  appellant  was
         not a British citizen, was not  settled  in  the  UK  and  had  not
         resided in the UK for a continuous period of 7  years.  Whilst  the
         respondent accepted that  the  1st  appellant  had  demonstrated  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with the 3rd appellant, EX.1 of
         Appendix FM did not apply because the 3rd appellant  did  not  meet
         the relevant eligibility requirements. Having  concluded  that  the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules were  not
         met the respondent considered whether there  were  any  exceptional
         circumstances outside of the immigration which, in accordance  with
         Article 8 principles, would warrant a grant of leave to remain. The
         respondent noted that the 2nd and 3rd appellants had  only  limited
         leave to remain and that they would all be returning to Nigeria and
         that the 1st appellant would therefore  be  able  to  maintain  his
         relationship  with  the  3rd  appellant   in   their   country   of
         nationality.

      8. The human rights applications of the 2nd and  3rd  appellants  were
         principally based on their relationship with [M]. However,  as  [M]
         was no longer  considered  to  be  a  British  citizen  child,  the
         eligibility requirements of Appendix FM could not be  met.  Neither
         did the 2nd or 3rd appellants meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
         276ADE of the immigration rules. Nor was the  respondent  satisfied
         that there were any exceptional circumstances that would result  in
         unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for   either   appellant.   The
         respondent considered it reasonable for the 3rd appellant  and  [M]
         to return to Nigeria.

      9. The appellants each appealed the respondent's decisions pursuant to
         s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

     10. In the meantime, the 2nd appellant entered into a relationship with
         another British citizen and a child, Albert, was born to them on 23
         May 2018. The 2nd appellant and the father of Albert are no  longer
         in a relationship.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     11. The appeals first came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Oxlade on 7 January 2019. The 2nd appellant sought to rely  on  her
         relationship with Albert in her human rights appeal.  Judge  Oxlade
         considered this to be a 'new matter' within the terms of section 85
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  that,  in
         order for the 2nd and 3rd appellants to rely on their  relationship
         with Albert, the respondent had to give her consent. The appeal was
         therefore adjourned and directions issued to the 2nd  appellant  to
         serve notice of the new matter on the respondent before 4 PM on  21
         January 2019, and for the respondent to reply by 15 April 2019.

     12. Instead of serving notice of the new matter on the  respondent  the
         2nd and 3rd appellant served amended grounds of appeal on the First-
         tier Tribunal.

     13. The joint appeals came before Judge Hussain on  30  May  2019.  The
         respondent failed to field a Presenting Officer. An application  to
         adjourn  the  hearing  was  made  by   counsel   representing   the
         appellants.  The  judge  set  out  the  basis  of  the  adjournment
         application at [18] to [23] of his decision. The  first  basis  for
         the adjournment application related to a judicial review  challenge
         brought by [M] against the  decision  by  HM  Passport  Officer  to
         revoke [M]'s passport. The judge was informed that  the  lawfulness
         of the Passport Offices decision was the subject of  litigation  in
         the "Administrative/Court of Appeal" and since the success  of  the
         2nd appellant's appeal depended on whether or not [M] was a British
         citizen, it was only fair to stay the proceedings until the outcome
         of the litigation was known. The second basis for  the  adjournment
         related to the 2nd appellants  relationship  with  Albert.  It  was
         accepted by Counsel  that  this  relationship  constituted  a  'new
         matter'.  As  the  respondent  had  not  however  replied  to   the
         'application' to admit the new matter, it was in the  interests  of
         justice to delay the hearing to enable the respondent  to  consider
         whether to give her consent.

     14. The  judge  refused  the  adjournment  request.  His  reasoning  is
         contained at paragraph 23.

             "I considered the application for adjournment but decided  not
             to  grant  it.  Insofar  as  awaiting  the  outcome   of   the
             proceedings in relation to [M] was concerned, I took the  view
             that the present appeals could  not  be  stayed  indefinitely.
             There was no date in sight as to when the challenge brought by
             [M] was going to be  settled  in  the  superior  courts.  With
             regard to the new matter, I was aware that the Tribunal  could
             not force the Secretary of State to determine the  application
             to admit the new matter, nor force the Secretary of  State  to
             admit it. In any event it was open to the second appellant  to
             make a fresh application, on the basis that she was, otherwise
             the mother of a British citizen  child,  called  Albert.  That
             application would have to  be  decided  by  the  Secretary  of
             State, afresh, and if refused, is very  likely  to  attract  a
             right of appeal."

     15. Having refused to grant the adjournment the judge then  heard  oral
         evidence from both the 1st and 2nd appellants and submissions  from
         Counsel.

     16. In his 'Findings' the judge noted that the 1st  appellant's  appeal
         revolved around his relationship with the 3rd appellant,  but  that
         the 3rd appellant had no  immigration  status  nor  an  independent
         claim under the immigration rules. Her only  claim  to  remain  was
         based on  her  family  life  relationship  with  the  1st  and  2nd
         appellants. The judge noted that the  2nd  appellants  claim  could
         only succeed if [M] was a British citizen. [M] was  not  however  a
         qualifying child within the terms of Appendix FM (or indeed  within
         the definitions contained in s.117D of the Nationality, Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002). Nor could the 2nd appellant establish a claim
         to remain in the UK on the basis of her  relationship  with  Albert
         because  the  respondent  had  not  given  her  consent   to   this
         relationship being considered. At paragraph 32 the judge stated,

             "It seems to me,  that  since  neither  the  first  or  second
             appellants are able to assert a claim  under  the  Immigration
             Rules and since then [sic] appears to be no impediment to  the
             appellants enjoying family  life  elsewhere  than  the  United
             Kingdom, the proportionality assessment has to weigh in favour
             of their exclusion from this country. That outcome seems to me
             to  be  inevitable  having  regard  to  the  public   interest
             considerations in Section 117B of the 2002 Act."

     17. The appeals were consequently dismissed.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

     18. The grounds of appeal  contend  that,  as  [M]  was  undertaking  a
         judicial review challenge against the revocation  of  her  passport
         she could not be removed from the UK and that even if  the  appeals
         of the 2nd and 3rd appellants were unsuccessful they  would  remain
         in the UK because they could not leave [M], who was aged 4,  alone.
         It would be unreasonable to remove them and, as none of them  could
         be removed until the conclusion of [M]'s challenge, the judge erred
         in using  the  absence  of  a  clear  timeframe  for  refusing  the
         adjournment application. The grounds referred to K (A Child) v SSHD
         [2018] EWHC 1834 (Admin) ('K'), the lead case  behind  which  [M]'s
         judicial review  challenge  had  been  stayed  following  a  signed
         consent order sealed on 25 September  2018.  Although  the  grounds
         state that neither Counsel nor the judge appeared to  be  aware  of
         the consent order,  I  note  that  the  consent  order  was  indeed
         included in the appellants' bundle of documents  prepared  for  the
         First-tier Tribunal appeal. The grounds noted that the Secretary of
         State had appealed the decision in K to the Court  of  Appeal.  The
         grounds noted a 'declaration of incompatibility'  under  section  4
         (2)  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  had  been  issued  by   the
         Administrative Court in respect of the relevant provisions  of  the
         British Nationality Act 1981. According to the grounds  this  meant
         that [M]'s biological father was, "for  purposes  of  nationality",
         her British citizen biological father.

     19. The grounds additionally or alternatively content  that  the  judge
         erred in refusing  the  adjournment  because  the  absence  of  any
         decision in respect of the 'new matter' would render "the  section"
         unworkable unless  there  was  a  legal  mechanism  compelling  the
         respondent to make a decision. Reliance was placed on Quaidoo  (new
         matter: procedure/process) [2018] UKUT 00087 (IAC)  in  support  of
         the contention that if the respondent fails to make a  decision  in
         respect of a 'new  matter'  then  the  appellants  cannot  mount  a
         judicial review challenge and this will leave them with no judicial
         remedy.

     20. At the 'error of law' hearing Mr Pipi provided a helpful bundle  of
         documents including a copy of  K  (a  copy  of  which  was  already
         contained  in  the  appellant's  First-tier  Tribunal  bundle),   a
         chronology, a family tree, a copy of the consent order in  relation
         to [M]'s judicial review challenge dated 25 September  2018  (which
         was also contained in the First-tier Tribunal bundle), and a letter
         issued by the GLD to [M]'s solicitors dated 19 November  2019.  The
         letter noted that [M]'s JR challenge had  been  stayed  behind  the
         case of K, and indicated that the Secretary of State had  requested
         that her appeal in K be dismissed. In an order sealed on 31 October
         2019 Lord Justice Singh granted the Secretary  of  State's  request
         and her appeal in K was dismissed. Under the terms of  the  consent
         order [M]'s legal representatives had to notify the  Administrative
         Court and the Secretary of State within 21 days if she intended  to
         pursue her judicial review claim and, if so advised,  to  file  and
         serve amended grounds  of  claim.  If  [M]  failed  to  notify  the
         Administrative Court or the Secretary of State within  that  period
         and file amended grounds of claim, her  judicial  review  challenge
         would be struck out without further order. Although  there  was  no
         documentation to this effect Mr Pipi had been told by  [M]'s  legal
         representatives that they were going to notify  the  Administrative
         Court that [M] would not be pursuing her Judicial Review challenge.

     21. In his submissions Mr Pipi submitted  that,  as  the  Secretary  of
         State's appeal against the decision in K had been dismissed, and as
         the relevant section of the British Nationality Act 1981  had  been
         held to be incompatible  with  the  European  Convention  of  Human
         Rights, the relevant section would be  amended  and  [M]  would  be
         recognised as a British citizen.

     22. In his oral submissions  Mr  Pipi  submitted  that  [M]'s  judicial
         review challenge was pivotal to the appeals and that, as she  could
         not be removed pending the outcome  of  her  judicial  review,  the
         judge's reliance on the absence of  any  definitive  timeframe  for
         determining her  judicial  review  challenge  fell  away.  Mr  Pipi
         confirmed that, to his knowledge, no  injunction  preventing  [M]'s
         removal had been issued by the Administrative Court, but that  this
         was not surprising given the absence of any decision to remove [M].
         According to Mr Pipi the 'bottom line' was that the appellants  had
         no right to remain in the UK and could be removed if their  appeals
         were dismissed. As there was a 'declaration of incompatibility' the
         Secretary State would either seek to amend the British  Nationality
         Act 1981  or  generate  a  policy  to  ensure  that  the  offending
         legislative provision was no longer  incompatible  with  the  ECHR.
         When this occurs [M] would be recognised as a British  citizen  and
         this would have been relevant to the appeals before the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

     23. In respect of the 'new  matter'  ground  Mr  Pipi  submitted  that,
         although the  appellants  failed  to  comply  with  Judge  Oxlade's
         directions, it would have been obvious to  the  respondent  that  a
         request was being made for her consent  to  enable  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to consider the 2nd appellant's relationship  with  Albert
         and that it was now too late for the respondent to make a  decision
         on the issue of consent.

     24. In his submissions Mr Lindsay indicated that  a  decision  had  now
         been made in respect of the 'new matter' and  that  the  respondent
         did not consent to  the  new  matter  being  considered.  This  was
         because the respondent considered that she should  be  the  primary
         decision maker  in  respect  of  events  that  occurred  after  the
         decisions to refuse the human rights claims  of  the  2nd  and  3rd
         appellants were made. Mr Lindsay said that this decision would have
         been the same if made prior to or at the  date  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing before Judge Hussain. Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that
         this was relevant to the materiality of  the  judge's  decision  to
         refuse the adjournment. The appellant's representatives  failed  to
         comply with Judge Oxlade's direction to serve  notice  of  the  new
         matter on the respondent and this was necessary as a first step  to
         enable  the  respondent  to  comply  with  Judge   Oxlade's   other
         direction. With reference to the decision in K,  this  demonstrated
         that [M] was not a British citizen and that the judge did  not  act
         unlawfully in refusing to adjourn.

Discussion

     25. No issue has been raised with the judge's decision other  than  his
         refusal to adjourn. I will first consider the refusal to adjourn to
         await the  outcome  of  [M]'s  judicial  review  challenge  to  the
         decision to revoke her British passport.

     26. Although the grounds suggest the judge was not aware of either  the
         decision of decision of Helen Mountfield QC, sitting  as  a  Deputy
         High Court judge, in K, or the consent order issued in  respect  of
         [M]'s judicial review staying her challenge behind the decision  in
         K, the decision in K was handed down  on  18  July  2018  and  that
         decision and the consent order were contained  in  the  appellants'
         bundle of documents. Although no explicit  reference  was  made  to
         either of  these  by  the  judge  in  his  decision,  it  would  be
         surprising if his attention was not drawn to them by Counsel making
         the adjournment application.

     27. In her decision Helen  Mountfield  QC  rejected  an  argument  that
         s.50(9A) of the British Nationality Act 1981 could be read in a way
         that was compatible with Article 8 and Article 14 ECHR and that the
         decision that K should not have a British passport because she  was
         not, as defined by that Act, entitled to be treated  as  a  British
         citizen by birth, did not breach section 6(1) of the  Human  Rights
         Act 1998 [100]. The reading of s.50(9A) advanced  by  the  Passport
         Office was not only the natural reading, but the only possible  one
         [96]. As such, K was not a British citizen  by  birth  because  her
         mother was married to a man who was not a British  citizen  at  the
         time of her birth even if  the  child's  biological  father  was  a
         British citizen.

     28. [M] is in a similar position. The 2nd appellant was married to  the
         1st appellant at  the  date  of  [M]'s  birth,  even  though  [M]'s
         biological father was a British citizen. [M] was  not  therefore  a
         British citizen by birth.

     29. Helen Mountfield QC issued a declaration of incompatibility holding
         that the provisions preventing a child, other  than  a  child  born
         under a licensed IVF arrangement mentioned in sections 50(9A)(b) or
         (ba) of the British Nationality Act 1981, as  being  recognised  as
         the child of his or her actual biological father for  the  purposes
         of acquiring his or her nationality,  if  the  child's  mother  was
         married to someone other than the biological father at the time  of
         the child's birth, was incompatible with Article 14 ECHR read  with
         Article 8 [101]. The issuance of the declaration of incompatibility
         did not however mean that K was a British citizen,  or  had  to  be
         treated as a British citizen. K, and by logical necessity, [M], are
         not British citizens. The appeal by the Secretary of State  to  the
         Court of Appeal was, it appears, against the decision to issue  the
         declaration. Although I  accept  Mr  Pipi's  observation  that  the
         British government is, eventually, likely to act in accordance with
         the Administrative Court's decision and remedy the incompatibility,
         there was, at  the  date  of  the  judge's  decision  refusing  the
         adjournment, and indeed at the date of the Upper Tribunal  hearing,
         no evidence of the manner in  which  the  incompatibility  will  be
         remedied or the time frame for such a remedy, or indeed whether  it
         will  be  retroactive.  There   was,   and   remains,   significant
         uncertainty as to whether [M] would become a British  citizen,  and
         if so, when and how.

     30. The judge properly observed that the appeals should not  be  stayed
         indefinitely and, in the absence of any indication as  to  when  or
         how the  incompatibility  with  the  ECHR  would  be  remedied,  an
         adjournment of the hearing would not have advanced the  appellants'
         appeals given that the declaration did not result in [M] becoming a
         British citizen. The judge was entitled to rely on the  absence  of
         any definitive  timeframe  in  respect  of  [M]'s  judicial  review
         challenge in refusing to grant the adjournment because, in light of
         the decision in K, she would still not be  a  British  citizen  and
         there was nothing to indicate when the  Secretary  of  State  would
         actually seek to remedy the incompatibility with the ECHR.

     31. Mr Pipi argued that [M] cannot be removed while her judicial review
         was active and that the  adjournment  should  be  granted  on  this
         basis. It is not apparent from the face  of  the  judge's  decision
         that this particular argument was advanced by Counsel in support of
         the adjournment application.  In any event, whilst  there  were  no
         removal directions in place to remove [M],  and  while  it  may  be
         unlikely that the Secretary of  State  would  seek  to  remove  her
         whilst she has an extant judicial  review,  there  was  nothing  in
         theory preventing removal  directions  being  issued  against  her.
         Moreover, [M]'s judicial review was stayed behind that of K, and it
         was the Secretary of State who sought to appeal the  Administrative
         Court's decision. If the Secretary of State had,  in  theory,  been
         successful in her appeal, the declaration of incompatibility  would
         have been withdrawn, which could not have assisted  the  appellants
         in any way. Nor does the dismissal  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
         appeal assist the appellants because [M] remains someone who is not
         a British citizen. the fact that the  appellants  are  unlikely  to
         face actual removal is not, on the particular facts of this case, a
         factor that would entitle a judge to adjourn the appeals  for  what
         would be an indeterminate period of time.

     32. If, as a result of the extant declaration of  incompatibility,  the
         offending provision within the  British  Nationality  Act  1981  is
         amended or the Secretary of State issues a  new  policy  addressing
         the incompatibility, then [M] may become a British  citizen.  This,
         in turn, could lead to further human rights applications being made
         by the appellants. If [M] is eventually considered to be a  British
         citizen, it is unlikely that the Secretary of State would  be  able
         to rely on paragraph 353 of  the  immigration  rules  (relating  to
         fresh applications) as there would have been a material  change  in
         circumstances (the same is likely to apply in respect  of  any  new
         applications that rely directly (in the case of the 2nd  appellant)
         or indirectly (in the case of the 1st and 3rd  appellants)  on  the
         2nd appellant's  relationship  with  Albert).  The  appellants  are
         therefore unlikely to be materially disadvantaged  if  there  is  a
         change in the law relating to children born in [M]'s situation.

     33. I  now  consider  whether  the  appeal  hearing  should  have  been
         adjourned because the respondent had not decided whether  to  treat
         Albert's birth as a 'new matter'.  The  appeals  had  already  been
         adjourned to enable the 2nd and 3rd appellants to serve  notice  of
         the  new  matter  on  the  respondent.  Instead,  the   appellants'
         solicitors applied to the First-tier Tribunal to amend the  grounds
         of appeal. Mr Pipi submitted that the respondent  would  have  been
         aware that that the 2nd and 3rd appellants (and, because his  claim
         rested  on  his  relationship  with  the  3rd  appellant,  the  1st
         appellant) wanted the First-tier Tribunal to consider a new  matter
         because the hearing before Judge Oxlade  was  adjourned  to  enable
         this to be done and because of the nature of the  amended  grounds.
         This may be so, but the fact remains that there was no  application
         made by the appellants to the respondent for her to consent to  the
         new matter. Judge Oxlade  clearly  envisaged  that  the  respondent
         would be served with a notice of the  new  matter  and  would  then
         decide in respect of that notice. I accept Mr Lindsay's  submission
         that the provision of a notice of the new matter was a  first  step
         before a response from the respondent was required.

     34. Mr Pipi relied on Quaidoo in support of  his  submission  that  the
         judge should have adjourned the hearing. Quaidoo explained that  it
         will generally be appropriate to grant an adjournment to enable the
         Secretary of State to decide whether to consent to the  new  matter
         being considered or not, rather than proceed without  consideration
         of the new matter.  But  there  had  been  an  adjournment  in  the
         proceedings to enable this to be done. The  hearing  on  7  January
         2019 was adjourned but the appellants' representative filed amended
         grounds with the First-tier Tribunal instead of serving the  notice
         of the new matter on the respondent. Given that the appellants  had
         already been given the opportunity to  request  the  respondent  to
         consent to the new matter, the  judge  was  entitled  to  refuse  a
         further adjournment in light of the  failure  to  comply  with  the
         previous direction.

     35. To the extent that the written grounds of appeal contend  that  the
         appellants  cannot  mount  a  judicial  review  challenge  if   the
         respondent fails to make a decision, this is simply wrong. There is
         nothing preventing the appellants from  challenging  a  refusal  to
         make a decision in judicial review proceedings. I note the  absence
         of any application by the appellants'  Counsel  at  the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing to seek an adjournment in order to  challenge  the
         failure to make a decision in the 'new  matter'  issue  by  way  of
         judicial review proceedings. Nor is there any merit in the  written
         grounds contending that the failure to make a decision renders  the
         appeals scheme unworkable. S.85(5) of the Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 makes clear that, in  the  absence  of  consent
         from the Secretary of State to  a  'new  matter',  the  new  matter
         cannot be considered. The existence of consent is  required  for  a
         new matter' to be  considered,  but  the  absence  of  any  consent
         results in the appeal being heard without consideration of the 'new
         matter'. This does not render the provisions unworkable.

     36. I find, in the alternative and in any event,  that  the  respondent
         would have withheld her consent  had  the  matter  been  considered
         prior to or at the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing. I  have
         no reason to doubt the information provided by Mr  Lindsay  at  the
         'error  of  law'  hearing  that  the  respondent  would  not   have
         considered giving her consent as she considers that she  should  be
         the principle decision maker in  respect  of  the  2nd  appellant's
         relationship with Albert. The  refusal  to  grant  the  adjournment
         would not therefore  have  made  any  material  difference  to  the
         outcome of the appeal as the First-tier  Tribunal  would  not  have
         been entitled to consider the birth of Albert. As  pointed  out  by
         the judge, this could form the basis of a further  application  for
         leave to remain.



Notice of Decision

The appeals are dismissed.


D.Blum

Signed   Date 13 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
