
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03953/2016
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 October 2017                    |On 27 October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           AMUDALAT ABOLORE LAPIDO
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:               Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:                    Ms J. Elliott-Kelly of counsel,
instructed by Lupins                     Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent, who was born on 12 February  1980,  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria. She was granted a multi-entry visit visa on 16  December  2004
    and visited the United Kingdom between 23 December and 26 December 2004
    and 3 and 7 February 2005.  She then returned on 6 March 2005  but  was
    refused leave to enter as she had  another  passport  in  the  name  of
    Shakirat Abelore Lapido in her bag. She was removed to Nigeria and  her
    subsequent appeal was dismissed on the basis that she had said that her
    intention  when  visiting  the  United  Kingdom  had  been  to   obtain
    employment.

2.   The Respondent made a further application  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor in a false name in  2006,  which  was  refused  but  a  further
    application was granted and she arrived here on 10 August  2006,  using
    the name of Panebi Mina.  Her son, E, who had been born in  Nigeria  on
    22 July 1999, accompanied her.

3.   The Respondent's second son, D, was born in the United  Kingdom,  on  6
    December 2006 and on  18  January  2007,  the  Respondent  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain. In this application she asserted  that  she
    had first  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  child  in  1991.  This
    application was refused on 4 November 2008 on the basis  that  most  of
    the documentary evidence relied upon was false.

4.   On 13 February 2010, the Respondent married an EEA national  and  on  4
    June 2010 she  applied  for  a  residence  card  as  his  spouse.   Her
    application was refused on 6 December 2010 on the basis that  no  banns
    for her marriage had been published for  her  marriage  at  All  Saints
    Church.

5.   Meanwhile, she had been encountered outside  this  same  church  on  31
    July 2010 in possession of an envelope containing a number  of  wedding
    rings and photocopies of passports.  She was arrested and on  22  March
    2012 she was convicted of conspiracy to breach UK immigration laws  and
    knowingly  possessing  false  identity  documents  with   intent.   The
    sentencing judge noted that her part in the conspiracy had been that of
    a marriage fixer and that she had acted as "middle management"  in  the
    conspiracy. She was sentenced to three  years'  imprisonment.  She  was
    released on licence on 10 October 2012 and her son, J, was  born  on  9
    November 2012.

6.   Meanwhile, interim care orders in relation to E and D had been made  in
    favour of the London Borough of Lambeth on 23 May 2012  and  full  care
    orders on 26 September 2012 on the basis  of  neglect.  The  Respondent
    applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds on 12 July 2013 but
    her application was refused on 28 August 2013.

7.   A decision to deport the Respondent was made on 1 April  2015  and  the
    Respondent replied relying on Article 8 grounds on  15  April  2015.  A
    deportation order was then signed on 26 January  2016.  The  Respondent
    appealed and her appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke
    in a decision promulgated on 11  April  2017.  The  Appellant  appealed
    against this decision on 21 April 2017 and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Boyes granted permission to appeal on 26 July 2017 on  the  basis  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke had  erred  in  consideration  of  the
    public  law  interest  aspects  of  the  deportation  order   and   had
    misdirected herself in doing so.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

8.   Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for the  Respondent
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

DECISION

9.   The Respondent was liable to automatic deportation under section 32  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 and her and her children's article 8 rights had
    to be considered in the light  of  Section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  paragraphs  398  to  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

10.  In paragraphs 17 and 18 of her decision, she  made  passing  references
    to paragraph 398(c), 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules and sections
    117A - D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  But  she
    did not explicitly remind herself that, for  the  purposes  of  section
    117C(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the
    deportation of a foreign criminal is in the public interest.

11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge purported to  consider  the  contents  of
    section 117C(5) of the Act and paragraph 399(a)(ii) of the  Immigration
    Rules in paragraphs 19 to 26 of her decision. The  former  provides  an
    exception  to  deportation  where  the  criminal  has  a  genuine   and
    subsisting relationship with a qualifying child and  deportation  would
    be unduly harsh for any child. (Section 117D defines a qualifying child
    as one who is a British citizen or who has lived in the United  Kingdom
    for a continuous period  of  seven  years  or  more).       The  latter
    provides an exception when  a  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a child under the age of 18 who  is  in  the
    United Kingdom and it would be unduly harsh for him or her to  live  in
    the country to which the parent is to be deported or it would be unduly
    harsh for him or her to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  that
    parent.

12.   In  particular,  she  noted  that  the  Appellant  accepted  that  the
    Respondent had a parental relationship with  J  and  R  with  whom  she
    currently lived and also E and D with whom  she  had  contact.  But  in
    paragraph 16 of her decision she found that the children could  not  be
    expected to live with the Respondent to Nigeria as  they  were  British
    citizens. However, it was only J and R who are British citizens and she
    did not provide any reasons for finding that it would be  unduly  harsh
    for R to accompany her mother to  Nigeria.  Neither  did  she  consider
    whether it would be unduly harsh for J and  R  to  go  there  if  their
    father was providing financial support and their grandmother was  there
    to provide emotional support.

13.  I was informed by counsel for the Respondent that the  local  authority
    was taking steps to regularise the immigration status of E  and  D  but
    had not yet done so. But in any event, as they were  in  the  full-time
    care of the London Borough  of  Lambeth  at  the  time  of  the  appeal
    hearing, it  was  not  suggested  by  the  Appellant  that  they  could
    accompany the Respondent to Nigeria so it was not necessary to consider
    whether it would be unduly harsh for them to accompany  the  Respondent
    to Nigeria.

14.  In relation to whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  them  to  remain
    here, I noted that in a letter, dated 29  September  2015,  the  London
    Borough of Lambeth stated that due  to  safeguarding  concerns  contact
    with E and D was supervised and that both boys were scared of the anger
    she displayed during contact sessions.  The letter also stated that the
    local authority did not support E being returned to her care and that D
    did not want to return to her care and that he was settled in long-term
    foster care. At the time of the hearing there was no evidence from  any
    on-going Family Court proceedings which  indicated  that  they  may  be
    returned to the Respondent's care during their minority.

15.  Furthermore, when considering whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  J
    and R to accompany the Respondent to Nigeria or remain here with  their
    father but without their mother, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  failed
    to take into account the test established in KMO (section 117 -  unduly
    harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC)  which  was  reaffirmed  by  the
    Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450. It held that when deciding whether  the
    deportation of a parent would be  unduly  harsh  for  a  child  it  was
    necessary to take into  account  all  the  circumstances  in  the  case
    including the parent's criminal and immigration history.  In  paragraph
    29 of her decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  the
    Respondent took an active and important  role  in  the  conspiracy  for
    which she was convicted but singularly failed to take into account  her
    immigration history which itself  involved  applications  which  relied
    upon using false names and documents.

16.  In my view, it was not sufficient for counsel  for  the  Respondent  to
    rely upon the fact that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had outlined  the
    Respondent's immigration history in paragraphs 3 to 12 or her decision.
    This was because later in the decision she did analyse the Respondent's
    criminal history when weighing up whether it had been  shown  that  any
    breach of Article 8 would be proportionate. It was at this  point  that
    her poor immigration history should also have been considered.

17.  In addition, in KMO  the  Upper  Tribunal  adopted  the  definition  of
    "unduly harsh" in MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT  00435
    (IAC), which stated that "whether the consequences of deportation  will
    be  "unduly  harsh"  for  an  individual   involves   for   more   than
    "uncomfortable,  inconvenient,   undesirable,   unwelcome   or   merely
    difficult and challenging" consequences and imposes a considerably more
    elevated  or  higher  threshold".  It  went  on  to  state  that   "the
    consequences for an individual will be "harsh" if they are "severe"  or
    "bleak" and they will be  "unduly"  so  if  they  a  "inordinately"  or
    "excessively" harsh taking into account all of the circumstances of the
    individual".

18.  In contrast, all that the First-tier Tribunal Judge said  in  paragraph
    31 of her decision was that "there are four  children  with  their  own
    individual difficulties, some greater than others,  but  the  composite
    effect of child E  and  J  is  more  than  any  'normal'  impact  which
    deportation may have".

19.  As a consequence, I find that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clarke  did
    make material errors of law in her decision and reasons.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Clarke.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 13 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


