
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03522/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 3 October 2018                   |On 19 October 2018                       |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr Kemo Jallow
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S A Salam, Salam & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Cohen  in  which  he
    allowed the  appeal  of  the  Claimant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse his application for leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom.


 2. The application under appeal was  refused  on  7  February  2017.   The
    Claimant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    appeal came before Judge Cohen on 24 April  2018  and  was  allowed  on
    human rights grounds. The Secretary of State applied for permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The application was  granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 14 August 2018 in the following terms

       I am satisfied  that  there  are  arguable  errors  of  law  in  the
       decision. The Judge allowed the appeal under EX1  but  accepted  the
       Appellant had used  deception.  He  did  not  consider  suitability.
       Further he failed to make any findings on  the  Appellant's  claimed
       relationship with his partner. He also failed  to  consider  whether
       alternative treatment for the Appellant's HIV would be available  in
       the Gambia.




Background


 3. The history of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Claimant  (the
    Appellant in the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal)  is  a  citizen  of
    Gambia born on 16 July 1965. He claims to have arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in December 1998 with a visitor's visa valid for 6  months.  He
    remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully and on 14 May 2007  attempted
    to claim indefinite leave to remain using forged  papers.  Having  been
    arrested as an overstayer the Appellant claimed asylum. His  claim  was
    refused. Thereafter applications were  made  for  leave  to  remain  on
    family and private  life  grounds  and  these  applications  were  also
    refused. The application now under appeal was made on 7 December 2016.


 4. The basis of the  refusal  was,  essentially,  two-fold.  Firstly,  the
    Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the  Claimant   had   submitted
    fraudulent documents in connection with a previous application and  had
    an outstanding debt to  the  NHS  and  therefore  failed  to  meet  the
    suitability  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Secondly   the
    Secretary of State considered that the Claimant had failed to show that
    his relationship with his claimed British citizen partner  was  genuine
    and  subsisting  and  therefore  failed   to   meet   the   eligibility
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  Secretary   of   State
    considered  exceptional  circumstances  outside  the   terms   of   the
    Immigration Rules but considered that the Claimant had not  shown  that
    medical treatment for his health conditions would not be  available  to
    him in Gambia.


 5. The appeal came before Judge Cohen and was  allowed.  The  Judge  found
    firstly  that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  preventing   the
    Claimant and his wife from enjoying family life together in Gambia  and
    therefore that the Appellant met the requirements of  paragraph  EX  of
    Appendix FM and secondly  that  in  view  of  the  ill  health  of  the
    Appellant and his wife there were exceptional circumstances  and  as  a
    result that the appeal should succeed on Article 8 grounds.










Submissions


 6. At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow appeared on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State and Mr Salam represented the Claimant. No rule 24 response was
    filed.


 7. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds. It was quite clear that the Judge  had
    purported to allow the appeal under paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM  even
    though the Appellant did not meet the suitability requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. He made no findings on the relationship between  the
    Appellant and his wife even though this was clearly in dispute. He  did
    not consider the availability  of  suitable  alternative  treatment  in
    Gambia. These were clear errors of law and  the  appeal  needed  to  be
    dealt with again by the First-tier Tribunal.


 8. For the Claimant Mr Salam said that  the  suitability  requirements  of
    paragraph S-LTR of Appendix FM recognised three  different  classes  of
    suitability. The first refers to "will be refused",  the  second  "will
    normally be refused" and the third "may be refused". The Claimant  came
    within the third category so refusal under the suitability requirements
    was not mandatory.  In any event the Judge had allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds. He found at paragraph 9 that the Claimant and his
    wife  had  a  strong  relationship.  The  Claimant's  bundle  contained
    evidence of their relationship by way of  a  marriage  certificate  and
    other documents showing cohabitation since 2007.  The  Judge  satisfied
    himself that treatment would not be available in Gambia.


 9. I said that I was satisfied that the Judge had materially erred in  law
    and I gave an extempore decision  allowing  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal and remitting the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

10. I am satisfied that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains
    material errors of law.  In particular I am satisfied that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, when allowing the appeal on human rights  grounds,
    because he was satisfied that the Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph EX1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules,  overlooked  the
    fact that the Claimant failed to meet the suitability  requirements  of
    paragraph S-LTR 4.2.  Indeed, the Judge finds, at paragraph 18 that the
    Appellant does not meet  the  suitability  requirements.  Paragraph  EX
    contains exceptions to eligibility requirements but not to  suitability
    requirements. Mr Salam's submission that the Claimant fell into a  "may
    be refused" category rather than a "will  be  refused"  category  given
    that the Judge made the finding that the  Claimant  did  not  meet  the
    suitability requirements cannot be sustained.

11. I am also satisfied that the Judge erred when he allowed the appeal  on
    human rights grounds  on  the  basis  of  the  difficulties  which  the
    Claimant's partner would face if she had to  live  in  Gambia.   It  is
    clear that the relationship between the Claimant and  his  partner  was
    not accepted by the Secretary of State.  This is  a  matter  which  the
    Judge does not deal with at all in his decision.  He makes the decision
    as if the relationship was accepted.  He refers to the relationship  in
    accordance with the Claimant's witness  statement.   He  overlooks  the
    fact that there was no witness statement from the  Claimant's  partner.
    He overlooks the fact that the Claimant's partner was not in attendance
    in court.  If it was implicit in his decision that he  made  a  finding
    that the relationship between the Claimant and his wife was genuine and
    subsisting then he still erred in law because he  failed  to  give  any
    reasons whatsoever for reaching such a decision, whether  expressed  or
    implicit.

12. I also find that the Judge erred in law by deciding that treatment  for
    the Appellant's condition was not available in Gambia when there was no
    expert evidence of any kind on the Appellant's behalf to show the  lack
    of availability of a suitable alternative treatment for  his  condition
    in the Gambia.

13. So, for all those reasons I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is unsafe, and the appeal of the Secretary of  State  is
    allowed.  I agree with Mr Tarlow that this is  a  matter  which  should
    properly be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing  afresh
    because it is important that, from the Claimant's  point  of  view  and
    from the Secretary of State's point of  view,  that  the  situation  is
    clear and if the matter goes back to the First-tier Tribunal then  full
    evidence can be put forward if appropriate from  the  Claimant's  wife,
    from medical experts and of course whatever  other  evidence  that  the
    Claimant and the representatives think appropriate.

14. No anonymity direction is made.




Summary of decision

15. The appeal of the Secretary of  State  is  allowed.  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit this matter to the First-
    tier Tribunal to be reheard with no findings preserved.



Signed                                  Date: 16 October 2018
[pic]

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

