
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03072/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 March 2019                              |On 28 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr Uddin


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant as they respectively appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on 25 May 1973 and is a  male  citizen
    of Gambia. The appeal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 15 November 2017 to refuse his human rights claim. The First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Kelly) which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  27  June
    2018, allowed the appeal on human rights grounds (Article  3  ECHR  and
    Article 8). The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in or about July  1996.  On  4
    September 1998, the appellant was made the subject of a hospital  order
    under section 37 of the Mental Health Act 1983, having  been  convicted
    of the offence of wounding. He made an asylum claim which is refused in
    June 2000. On 17 December 2000, the appellant was  granted  exceptional
    leave to remain for a period of three years.  Upon  conviction  of  the
    offence of possessing a bladed article in a public place, the appellant
    was sentenced to a period of 12 months community  rehabilitation  order
    in September 2002. Upon his  application,  the  appellant  was  granted
    further leave to remain until 12 October 2005, apparently on the  basis
    of his poor mental health. A further application was refused in October
    2009  because  the  Secretary  of  State,  whilst  accepting  that  the
    appellant suffers from  a  schizoaffective  disorder,  considered  that
    there was suitable treatment available in  Gambia.  An  appeal  against
    that decision was allowed in the First-tier Tribunal in  October  2009;
    by that date the  appellant  had  developed  a  relationship  with  his
    current partner are RS, a British citizen and mother  of  the  couple's
    children (now ten in number). An appeal was allowed on Article  8  ECHR
    grounds, the judge having found that the appellant's 'mental well-being
    is an important aspect of his private life.'

 3. Following a further grant of discretionary leave  consequent  upon  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  the  appellant  failed  thereafter  to
    regularise his status. On 18 November 2016, he was served with a notice
    of his liability to be detained and removed as an overstayer. On 31 May
    2017, the appellant was arrested and charged with  common  assault  and
    threatening  behaviour;  he  had  threatened  to  stab  a  woman  in  a
    supermarket and burn down the building. Having been detained,  he  was,
    in July 2017, moved to HMP Leicester having been deemed 'unsuitable for
    detention  centre  conditions.'  He  was  sentenced  to   a   term   of
    imprisonment of 28 days for contempt of court on 24 July  2017.  On  18
    September 2017, he was sentenced to imprisonment  for  six  months  for
    common assault and threatening behaviour. (see above). In October  2017
    (the day on which he was due  to  be  released  from  his  sentence  of
    imprisonment) the appellant was transferred to Wathwood Hospital due to
    a serious deterioration in his mental health.  I  understand  that  the
    appellant has now left the hospital and is complying with his regime of
    medication.  He  and  his  partner  attended  the  Upper  Tribunal   at
    Birmingham on 22 March 2019.

    Article 3 ECHR

 4. Judge Kelly allowed the human rights  appeal  on  both  Article  3  and
    Article 8 ECHR grounds. Mr  Mills,  who  appeared  for  the  respondent
    before the Upper Tribunal, accepted that this was not a medical case as
    in N (2005) UKHL 31; it was not pleaded that Article 3  ECHR  would  be
    breached because the appellant would die or be subjected to  Article  3
    ECHR only as a result of a deterioration of his  medical  condition  in
    Gambia. Insofar as the  grounds  of  appeal  suggested  otherwise,  the
    grounds were not accurate. Rather, the judge had  found  that,  if  the
    appellant returned to Gambia and failed to follow an appropriate course
    of medication, he would suffer from severe  psychotic  episodes  and  a
    collapse in his mental health. That collapse, in turn,  was  likely  to
    lead to the appellant being detained in a  medical  facility  where  he
    would be chained subjected to ill-treatment by others.  The  judge  was
    satisfied that the  anti-psychotic  drug  the  appellant  is  currently
    prescribed  is  not  available  in  Gambia  although  alternatives  are
    available. The judge relied upon the expert evidence  of  the  treating
    psychiatrist, Dr Bloye, who stated that  one  of  the  drugs  which  is
    available (Chlozopine) would need  to  be  administered  by  registered
    psychiatrist. The other drug (Olanzapine) the  judge  found,  would  be
    available  to  the  appellant  and  could  be  prescribed  by   doctors
    practising in Gambia. At [45], the judge wrote:

         "The evidence in the Gambia Mental Health Report 2012 is  based  on
         432 responses to a survey conducted by the mental health leadership
         and advocacy programme of West Africa. 75% of those  who  responded
         believe that mental health can be associated with evil spirits. The
         report notes that the Gambia still retains the outdated Lunatic Act
         1917 which is no longer fit for purpose.  86%  of  the  respondents
         stated that patients with mental health problems were  chained  up.
         This was confirmed by the two sets of traditional healers in Busura
         and Jappineh who said the patients are chained  or  beaten  because
         they are uncooperative and it is necessary to calm them  down.  The
         mother of one patient arrange her son to be  remanded  into  prison
         'because it comfortably absconds from the psychiatric hospital  any
         time he has admitted there.' I find  that  this  evidence  supports
         {the appellant's counsel's] submission that there is  a  real  risk
         the appellant would be subjected to cruel,  inhuman  order  grading
         treatment on return to the Gambia."

 5. Mr Mills submitted that the judge's analysis is flawed because  he  has
    failed to take proper account of the support which the appellant  would
    be likely to receive from family  members  living  in  the  Gambia.  He
    accepted that, if the appellant's mental health did collapse and family
    members could not prevent him being admitted to an institution such  as
    described in [4] above, then there was a real risk  that  he  would  be
    treated in the manner which would breach Article 3  ECHR.  However,  he
    submitted that it was not reasonably likely that the appellant's mental
    health would collapse given family  support  and  the  availability  of
    appropriate medication.

 6. Judge Kelly has set out the evidence and his observations at  [45]  but
    has then proceeded to consider the  appellant's  appeal  under  section
    117C of the 2002 Act and Article 8. Only at [59] does he return to  the
    question of Article 3 ECHR risk, concluding that 'given my findings  at
    paragraph 45 (above) I also hold that the appellant's deportation would
    be contrary to the obligations of the UK under Article 3 ECHR.'

 7.  The  question  remains,  therefore,  whether   the   availability   of
    appropriate medication and the support of family members in the  Gambia
    would be sufficient to ensure that the appellant would  not  become  so
    unwell that he would suffer ill treatment  in  an  abusive  asylum.  In
    considering that question, I note  that  there  exists  a  very  strong
    correlation between the appellant's past failures/refusal to follow his
    regime of medication  and  his  lapsing  into  psychotic  and  criminal
    behaviour.

 8. I agree that the judge has not made findings in terms as to whether the
    family in Gambia would be able or willing  to  ensure  the  appellant's
    compliance with his medication regime. At [46], the  judge  notes  that
    the appellant's father, a former senior police officer  and  now  local
    chief, has remarried and lives in  retirement.  The  appellant  himself
    last  travelled  to  Gambia  in  2012  in  order  to  visit  his  dying
    grandmother. The appellant has a sister who lives  in  the  Gambia  and
    another sister who lives in Leeds. It would have been  helpful  if  the
    judge had made specific findings as to whether he believed the  Gambian
    family would  offer  sufficient  support  to  the  appellant.  However,
    earlier in the decision at [43], whilst discussing  the  psychiatrist's
    evidence, the judge recorded  that  there  was  no  'infrastructure  of
    community  mental  care  or  any  trained  psychiatrists  operating  in
    [Gambia].' He found that there would be 'very high risk of  relapse  on
    return due to the stress and  dislocation  associated  with  separation
    from his family and adjusting to the change without  stable  social  or
    medical support.' It is true to say that the judge is here  summarising
    the psychiatrist's evidence and that in the subsequent paragraph, where
    he seeks to resolve conflicts in the  evidence,  he  deals  exclusively
    with the availability of drugs. However, it clearly must  be  the  case
    given his conclusion at [59], that the judge did not consider that  the
    level of family support in Gambia would  be  adequate  to  overcome  or
    manage the negative effects of dislocation and stress. That plainly was
    a finding available to the judge on the evidence and the  Secretary  of
    State's challenge amounts to little more than a disagreement with  that
    finding. It is certainly not the  case  that  the  evidence  about  the
    family in Gambia compels an opposite conclusion. It  follows  that  the
    judge was right to allow the appeal on Article 3 ECHR grounds.

    Article 8 ECHR

 9. In  the  circumstances,  I  shall  deal  relatively  briefly  with  the
    challenge of the Secretary of State to the judge's conclusion that  the
    appeal should be allowed also on Article 8 grounds.  I  agree  with  Mr
    Mills that the judge's findings at [53] are difficult to reconcile with
    the recent decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) 2018 UKSC  53.
    I also find troubling the judge's findings at  [52].  The  judge  notes
    that the appellant currently has contact with his children by telephone
    and Skype. However, as he notes, 'social services have only  sanctioned
    these arrangements on the basis that there is always  a  mental  health
    worker standing nearby [presumably, near the  appellant]  to  intervene
    should the appellant begin acting abnormally during contact.' The judge
    observed that that  this  safeguard  would  not  be  available  if  the
    appellant were exercising contact by telephone or Skype from Gambia. He
    also states that the appellant's partner could, in theory, take some or
    all the children to Gambia for them to exercise direct and unsupervised
    contact with the appellant. The  judge  finds  that  neither  of  these
    arrangements would currently be in the best interests of the  children.
    I raised with the that advocates my concern that  the  judge  does  not
    appear to have considered, first, the possibility that the  appellant's
    partner could allow the appellant direct and unsupervised contact  here
    in the United Kingdom and, secondly, that there  would  be  nothing  to
    prevent a mental health worker supervising  Skype  or  telephone  calls
    whilst the children are in the United  Kingdom  and  the  appellant  in
    Gambia. The judge appears to identify difficulties  where  none  exist.
    Consequently, his analysis of the children's best interests is arguably
    undermined.

10. I also agree with Mr  Mills  that  the  judge  wrongly  criticises  the
    Secretary of State for an inconsistency of approach to the  appellant's
    underlying  mental  illness  at  [57].  The  judge  observes  that  the
    appellant had been granted leave to remain on a number of occasions  on
    account of his illness but now the Secretary of State seeks  to  remove
    the appellant. Mr Mills is right, in my opinion, to point out that,  on
    each expiry of leave, the Secretary of State has taken  a  view  as  to
    whether it was appropriate to grant further  leave.  Quite  reasonably,
    the Secretary of State considered the appellant's circumstances  as  at
    the date of each decision. The decision which  is  a  subject  of  this
    appeal was taken following a recent and serious  deterioration  in  the
    appellant's mental health and conduct.

11. The concerns which I have set out above regarding Article 8 are perhaps
    sufficient to cast doubt  upon  that  part  of  the  judge's  analysis.
    However, in the light of my findings regarding Article 3 ECHR,  nothing
    would be achieved by a re-examination of  Article  8.  Consequently,  I
    dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

12. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 22 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
