
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03600/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 May 2021                     |On 16 June 2021                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                          RAHMAN MOHAMMAD YEAMINOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Biggs, Counsel instructed by Hubers Law Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.  This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  to  which  both   parties   have
      consented. The form of remote hearing was video by  Microsoft  Teams
      (V). A face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
      practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.  I
      did not experience any difficulties, and neither party  expressed  any
      concern, with the process.

   2. The appellant is appealing against a decision of Judge of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Chohan  ("the  judge")  dated  15  September  2020
      dismissing his human rights appeal.

Background

   3. On 23 January 2020 the respondent refused the appellant's  application
      for leave to remain ("the respondent's  decision").  The  respondent's
      decision is in two  parts.  The  first  part  considered  whether  the
      appellant was entitled to Indefinite Leave  to  Remain  ("ILR")  under
      paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules (10  years  continuous  lawful
      residence). The respondent's decision states that  the  appellant  had
      only been lawfully in the UK between 6 September  2009  and  11  April
      2016 and therefore the conditions of 276B were  not  met.  The  second
      part of the respondent's decision, under the heading  "repeat  claim",
      stated that the appellant's human rights  and  protection  submissions
      had previously been considered (in a decision made on 1 July 2019) and
      therefore did not amount to a fresh claim under paragraph 353  of  the
      Immigration Rules. At the end  of  the  respondent's  decision  it  is
      stated that the appellant did not have a right of appeal.

   4. On 29 February 2020 the appellant lodged an appeal with the First-tier
      Tribunal. No grounds were included.

   5. On 16 March 2020 the First-tier Tribunal sent the  appellant  and  his
      representatives a notification with the heading request for grounds of
      appeal ("the First-tier Tribunal's notice"). The First-tier Tribunal's
      notice states:

           "The Tribunal has received notice of  the  above  appeal.  Under
           rule  19  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014, the  appellant,  or
           their appointed representative, must  set  out  the  grounds  of
           appeal.

           The appeal has been received without any  specific  grounds  for
           appeal and with a statement that grounds to appeal will follow.

           You are required  to  supply  the  Tribunal  with  complete  and
           specific grounds of appeal, together with supporting reasons  by
           23 March, 2020.

           Failure to comply with this notice  may  result  in  the  appeal
           being dismissed without a hearing under the provisions  of  rule
           25(1)(e)."

   6.  On  18  March  2020  the  appellant's  representatives  requested  an
      extension to file the grounds of appeal. The request was  made  in  an
      email where it was stated that  "a  short  extension"  was  requested.
      There is no record on the Tribunal file that a decision in respect  of
      the requested extension was made.

   7. On 15 September 2020 the appeal came before the  judge.  After  noting
      that the appellant had still not provided the grounds of  appeal,  the
      judge stated:

           "I am satisfied, pursuant to  rule  25(1)(e)  of  the  Procedure
           Rules 2014, that I may proceed  to  consider  the  appeal  as  a
           substantive matter without a  hearing.  The  appellant  has  had
           ample time and opportunity to submit grounds of  appeal.  Having
           considered the respondent's decision and reasons for refusal,  I
           am satisfied that the respondent has given  cogent  reasons  for
           refusing the appellant's application and in the absence  of  any
           challenge to the respondent's decision  (no  grounds  of  appeal
           being set out), this appeal must be dismissed".

Grounds of Appeal

   8. The appellant has advanced three grounds of appeal:

     a. First, it was procedurally unfair to dismiss the appeal under  rule
        25(1)(e)  of   the   Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 ("the Procedure Rules")
        without giving the appellant notice and a chance to explain why  he
        failed to comply with rule 19.

     b. Second, the judge did not  correctly  (or  adequately)  apply  rule
        25(1)(e).

     c. Third, the judge failed  to  adequately  consider  article  8  ECHR
        and/or give adequate reasons for his decision under article 8.

Relevant Procedure Rules

   9. Rule 19 of the Procedure Rules provides:

           "(1)  An appellant must start proceedings by providing a notice
           of appeal to the Tribunal.

           ...

           (4)   The notice of appeal must-

                 (a)   set out the grounds of appeal"

  10. Rule 25(1)(e) of the Procedure Rules provides that:

           "25 - (1) The Tribunal must  hold  a  hearing  before  making  a
           decision which disposes of proceedings except where -

                 .....

                 (e)   a party has failed to  comply  with  a  provision  of
                 these Rules, a practice direction or a  direction  and  the
                 Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  in  all  the  circumstances,
                 including the extent of the failure and any reasons for it,
                 it  is  appropriate  to  determine  the  appeal  without  a
                 hearing.

Procedural unfairness in applying rule 25(1)(e)

  11. In the grounds of appeal Mr Biggs  argues  that  it  was  procedurally
      unfair to decide the appeal under rule 25(1)(e) without  notice  being
      given to the appellant and without him being given an  opportunity  to
      respond to the possibility that the appeal would be decided without  a
      hearing.

  12. It was immediately apparent from a review of  the  grounds  of  appeal
      that Mr Biggs  had  not  seen  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  notice.  I
      therefore drew it to his attention at the start  of  the  hearing.  Mr
      Biggs acknowledged that this weakened, to some extent, his  procedural
      unfairness  argument,  but  maintained  that  there  was   nonetheless
      procedural unfairness because the appellant had  not  been  given  the
      chance to explain the relevant circumstances and the reasons  for  the
      failure to submit any grounds.

  13. Ms  Everett  submitted  that  the  appellant's  procedural  unfairness
      argument is undermined by the fact that the appellant was  clearly  on
      notice that if he  failed  to  submit  grounds  his  appeal  might  be
      determined without a hearing.

  14. In this case, rule 25(1)(e) was applied following a breach of rule 19.
      There is nothing in rule 19 stating that a consequence of  its  breach
      is that a party will  be  deprived  of  a  hearing  pursuant  to  rule
      25(1)(e). Therefore, having regard in particular to the importance  of
      oral hearings in this jurisdiction (see Joint Council for the  Welfare
      of Immigrants v The President of the Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  And
      Asylum Chamber) [2020]  EWHC  3103  (Admin)),  I  would  have  had  no
      hesitation in finding that there had been procedural unfairness if the
      appellant had been denied a hearing pursuant to rule 25(1)(e)  without
      first being given an opportunity to remedy the breach of rule  19  and
      warned that rule 25(1)(e) might be applied if he did not do so.

  15. However, the appellant (by way of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  notice)
      was, in clear and unambiguous terms, given an  opportunity  to  remedy
      the breach and put on notice that rule 25(1)(e) might be applied if he
      did not. Mr Biggs argued that the appellant was not given  the  chance
      to explain why he was unable to comply with rule 19 but that  in  fact
      is what the First-tier Tribunal's notice did. In these  circumstances,
      no procedural unfairness arises. To impose on the First-tier  Tribunal
      a requirement to give a second opportunity to the appellant to explain
      the reasons for his breach  would,  in  my  view,  be  undermining  of
      procedural rigour, the importance of which in  public  law  litigation
      has been emphasised by the Court of Appeal (see, for example, Singh LJ
      in paragraphs 67-69 of Talpada,  R  (On  the  Application  Of)  v  The
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 841).

Incorrect application of rule 25(1)(e)

  16. Mr Biggs submitted that judge erred by failing to  consider  "all  the
      circumstances" relating to the failure to comply with the rule 19,  as
      is required by rule 25(1)(e), as he merely stated that  the  appellant
      had ample time and opportunity to submit grounds of appeal.  Mr  Biggs
      argued that this was legally insufficient. He maintained that  it  was
      necessary  under  rule  25(1)(e)  for  the  judge  to   consider   the
      appellant's reasons for the breach, which the judge did not do because
      the appellant had not submitted any reasons by the time  the  decision
      was made.

  17. I do not consider there to be any merit to this ground. Rule  25(1)(e)
      requires consideration to be given to "any reasons" given by a  party.
      If a party does  not  submit  any  reasons,  despite  being  given  an
      opportunity to do so, there are no reasons to be  considered  and  the
      judge cannot be said to have erred by not considering the  appellant's
      reasons.

  18. The judge was required to  consider  "all  the  circumstances".  These
      were: (a) the appellant breached rule 19; (b) the appellant was  given
      an opportunity to remedy the breach  and  warned  that  rule  25(1)(e)
      might be applied if he did not; and (c) the appellant did  not  remedy
      the breach (or give an explanation) despite the warning.  Given  these
      circumstances, it was open to the judge to reach the view that because
      the appellant had had "ample time and opportunity" to comply with rule
      19 but had not done so it was  appropriate  to  determine  the  appeal
      without a hearing.

Failure to adequately consider article 8 ECHR

  19. The only reason the judge gave for dismissing the appeal was that  the
      respondent  gave  "cogent  reasons  for   refusing   the   appellant's
      application".  Mr  Biggs  argued  that  this  was   insufficient   and
      inadequate, as the judge was required to determine for himself whether
      the respondent's decision was unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human
      Rights Act  1998  (ie  breached  article  8  ECHR),  not  whether  the
      respondent's  reasoning  was  adequate:   see  section  84(2)  of  the
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,

  20. I do not accept that the judge erred because although he did not state
      explicitly that he was satisfied the  appellant's  removal  would  not
      violate article 8 ECHR it is tolerably clear  that  this  is  what  in
      substance he found, by  effectively  adopting  the  reasoning  of  the
      respondent.

  21. It is not necessarily erroneous for a judge to adopt the reasoning  of
      the respondent. See  Gheisari  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2004] EWCA Civ 1854, where Sedley LJ stated:

           "I have no difficulty in accepting that where  the  Home  Office
           refusal letter  sets  out  coherent  reasons  for  rejecting  an
           account and the adjudicator having independently considered  the
           question agrees with them, it is permissible  for  him  or  her,
           having set them out, simply to  say  so.  The  Home  Secretary's
           reasons then become the adjudicator's by express  adoption.  But
           if they turn out to be inadequate,  so  will  the  adjudicator's
           decision be."

  22. I am satisfied that  in  this  case  adopting  the  reasoning  of  the
      respondent was  adequate  because  the  appellant  did  not  made  any
      arguments challenging  the  respondent's  reasons  and  there  was  no
      evidence or information before the judge that would support a  finding
      that the appellant's removal would violate article 8 ECHR.





Materiality

  23. If I am wrong in respect of any  or  all  of  the  grounds  considered
      above, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  still  stand
      because any error would not be material.

  24. I pause to note that one reason it could be said that any error  would
      not be material is that the judge did not have jurisdiction.  However,
      I did not hear argument on this issue and  I  have  not  decided  this
      point because it is not necessary for me to do so in the light  of  my
      findings above and the materiality points discussed below.

  25. The reason any error would not be material is that  the  argument  the
      appellant says he would have advanced at a hearing, had the appeal not
      been decided under rule 25(1)(e), had no prospect of succeeding.

  26. The appellant's argument is the following: his leave to remain in  the
      UK as a student ended on 11 April 2016. On 8 April 2016 he applied for
      a residence card under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006.  This
      application was refused and he was left with no lawful basis to be  in
      the  UK.  If,  instead  of  making  an  application  under   the   EEA
      Regulations, the appellant had applied for leave to remain, his  leave
      would have been extended under section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971
      and his application might have succeeded, leading,  ultimately,  to  a
      successful claim for ILR under paragraph 276B after he had accrued ten
      years' of lawful residence. Reliance is placed on Mansur  (immigration
      adviser's failings: Article 8) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 00274 (IAC).

  27. Mansur was a case in which advisors had "blatantly  failed  to  follow
      the appellant's specific instructions" and where there  was  a  "clear
      and categorical" finding by the OISC criticising the  conduct  of  the
      firm. At paragraph 32 of Mansur, the Upper Tribunal stated:

           "The position is far removed from that which we  frequently  see
           in this jurisdiction, where legal advisers are belatedly  blamed
           but where there has been no admission of guilt and no finding of
           culpability by a relevant professional regulator".

  28. The headnote to Mansur states:

           "(3) It will be only in a rare case that an  adviser's  failings
           will constitute such a reason. The weight that  would  otherwise
           need to be given to that interest is  not  to  be  reduced  just
           because there happen to be immigration advisers who  offer  poor
           advice and other services. Consequently, a person who takes such
           advice will normally have to live with the consequences.

           (4) A blatant failure by an immigration adviser  to  follow  P's
           instructions, as found by the relevant  professional  regulator,
           which led directly to P's application for  leave  being  invalid
           when it would otherwise have been likely to have  been  granted,
           can, however, amount to such a rare case."

  29. The facts of this case are  far  removed  from  Mansur.  There  is  no
      finding by a regulator/ombudsman that is critical  of  the  advice  to
      apply for a residence card in 2016.  The  appellant  has  submitted  a
      legal ombudsman decision, but this relates to a different firm  and  a
      different issue. The grounds of appeal make the bare assertion that it
      was wrong for the appellant to be advised to  apply  for  a  residence
      card in 2016  but  do  not  explain  why,  based  on  the  information
      available to the  advisers  at  that  time,  it  is  believed  it  was
      incorrect advice. The grounds also make the bare  assertion  that  the
      appellant might have succeeded in an application for leave  to  remain
      but there is no explanation of the basis it is believed he would  have
      been granted leave (it is not even  said  what  leave  he  would  have
      applied for). Nor is it explained why it is believed he would have had
      the benefit of leave under section 3C for several years.

  30. This case has nothing in common with Mansur and the appellant has not,
      on any legitimate view, put forward an arguable case that  because  of
      the incompetence of previous representatives he should be  treated  as
      if he had accrued 10 years of lawful leave. Accordingly, any error  by
      the judge was not material.



Decision

  31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      a material error of law and stands.

|                                  |                                  |
|Signed                            |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|D. Sheridan                       |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan     |Dated: 4 May 2021                 |

