
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03106/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2020                           |On 12 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                 TAOFEEK [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a Nigerian national born on 9  January  1975,  raises  a
    challenge to the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe promulgated
    on 17 June 2019.


2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Swaney
    on 16 October 2019.  In material part the grant of permission to appeal
    is in these terms:

     "The Appellant applied for further discretionary  leave  to  remain  as
         evidenced by the application form  contained  in  the  Respondent's
         bundle.  He completed form FLR(DL) which was the  appropriate  form
         for him to complete, as he was first granted discretionary leave to
         remain on 26  October  2011.   The  application  form  specifically
         states that the application will  be  considered  pursuant  to  the
         published Asylum Policy Instruction on Discretionary  Leave.   That
         instruction contains transitional provisions which state  that  the
         policy will continue to apply through to settlement in cases  where
         a grant of  discretionary  leave  was  made  before  9  July  2012.
         Appendix FM does not apply in such cases.

     The failure to consider the correct policy amounts  to  a  misdirection
         of law and it is material because the Appellant's appeal  has  been
         determined in relation to requirements and criteria  that  are  not
         applicable".


3.   Consequent to the grant of permission to appeal,  on  23  October  2019
    the Respondent filed a Rule 24  response  in  material  part  in  these
    terms:

     "The  Respondent  does  not  oppose  the  Appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal because the Judge had failed to have regard to
         the Respondent's discretionary leave policy (version 7) - dated  18
         August 2015.  The Respondent invites  the  Tribunal  to  remit  the
         matter afresh for a de novo hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
         as findings of fact will need to be made afresh".

    Mrs Aboni confirmed that that was the position of the Respondent today.




4.   In those circumstances, and essentially for the reasons given by  Judge
    Swaney, I am content to find error of law, set aside  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe, and direct that  the  decision  in  the
    appeal now be remade before the First-tier Tribunal by any Judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe.


5.   Given the nature of the concession by the Respondent it is  unnecessary
    for  me  to  rehearse  herein  in  any  great  detail  the  facts   and
    circumstances that form the background to this  case.   I  do  comment,
    however,  that  the  problem  in  respect  of  the  erroneous  approach
    identified above is not limited  to  the  approach  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Respondent's 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') of 21
    January 2019 also fails to have regard to the Respondent's own  policy;
    the Respondent's decision-maker evaluated the  Appellant's  application
    by reference, in the first instance, to the Immigration  Rules  and  in
    particular Appendix FM.  As such, the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State is in itself in error of law.


6.   Not so very long ago this Tribunal had jurisdiction to allow an  appeal
    on such  a  basis,  and  in  effect  to  determine  that  the  original
    application remained outstanding before  the  Secretary  of  State  and
    required to be decided in accordance with the law.  The current  appeal
    regime affords me of no such power.  In the circumstances, as I say the
    appeal must be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal.

7.   It will now be a matter for the  Respondent  to  consider  whether,  in
    light of the circumstances described, the decision of 21  January  2019
    should be withdrawn with a view to the  Respondent  re-determining  the
    application in accordance  with  its  discretionary  leave  policy,  or
    alternatively to supplement the decision of 21 January 2019 by way of a
    further 'reasons' letter explaining why, if at all, the decision is  to
    be maintained notwithstanding consideration of the discretionary  leave
    policy. In the event that the matter comes back before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal without any such reconsideration by the Respondent, the First-
    tier Tribunal will in effect become the first  instance  decision-maker
    in respect of the discretionary leave policy and how that  impacts  the
    available 'Article 8' ground of appeal.


8.   There is one further matter  to  which  I  draw  attention.   It  is  a
    feature of the Appellant's case that he has relied upon a  relationship
    with a British citizen whose details are a matter of  record  on  file.
    He attended the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  without  his
    claimed partner, albeit that there were various  items  of  documentary
    evidence before the Tribunal that related to her.  When asked about her
    non-attendance he gave answers which suggested it had been a matter  of
    his choice not to have her attend in support of the hearing  (e.g.  see
    paragraph  12  of  the  Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal).   The
    Appellant will now be aware from the substance of the Decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that his partner's "absence weighs heavily  in  the
    balance" (paragraph 21).


9.   I also drew to the Appellant's attention that if his partner  were  not
    present at any further hearing of his appeal without good  reason  (and
    indeed without  there  being  supporting  evidence  of  any  such  good
    reason), it was a very real possibility that the next Judge would  draw
    an adverse inference from her absence as to  whether  the  relationship
    was genuine and subsisting.  The matter having again  been  brought  to
    the Appellant's attention, it is now a matter for him as to how he  may
    wish to conduct his appeal: but he can be in no doubt of - and has been
    alerted to - the importance of the attendance of his claimed partner to
    support any aspect of his case based on a claimed relationship.


Notice of Decision

10.  For the reasons given the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside for material error of law.


11.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe.


12.  No anonymity direction is made. (Although a  direction  was  previously
    made it is unclear to me why, and I can  see  no  basis  presently  for
    continuing it. In the event that facts and evidence in  the  appeal  in
    due course touch more directly on  the  circumstances  of  any  of  the
    children of the Appellant's  purported  partner,  particularly  in  the
    event that any such children are still minors, the issue of 'anonymity'
    can be re-visited.)



Signed:                                 Date: 8 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

