
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03932/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 November 2016                  |On 12 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr taimoor malik
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Plowright, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by  the  Secretary  of  State,  who  will  simply  be
    referred to as the respondent for the sake of continuity.   The  appeal
    is against a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge G A Black.   In
    that determination, promulgated on 6 July 2016, the judge  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to remove him  and
    to refuse leave to remain. The facts of the case are  set  out  therein
    and we need not repeat them at length. In essence the  appellant  is  a
    national of Pakistan who came to the UK on 23 January 2011  with  valid
    leave to remain as a student until 6 March 2012. He has remained  since
    without lawful leave but is now married to a British  citizen  who  has
    close family ties in the UK. She has no  meaningful  relationship  with
    her father, who lives in Pakistan. The couple have a child,  who  is  a
    British citizen. In terms of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, the judge
    found  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

2.   Permission was granted on the basis that the judge may  have  erred  by
    treating  Section  117B(6)  as  a  freestanding  provision  having   no
    correlation to the public interest considerations.  It was argued  that
    the judge focused on the approach in  Treebhawon  and  Others  (Section
    117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) and that the proper approach  is  that
    set out in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

3.   Before us Mr Armstrong submitted first of  all  that  the  approach  in
    Treebhawon should not be followed as the law had moved on, as reflected
    in MA (Pakistan). He referred to the case of R (on the  application  of
    Chen) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department   [2015]  UKUT  189
    (IAC) as authority for the view  that  there  was  no  reason  why  the
    appellant should not be made to go back to his home country to make  an
    application for leave to enter the UK from there.

4.   As the discussion developed, however,  he  was  asked  about  the  Home
    Office policy  at  paragraph  11.2.3  of  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction on Family Migration, dated August 2015, under reference  to
    the Family Life (as a Partner or  Parent)  and  Private  Life:  10-Year
    Routes.  Paragraph 11.2.3 of  that  asks  the  question  "Would  it  be
    unreasonable to expect a  British  Citizen  child  to  leave  the  UK?"
    Having considered that question and the case of MA and having  conceded
    that the judge was entitled to find that it would be  unreasonable  for
    the child who is now a British citizen to leave the  UK,  Mr  Armstrong
    made no further submissions.

5.   We are of the view that the concession to which  we  have  referred  is
    fatal to the respondent's case in the context of the policy and in  the
    context of MA.   We  do  not  consider  that  MA  completely  overturns
    Treebhawon but rather  explains  it.   In  effect  it  only  criticises
    Treebhawon effectively in relation to the question of the assessment of
    reasonableness or otherwise.  Once unreasonableness is established then
    Section 117B(6) comes into play.

6.   There being no public interest to require the removal of the  appellant
    in this case we are of the view that  the  respondent's  appeal  cannot
    succeed.  We therefore dismiss the respondent's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                       Date: 11 January 2017
