
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number HU/03500/2018
                                                               HU/03511/2018
                                                               HU/03516/2018
                                                               HU/03523/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision Promulgated
On 9th April 2019 On 23 May 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                            MR SALEEM JAVED et al
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr D Shrestha, Counsel, instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms S Chuna, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

   1. The appellants have been given permission to appeal to the Upper
      Tribunal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla.

   2. Application was made on 30 September 2017 for leave to remain on the
      basis of private life. This was refused by the respondent on 17
      January 2018.The appeals were heard at Taylor House on 3 January 2019
      and the appeals of the first two appellants dismissed in a decision
      promulgated on 9 January 2019. That decision is the subject matter of
      the present proceedings.

   3. The 1st appellant is married to the 2nd appellant. The 3rd and 4th
      appellants are their children, born respectively on 28 December 1994
      and 23 July 1993. All are nationals of Pakistan. The couple have 2
      other adult children in the United Kingdom who are not party to these
      proceedings but of whom, SS, is relevant to a claim of family life.

   4. The family arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 September 2006 on
      diplomatic visas, valid until 8 June 2011. Applications for further
      leave to remain were unsuccessful. On 25 October 2011 the 1st
      appellant was served with an IS151A Notice, indicating he was an over
      stayer, liable to administrative removal.

   5. The appeal against the refusal of further leave was dismissed by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Ruth on 2 February 2012. An appeal to the Upper
      Tribunal was unsuccessful.

   6. On 22 March 2013 a further application was made, which again was
      refused with no right of appeal. Judicial review proceedings were
      unsuccessful and enforcement notices were served.

   7. The appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla considered the
      appellants family life in relation to SS, the 1st and 2nd appellant's
      daughter. She had been granted leave to remain on 15 January 2018 on
      the basis of her private life and as stated was not a party to these
      proceedings. She was born on 17 September 1999.She continued to live
      with the family and was in education.

   8. It was argued that the 3rd named appellant satisfied the requirements
      of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(v): she was under the age of 25 and had
      resided in the United Kingdom for at least half her life.

   9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla did not find family life within the
      meaning of article 8 was engaged for the appellants in relation to SS.
      In the alternative, she could maintain contact with her family or
      return to Pakistan if she so wished.

  10. In relation to the 3rd appellant, the judge noted she was almost 12
      years of age when she arrived in the United Kingdom. By the time of
      hearing she was 24 years old and has spent just over 12 years in the
      United Kingdom. The judge accepted that she had spent at least half
      her life in the United Kingdom and so satisfied paragraph 276
      ADE(1)(v). The judge therefore allowed her appeal.

  11. The 4th appellant was born on 23 July 1993 and was over the age of 25.
      He came to the United Kingdom on 26 September 2006 at the age of 13.
      Therefore, he had not resided in the United Kingdom for at least 20
      years and did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(v).
      The judge noted that his leave had expired on 8 June 2011 and various
      appeals and applications thereafter had been unsuccessful.
      Consequently, the private life had developed whilst he was an over
      stayer.

  12. At paragraph 50 the judge noted that he was 17 years of age on 8 June
      2011 and concluded he could not be held responsible for the actions of
      his parents. The judge found he had an established private life,
      albeit not within the rules and his removal would be disproportionate.
      This meant that the appeals of the children, the third and fourth
      appellants, were allowed but not the parents.

The Upper Tribunal

  13. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson on the
      basis it was arguable the judge erred in concluding family life did
      not exist in relation to SS. Arguably, she had not formed an
      independent life and remained dependent upon her parents. Reaching her
      18th birthday was not a bright line for concluding dependency did not
      exist. It was arguable the judge erred in concluding, in the
      alternative, that the family life could continue through communication
      and contact. Permission was also granted on the other ground advanced,
      namely, a failure to consider the 1st and 2nd appellant unsuccessful
      applications for leave included technical shortcomings. An application
      for ILR was rejected in June 2011 as the fee had been declined. A
      further application was rejected on 11 July 2011 as it was unsigned.

  14. At hearing, Mr Shrestha submitted that the First-tier Tribunal judge
      erred in law by not finding the existence of family life in relation
      to the appellants and SS. He referred to the grant of permission where
      Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson who stated that family life within the
      meaning of article 8 came into existence when the child was born and
      if SS remained dependent upon her parents as she had not formed an
      independent life then such family life may continue. Upper Tribunal
      Judge Hanson stated that it was arguably irrational for the judge to
      conclude family life did not exist and referred to her continuing in
      education and to live with her parents which she had done since the
      age of 6.

  15.  The judge also said it was arguable that the alternative findings
      were irrational in concluding that any emotional dependency can be
      satisfied indirectly when this was not set out precisely. Mr Shrestha
      referred to the decision of Kugathas -v- SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and
      subsequent case law, notably, Ghising (family life- adults- Gurkha
      policy) where the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 56 said that the
      judgement in Ghising had been interpreted to restrictively in the
      past. He also provided me with a copy of the decision in Ria v ECO
      [2017] EWCA Civ 320 where the authorities were set out. In his
      submissions he indicated that SS's brother, NS, who is 10 years older
      had married a British national and was living in the United Kingdom.

  16. Ms Chuna opposed the appeal and suggested it mounted to no more than a
      disagreement with the outcome. The judge had indicated there were ties
      within the family based upon emotions, finances and the fact they all
      live together. However, the children were adults who had their own
      private life. Notably, the appeals of the 2 children were allowed on
      the basis of their private lives which was not at odds with the
      rejection of the existence of a family life within the meaning of
      article 8. Whilst the family live together and there were ties he did
      not go beyond the norm.

  17. Ms Chuna pointed out that in the appeals the children were in reality
      the sponsors of their parents. However, whilst the children had now
      been granted leave this was for a fixed period and therefore their
      status continue to be precarious. The judge found the 1st 2 appellants
      did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE and at paragraph 40
      set out the reasons. They had been here 12 years not the required 20
      years. The judge did not find very significant obstacles to their
      reintegration into Pakistan. They were fit and well and were educated
      and her family in Pakistan.

  18. At paragraph 41 the judge then went on to consider if there were any
      exceptional circumstances outside the rules. Judge referred to their
      precarious immigration status which would relevant to the public
      interest factors in section 117B. They had been here without leave
      since 8 June 2011.

  19. In summary, Ms Chuna submitted that the appeal was a disagreement with
      the judge's findings rather than a demonstration of an error of law. I
      was referred back to paragraph 36 onwards with the judge considered
      the question of family life between SS as an adult and her parents and
      the guidance given in Kugathas and the relevant case law cited. She
      submitted the fact that the parties lived together in the same
      household did not mean there was a dependency. I was referred to
      paragraph 38 and the judge was not simply deciding the appeal because
      SS was now considered an adult.

  20. In response, Mr Shrestha referred me to the facts of the decision in
      Ria, where the parties had been apart for 4 years and yet family life
      was still fun to exist. He said in the present case the family had
      lived together as a unit continuously. He said there were no contrary
      section 117 B factors.

Consideration.

  21. The principal argument advanced is that the First-tier judge
      materially erred in law in concluding family life within the meaning
      of article 8 did not exist between the first two appellants and their
      daughter, SS. She had lived with her parents all her life and continue
      to do so. She came to the United Kingdom after her 6th birthday. There
      is evidence from the 3rd appellant about a close bond she had with her
      sister. Whilst she spoke English and Urdu she could not read or write
      in Urdu. She continued in her studies and was financially dependent
      upon her parents.

  22. There is no legal or factual presumption as to the existence or
      absence of family life for the purposes of article 8. All depends upon
      the facts. The love and affection normally flowing between an adult
      and their parents or siblings will not of itself justify a finding of
      family life. Something more is required.

  23. At paragraph 36 onwards the judge refers to the decision in Kugathas
      and replicates paragraph 19, 24 and 25. In paragraph 38 judge refers
      to factors considered relevant. SS became 18 on 17 September 2017. The
      judge did not see evidence of any normal emotional dependency. The
      judge acknowledged that she recently became 18 but nevertheless was an
      adult.

  24. I do not find any legal error in the approach taken by the judge. An
      awareness of the jurisprudence was indicated. The judge stated the
      factors that were relevant. Referred to paragraphs 37 and 38 of the
      decision. It is possible a different judge may have gone to a
      different conclusion. However, that is not the issue.

  25. The judge posed the alternative, had family life been found. The
      existence of family life was not determinative but was the starting
      point in the Razgar sequential approach. Moving through the stages the
      issue would be the proportionality of the decision. The judge made the
      observation that financial support from parents could continue if they
      were in Pakistan. The judge considered emotional support and referred
      to moderate means of communication. The judge made the observation
      that she was now an adult and able to fend for herself. She had the
      option of returning to Pakistan to be with her parents. The judge set
      out the reasons why there would be no difficulty with her
      reintegration. I find these were legitimate observations and did not
      find an error of law demonstrated. It is also consistent with the
      judge's view that the 2nd and 3rd appeals were allowed on the basis of
      private life rather than family life.

  26. I do not see any merit in the ground that 2 of the applications made
      were unsuccessful on what could be considered technical grounds.
      Irrespective of this, the appellants have overstayed for some time.
      The judge had correctly factored in section 117 B in the decision.

  27. Ultimately, I am in agreement with Ms Chuna's opinion that the
      challenge is basically a disagreement with the outcome. As I have
      stated, a different judge could have arrived at a different
      conclusion. However, this does not mean there is any material error of
      law in the decision made by this judge.

Decision

No material error of law has been demonstrated in  the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal  Judge  Aujla.  Consequently,  that  decision  dismissing  the
appeals of the 1st 2 appellants shall stand.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.                 Date: 23 May 2019

