
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03622/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th March 2018                             |On 27th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       mr Gunjanbhai Prakashbhai patel
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant/Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by way
                           of Direct Public Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant is a citizen of India seeking to challenge the refusal  of
    entry clearance dated 16th July  2015  as  confirmed  by  a  subsequent
    administrative review.

2.   The hearing of the appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Malone
    on 30th March 2017.  The Judge found that the decision was defective in
    a number of respects.  The appeal was allowed for a proper decision  to
    be made.  The Secretary of State seeks to challenge  that  decision  on
    the basis that the Judge was in error in making the  findings  of  fact
    and law which were made.  Permission to argue the matter  was  granted.
    Accordingly the matter comes before me to determine the issues.

3.   By way of context the claimant entered the United Kingdom as a  student
    in 2009.  A further application to extend leave as a  student  made  in
    2010 resulted in leave being granted to 1st March 2014.

4.   On 20th February 2014 the claimant applied for further leave to  remain
    as a student.  No decision on that matter was made.  Indeed, subsequent
    to making that application the claimant made a second one in June  2014
    to remain as a spouse of a British citizen.   To  that  application  no
    decision was made.  On 30th July 2014 Immigration Officers attended the
    claimant's accommodation and informed him that he was to be removed  as
    an overstayer.  Seemingly his leave to remain as  a  student  had  been
    curtailed by a decision of 28th July 2012.  It was his case that he had
    never received that particular decision and therefore  was  unaware  of
    his leave having been curtailed.  He made his application  for  further
    leave on the understanding that he had existing  leave  and  that  that
    leave was lawfully continuing.  Nevertheless, it was considered that he
    would comply with his removal, thus he was removed to India on 28th May
    2015.

5.   On 26th May 2015 he had made an  application  for  entry  clearance  to
    settle in the United Kingdom as the spouse of a  British  national  and
    the decision in relation to that matter is the subject matter  of  this
    appeal.

6.   The first contention in the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  is  in
    connection with the use of the TOEIC certificate which is said to  have
    been falsely obtained.

7.   It is said in the decision that "you had  used  a  false  document  the
    TOEIC  certificate  mentioned  above  to  obtain  leave  to  remain  by
    deception".  Although the claimant agrees that such a  certificate  was
    obtained and used in the applications of 20th February  2014  and  June
    2014, neither had resulted in any grant of leave to remain and thus the
    statement as made on its face is inaccurate.

8.   From start to finish the claimant has insisted that he took that  test.
     Indeed,  he  submitted  with  his  applications  an  NARIC  qualifying
    certificate which serves the same purpose.

9.   Leave to bring the appeal before the Upper Tribunal was granted on  the
    application of the Secretary of State, that the  Judge  had  failed  to
    consider the jurisprudential nature of the evidence concerning the  ETS
    verification system and in particular decisions in Shehzad [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 615 and Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167.  It was said that the Judge had
    failed adequately to engage the evidence of Professor French and of the
    statistical analysis of such tests.

10.  What is accepted in the course of the hearing before me  by  Mr  Walker
    is firstly that the issue of the TOEIC certificate was raised  for  the
    first time in the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision.   It  had  not
    formed part of any previous decision so as to  alert  the  claimant  to
    that issue.  Secondly, that it amounted to  a  bald  assertion  in  the
    decision and  no  other  evidence  relating  to  that  certificate  was
    presented, or indeed relied upon.  Usually in such cases the  Secretary
    of State will cite and rely upon certain  generic  evidence,  including
    the evidence of Professor French, to show that a particular certificate
    taken on a particular day at a particular place was not valid.  None of
    that evidence was present in the  decision,  nor  indeed  was  it  ever
    served upon the claimant in the course of proceedings.  The position of
    the claimant, as I have indicated, was clearly stated in the grounds of
    appeal that he had actually undertaken the test, that he  had  no  need
    whatsoever to cheat.  Indeed, he had with  him  also  another  document
    which would  have  entitled  him  to  the  same  relief  as  the  TOEIC
    certificate.  No challenge was made to that and no evidence was served.

11.  The Judge noted at paragraph 28 of the decision:-

         "The ECO put forward no evidence in support of his contention  that
         the Appellant had submitted a false document with his  application,
         or with any earlier application, namely a TOEIC  certificate.   The
         Appellant's evidence was that it was a genuine certificate.  He sat
         and passed the exam.  He actually had no need to take the  exam  at
         all because he was NARIC qualified.  He was never notified that  it
         had been concluded that he had submitted a false  document  to  the
         Home Office, before it was raised in the ECO's Notice  of  Refusal.
         It was not mentioned by the enforcement officers  who  visited  the
         Appellant's property on 30 July 2014."

12.  Indeed, Mr Paramjorthy, who represents the claimant before me  and  who
    represented him at the hearing, said that  actually  matters  had  gone
    slightly further along that path than had been explicitly stated by the
    Judge.  That matter has been raised in the  Rule  24  response  to  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.  It was conceded expressly by  Mr  Graham,
    who then acted as the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  that  he  had
    nothing to support the submission that was made, no further evidence to
    present and nothing further to assist.  It is  in  those  circumstances
    that it is entirely understandable that in the absence of any  evidence
    that establishes falsity or even gives a prima facie case  of  falsity,
    that allegation cannot succeed.  I find that the  Judge  was  therefore
    entirely correct to  approach  the  matter  in  the  way  that  it  was
    approached.

13.  The second issue and one again raised in  the  decision  was  that  the
    claimant contrived in a significant way to frustrate the intentions  of
    the Immigration Rules by overstaying because of the fact that his leave
    was curtailed on 28th July 2012  and  that  he  was  informed  of  that
    matter.  Nevertheless he continued to make a series of applications for
    leave and indeed continued to work as if that leave had continued.  The
    position, so far as the claimant is concerned, was a  simple  one.   He
    maintained at the time when the Immigration Officers came to  his  home
    and since that time that he had no knowledge that his  leave  had  been
    curtailed.  He had received no papers in relation to  it  or  decision.
    Once again nothing was presented by the Secretary of State to show that
    indeed that decision had been served  upon  the  claimant.   It  was  a
    matter also the subject of challenge in the grounds of appeal and  thus
    the Secretary of State would have been aware of that issue well  before
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Judge,  having  heard
    the claimant, accepted the truth  of  what  he  had  to  say.   It  was
    perfectly open in those circumstances  for  the  Judge  to  accept  the
    credibility of  a  witness  appearing  in  front  of  him  and  to  act
    accordingly.

14.  Thus before ever embarking upon the merits of  the  application  itself
    the Entry Clearance Officer had produced two obstacles in  the  way  of
    that decision, namely the deception under the TOEIC certificate and the
    deception in relation to the immigration  conduct,  such  matters  were
    found by the Judge not to be established.   I  find  no  error  in  the
    approach taken by the Judge.

15.  There is perhaps a slight ambiguity in the decision that is set out  in
    paragraph 40 of the decision and there seems to  have  been  a  finding
    that the Entry Clearance Officer's decision  had  unlawfully  infringed
    the claimant and his  wife's  qualifying  protective  rights  to  enjoy
    family life together with their baby daughter in the United Kingdom.

16.   Mr Paramjorthy  has  clarified  the  matters.   It  looks  within  the
    context of paragraphs 40, 41 and 42 of the determination that the  case
    of Greenwood No. 2 was what  was  being  considered,  namely  that  the
    appeal was allowed on the basis of the  challenges  made  to  it  being
    successful and that it was for the Secretary of State  to  make  a  new
    decision in the circumstances of the findings that had been made.

17.  In practical terms therefore it will be for the claimant to present  to
    the Entry Clearance Officer without delay such matters  as  are  relied
    upon with an invitation that a fresh decision is made.  Hopefully  that
    will not be long delayed given the potential importance of family unity
    with a daughter.

Notice of Decision

18.  I find no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.   In  those
    circumstances the appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.   The  decision  stands,  namely  that  a  fresh
    decision is required to be made by the Secretary of State  in  response
    to the application which was made by the claimant for  entry  clearance
    to bring himself and his daughter to his British citizen  wife  in  the
    United Kingdom.

19.  No anonymity direction is made.

Signed            [pic]                      Date 26 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
