

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/03716/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 5th of December 2017                  |     On 22nd of December 2017     |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                              MR MOHAMMAD ALAVI
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ata, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 5th of  March  1989.
      He appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Moan
      sitting  at  Birmingham  on  9th  of  March  2017  who  dismissed  the
      Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated  2nd  of
      February 2016. That decision was to refuse the Appellant's application
      for leave to remain on the basis of his relationship with his spouse M
      H a citizen of Afghanistan with refugee status in this  country  ("the
      Sponsor").


 2. The Appellant arrived in this country illegally  in  2000  and  claimed
    asylum. His asylum claim was treated as abandoned after  he  absconded.
    He was encountered in 2012 whereupon he made a further claim of  asylum
    which was refused by the Respondent in 2014. His  appeal  against  that
    refusal decision was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in 2015.  The
    Sponsor came to the United  Kingdom  in  April  2013  and  was  granted
    refugee status on 26th of January 2015 valid until  January  2020.  The
    Appellant states that he and the Sponsor met in October 2014 and  began
    a relationship. They underwent an Islamic Nikkah ceremony  on  16th  of
    June  2015  and  thereafter  lived  together  as  man  and  wife.  They
    registered their marriage at the  local  Register  Office  on  13th  of
    January 2016. Their first child was born on  23rd  of  March  2016  two
    months after the Appellant had made his application for leave to remain
    the refusal of which gave rise to these proceedings.

The Explanation for Refusal

   3. The Respondent did  not  accept  that  the  relationship  between  the
      Appellant and the Sponsor was genuine and subsisting. A home visit was
      conducted by the Respondent on 23rd of November 2015  and  the  couple
      were interviewed. Notes of the interviews were briefly recorded in the
      immigration officers' notebooks which were provided to  the  Judge  at
      the hearing at first instance. It was deemed that the couple's answers
      to  a  series  of  questions  were  not  credible   due   to   several
      discrepancies which led the officers to believe the marriage  was  one
      of convenience. The Appellant's  answers  did  not  match  up  to  the
      Sponsor's answers for example he did not know the  Sponsor's  date  of
      birth. He claimed the couple had met in 2014 and could  not  say  when
      they decided to get married but the Sponsor claimed they met  in  June
      2015 and they had married two weeks after  their  first  meeting.  The
      Sponsor was 6 months pregnant at the time of the visit.

The Decision at First Instance

   4. The Judge noted the inconsistencies in the interviews conducted at the
      time of the home  visit.  When  the  Appellant  was  asked  in  cross-
      examination why he had not been able to tell immigration officers  his
      wife's date of birth he said that  he  had  forgotten  it.  The  Judge
      considered this was not an acceptable answer. The Sponsor said in  her
      oral evidence that she had struggled to understand the  questions  put
      to her during the home visit because there was no interpreter  present
      but the Judge did not except that explanation either. The Sponsor  had
      confirmed at the time she was happy to be interviewed in English.  The
      answers to the two questions that she  had  given  about  meeting  the
      Appellant were consistent with each other but  inconsistent  with  the
      Appellant's answers. The tenancy agreement produced by  the  Appellant
      was in the name of the Sponsor and  her  sister  not  the  Appellant's
      name. He was not mentioned on that tenancy agreement or on the utility
      bills for the property. Bank statements were produced which showed the
      Appellant at the Sponsor's address but the Judge  did  not  find  this
      compelling  in  itself  to  confirm  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship.


   5. The Judge pointed to the Appellant's poor immigration  history  noting
      that the Appellant had been working illegally  in  this  country.  The
      lack of evidence to demonstrate the subsistence  of  the  relationship
      and the Appellant's poor immigration history led the Judge to conclude
      that the application was a  contrived  attempt  by  the  Appellant  to
      create a family life  to  enable  the  Appellant  to  remain  in  this
      country. The Judge was not clear about the  relationship  between  the
      Appellant and his child  although  she  was  prepared  to  accept  the
      Appellant was likely to have a relationship with the child. The  child
      was very young and fully dependent upon his carers likely  to  be  the
      Sponsor in the first instance. The best interests of the  child  would
      be served by having an ongoing relationship  with  both  parents.  The
      child was not a British citizen but was present here.


   6. The Sponsor could not return to Afghanistan because she was a refugee.
      She had been born in Iran but it was not clear whether  she  would  be
      able to return there. As the child was not born at  the  time  of  the
      Appellant's application  in  January  2016  the  Appellant  could  not
      satisfy the parental  relationship  requirements  under  Appendix  FM.
      Dealing with  the  application  outside  the  immigration  rules,  the
      Appellant did not speak English, he was reliant on  benefits  although
      he had been working illegally. He was not financially independent.  He
      had begun his relationship with the Sponsor when he had no leave to be
      here being  unlawfully  present.  He  could  have  had  no  legitimate
      expectation that he would be allowed to stay  in  the  United  Kingdom
      because of his family. The Sponsor knew of his immigration status  and
      would equally have known there was no expectation he could stay.


   7. The  Appellant  could  return  to  Afghanistan  and  apply  for  entry
      clearance from there. The Appellant's objections to that  referred  to
      his asylum claim but  those  claims  had  been  rejected.  The  public
      interest in this case was strong. The best interests of the child  did
      not outweigh the compelling public interest in this case.  Should  the
      Appellant wish to apply for  entry  clearance  on  the  basis  of  his
      relationship with his child he would be free to do so. The  child  was
      currently very young and less likely to be affected by separation. The
      appeal was dismissed.

The Onward Appeal

   8. The Appellant appealed against that decision arguing that there was  a
      significant amount of evidence to show the Appellant had a  subsisting
      relationship with his wife and the appeal  should  have  been  allowed
      under  EX.1(b)  of  Appendix  FM.  There  were  a  small   number   of
      inconsistencies in the interviews which had been conducted  during  an
      unannounced visit by immigration officers to  the  parties'  residence
      but by and large the interviews were  consistent.  The  Appellant  and
      Sponsor were legally  married  and  had  had  a  child  together.  The
      Appellant was the father  as  confirmed  by  DNA  evidence.  Both  the
      Appellant and the Sponsor were at home when the  visit  was  conducted
      early in the morning. The Appellant  and  Sponsor  both  attended  the
      Tribunal and gave evidence which was consistent. The couple were  both
      from Afghanistan and belonged to the same ethnic group and were  of  a
      similar age. It was difficult for the Appellant to produce documentary
      evidence of the relationship  as  he  had  no  meaningful  immigration
      status to be able to rent the property in his  name.  He  did  produce
      bank statements which were found to be insufficient.  The  Judge  must
      have applied a very high threshold for  the  Appellant  to  prove  his
      claim which would be an error of law.


   9. The 2nd ground of onward appeal argued that the Judge  had  failed  to
      adequately consider the best interests of the Appellant's child. Those
      best interests were undervalued. There were concerns if the  Appellant
      had to return to Afghanistan to apply for entry clearance from  there.
      Not only was it unlikely that he would be able to  successfully  apply
      in the future in light of the Sponsor's financial circumstances but he
      faced return to a war-torn country where there were not even consulate
      services to enable him to apply for entry clearance. This  could  lead
      to  the  child  being  permanently  separated  from  his  father   the
      Appellant. The 3rd ground was not relied upon before me.


  10. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kimnell on 28th of September 2017. In
      granting permission to appeal he wrote: "the Judge  gave  reasons  for
      finding the Appellant was not in a genuine and subsisting relationship
      with his wife, taking  account  of  the  existence  of  a  child.  The
      decision cannot be  described  as  perverse.  The  Judge  specifically
      considered the lack of an interpreter at the interview (paragraph 14).
      Nevertheless, at no point in the decision does the  Judge  record  the
      standard of proof applied to the evidence  and  on  that  point  alone
      permission is granted. The Judge  accepted  that  it  would  be  in  a
      child's best interests to have a relationship with  both  parents  but
      gave reasons  why  in  this  case  the  proportionality  exercise  was
      resolved  in  the  Respondent's  favour.  It  is  striking  that   the
      Appellant's  witness  statement  says   almost   nothing   about   his
      relationship with his child nor indeed does his wife. Whilst there may
      have been supporting witness statements, no one  gave  evidence  apart
      from the Appellant and his wife".

The Hearing Before Me

  11. At the hearing before me to decide whether there was an error  of  law
      in the decision at first instance the Appellant's solicitor maintained
      the grounds of appeal save for the 3rd point therein.  It  was  argued
      that it was not open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  find  there
      was no substantive relationship as there was evidence that the  couple
      were living together. There were nine factors not properly taken  into
      account which were listed in the grounds. Immigration  Officers  found
      the couple in the same house probably the same bed;  the  Sponsor  was
      pregnant at the time and the couple now had a  child  whose  paternity
      had been proved by DNA evidence. The couple were similarly matched  in
      terms of nationality and ethnicity.


  12. The difference in the answers  about  when  the  relationship  started
      given the absence of an interpreter was not sufficient in itself.  Was
      it significant that the Appellant did not know the Sponsor's  date  of
      birth? If the relationship was accepted the Appellant's appeal  should
      be allowed. There were insurmountable obstacles  to  the  relationship
      continuing elsewhere. The Sponsor was a refugee who could  not  go  to
      Afghanistan. If there  was  a  genuine  relationship  and  there  were
      insurmountable obstacles the appeal should have been allowed under the
      Rules.


  13. The 2nd ground was the consideration (or  lack  of  it)  of  the  best
      interests of the child. There  was  no  proper  analysis  of  that  in
      accordance with the guidelines. If the Appellant was removed he  might
      never see the child again. The grant of permission referred to a  lack
      of evidence but there was the witness evidence of the couple which was
      sufficient to indicate the best interests of the child.


  14. In reply, the Presenting Officer indicated that the  Tribunal  was  in
      something of an artificial position. Although Judge Kimnell  had  seen
      no merit in the substantive grounds of appeal  they  could  be  argued
      once  permission  had  been   granted.   Having   read   through   the
      determination the Presenting Officer agreed that  the  Judge  had  not
      referred to the standard of proof in terms. At paragraph 16 the  Judge
      had not found the bank statements compelling in themselves to  confirm
      the relationship. The use of the word  compelling  was  potentially  a
      worry. Having said that this was a perversity  challenge  against  the
      Judge's  finding  that  there   was   not   a   genuine   relationship
      notwithstanding the child. Perversity had to be established before  an
      error of law could be made out.


  15. The child was a strong indicator  of  a  subsisting  relationship  but
      there was very little said by the Appellant and the Sponsor about  the
      Appellant's relationship with that child.  The  Judge  had  adequately
      considered the best interests at paragraph  19  of  the  determination
      which referred to the child being very young and fully dependent  upon
      his carers in this case the Sponsor. Although one would expect to  see
      more than that in a  determination  when  fulfilling  the  duty  under
      Section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 it  was
      fair to point out that the Judge's treatment of the best interests  of
      the child was short because of the very limited  information  she  was
      given to make findings on. The Sponsor  was  a  refugee  with  limited
      leave and the child was not a qualifying child under  either  Appendix
      FM or section 117B (6) of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act
      2002. The Respondent had refused the application on the basis  it  was
      not a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  and  if  the  Judge  had
      considered the best interests adequately there was no error of law  in
      the determination.


  16. In conclusion, the Appellant's solicitor said  that  even  though  the
      child was not a qualifying one it was still the case  that  the  child
      mattered. The child's future was in the United Kingdom. It came  as  a
      shock that the evidence of relationship had not been accepted  by  the
      Judge. I queried with the Appellant's solicitor what  the  Appellant's
      response was to the finding  that  the  Appellant  could  go  back  to
      Afghanistan and apply for entry clearance from  there.  The  solicitor
      replied that submissions had been made to the Judge  that  Afghanistan
      was a war zone. The Appellant came from a very insecure  area,  Wardak
      province. He was not an economic migrant. He  had  an  expectation  of
      international protection but his claim had failed. The  Sponsor  could
      not meet the financial requirements in the  Immigration  Rules.  There
      was no entry clearance post in Afghanistan and there  were  a  lot  of
      uncertainties whether the Appellant would ever  come  back  to  United
      Kingdom. The Appellant met the requirements of section  EX1  but  that
      would not apply outside United  Kingdom  so  once  the  Appellant  was
      removed to Afghanistan he would be unable to take advantage of  it  to
      come back.




Findings

  17. This is a perversity challenge to the Judge's findings  of  fact.  The
      Judge accepted that the Appellant had been in a relationship  of  some
      sort with the Sponsor because  they  were  married  and  had  a  child
      together. The Judge did not accept that the marriage was still genuine
      and subsisting because the couple had given inconsistent answers about
      their relationship and the  Appellant  could  produce  no  documentary
      evidence to support the claim that he was living with the Sponsor. The
      Appellant's argument is that he should have succeeded under section EX
      .1 (b) because he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
      partner who was in the United Kingdom with  refugee  leave  and  there
      were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  that  partner
      continuing outside the United Kingdom.


  18. The Sponsor could not return  to  Afghanistan  although  there  was  a
      paucity of evidence as to whether the Sponsor could  return  to  Iran.
      The Judge raised that point at paragraph 20 of the determination.  The
      Sponsor was born on 6 June 1991 in Mashhad in Iran. Whilst  the  grant
      of refugee protection to her was sufficient to indicate that she could
      not reasonably be expected to return to  Afghanistan,  the  burden  of
      proof was on the Appellant to show why she could not return  to  Iran.
      EX.1  does  not  indicate  that  any  particular  country  has  to  be
      appropriate only that there must be insurmountable obstacles to family
      life continuing outside the United Kingdom. As far as  the  Judge  was
      concerned the case did not reach that far because she did  not  accept
      that the Appellant and  Sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship.


  19. The  issue  is  whether  the  Judge's  reasons  and  findings  on  the
      relationship are perverse or were properly open  to  the  Judge.  That
      another Judge might have  concluded  differently,  that  there  was  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship notwithstanding  the  difficulties
      pointed out by the Judge is irrelevant.  The  issue  is  whether  this
      Judge did enough in her determination to show the lack  of  a  genuine
      relationship. The Judge was clearly influenced by what  was  perceived
      to be the Appellant's unreliability given his poor immigration history
      which included making an asylum claim that had no  merit  and  working
      illegally while claiming benefits. The Appellant's bad character might
      not of itself be sufficient for a Judge to be able to draw an  adverse
      conclusion on the  existence  or  otherwise  of  a  relationship.  The
      Appellant's immigration history could properly  be  a  factor  in  the
      assessment  of  the  Appellant's  credibility  generally.  The   Judge
      evidently felt it was a significant factor in this case. She had other
      evidence and had sight of the  interviewing  officers'  notebooks  and
      could thus gauge the tenor of the interviews and the answers given  by
      the Appellant and the Sponsor.


  20. Rather than explain the differences in the way it was put to me at the
      hearing, that they were insignificant, the Sponsor  claimed  that  her
      answers were inconsistent with  the  Appellant's  answers  because  of
      interpreting  problems.  The  Judge  found  this  implausible  and  it
      undermined the credibility of the claim. I accept that at the time  of
      the home visit the Sponsor was 6 months pregnant with the  Appellant's
      child indicating there was a relationship in the very recent past.  In
      those  circumstances,  another  Judge  may  have  concluded  that  the
      relationship was genuine and subsisting. It is more difficult  to  say
      that this Judge was perverse in coming to the view that she  did.  The
      test for perversity is a very high one and I am not persuaded that  it
      can be met in this case.


  21. If the Judge is right  that  the  relationship  was  not  genuine  and
      subsisting the claim under section EX.1 of Appendix FM fails.  If  the
      Judge is wrong and the relationship was  genuine  and  subsisting  the
      Appellant still cannot show that there are insurmountable obstacles to
      family life continuing outside  United  Kingdom  since  the  issue  of
      whether family life could continue in Iran was not  disproved  by  the
      Appellant. There appears to be no evidence as to what was or  was  not
      the Sponsor's connection to Iran or indeed why it came about that  she
      was born there but her family moved to Afghanistan.


  22. The Appellant's 2nd ground is that even if he cannot  succeed  on  the
      basis of a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  the  Sponsor,
      nevertheless he is the father of a child living in  this  country  and
      his claim should succeed on that basis. That would have to be a  claim
      outside the Immigration Rules as the child is not a  qualifying  child
      being neither a British citizen nor having lived  here  for  at  least
      seven years. It would not succeed under section 117B of the  2002  Act
      for the same reason. As the child is here the child's  best  interests
      have to be considered outside the Rules and the child's interests have
      to be considered first as a primary though not the primary concern  of
      the Tribunal. Did the Judge in  her  determination  do  that?  As  the
      Respondent submitted to me the Judge's consideration was  hampered  by
      the lack of evidence. The child is presumably now almost 2 years  old.
      What are the arrangements for its care? If  the  Appellant  is  living
      with the Sponsor and the child it would be a relatively easy matter to
      explain what the  domestic  arrangements  are.  The  absence  of  that
      evidence inevitably caused the Judge to be  suspicious  about  whether
      there was a relationship of substance between the  Appellant  and  his
      child. That in turn cause the Judge to  doubt  whether  the  Appellant
      still had a relationship of substance with the child's mother.


  23. The argument is put that the Sponsor would find it difficult to manage
      in  this  country  on  her  own  whilst  the  Appellant  returned   to
      Afghanistan to make such arrangements as he could to apply  for  entry
      clearance from there. The difficulty with that  argument  is  that  it
      requires evidence to support it  and  again  one  comes  back  to  the
      paucity of evidence put before the Judge. For a  perversity  challenge
      to succeed it must be shown that cogent evidence was provided  to  the
      Judge which was not properly taken into account. This appeal fails  on
      the first point that there was a lack of cogent evidence.


  24. The grant of permission was not made on the basis either that  it  was
      an arguable error that the Judge's findings were perverse or  that  it
      was arguable that the Judge had failed to consider the best  interests
      of the child adequately. I would agree with the grantor of  permission
      for the reasons I have  given.  The  grant  of  permission  was  given
      because the Judge nowhere in the determination specifically stated  in
      terms that she was applying the usual civil  standard  of  balance  of
      probabilities in arriving at her conclusions. I do not  consider  that
      there is merit in that argument. It is correct that the Judge does not
      refer to the standard of proof but  reading  the  determination  as  a
      whole it is clear that the Judge is aware  that  matters  have  to  be
      proved on the balance of probabilities. For example, if one  looks  at
      paragraph 18 of the determination the Judge states "I am  prepared  to
      accept that he is likely to have a relationship with his child".  That
      is to say the Judge found  it  was  more  likely  than  not  that  the
      Appellant had a relationship with his child, even  if  it  was  not  a
      significant one, which is the test of the balance of probabilities.


  25.  The  Presenting  Officer  very  fairly  noted  paragraph  16  of  the
      determination in which the Judge indicated that  the  bank  statements
      showing the Appellant to be at the same address as  the  Sponsor  were
      not  compelling  in  themselves  to  confirm  the  relationship.   The
      expression compelling is an ambiguous one, it could perhaps  mean  the
      Judge was applying a higher standard than the balance of probabilities
      but it is more likely to be a reference to the quality of evidence  as
      opposed to the standard of proof. There is an analogy  with  the  test
      under Article 8 outside the immigration rules in  an  out  of  country
      appeal that very compelling circumstances have to be shown to succeed.
      This does not mean that the standard  of  proof  is  higher  than  the
      balance of probabilities it is a  reference  to  the  cogency  of  the
      evidence which has to be put forward.


  26. The Appellant argued that he  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to
      return to Afghanistan and apply for entry clearance from there.  There
      are difficulties given the absence of an entry clearance post but  the
      Appellant has shown he is able to leave Afghanistan  and  travel  many
      thousands of miles. I see no reason why he would not be able to travel
      to Pakistan to make an application for entry clearance from there. The
      obstacle to a successful application would be  the  inability  of  the
      Sponsor to meet the financial requirements. That position  may  change
      in the future if for example the Sponsor obtained employment.

27. The case of SM [2007] UKAIT 10 notes that there were no facilities  for
    Afghan  nationals  to  obtain  entry  clearance  from  Afghanistan   or
    elsewhere. Where an Appellant met all the relevant  requirements  under
    the Immigration Rules and but for the absence of entry clearance  would
    qualify and the Respondent cannot  show  that  is  practicable  for  an
    Appellant to obtain entry clearance the claim may succeed under Article
    8 if the Appellant shows that entry clearance  cannot  in  practice  be
    obtained because of the lack of accessible facilities.  The  difficulty
    for the Appellant in this case is that it assumes that all things being
    equal the Appellant could meet the  entry  clearance  requirements.  In
    that case the rule in Chikwamba would apply and  it  would  be  a  mere
    bureaucratic formality that the  Appellant  would  have  to  return  to
    Afghanistan to apply from there. Unfortunately for  the  Appellant  all
    things are not equal and he cannot show that an application  for  entry
    clearance would succeed because of the Sponsor's inability to meet  the
    financial requirements. The ratio  in  SM  does  not  apply  since  the
    Appellant cannot show but for the absence of entry clearance  he  would
    qualify for admission to this country.


28. The Appellant seeks to rely on the effect of section EX.1  of  Appendix
    FM but before he can do that he must show that it applies in this case.
    The Judge rejected the appeal partly because she  found  the  Appellant
    did  not  meet  the  suitability  requirements  because  of  his   poor
    immigration history. EX.1 is not a free-standing ground of application.
    The Appellant is unable to show that the decision at first instance was
    perverse and is unable to show that he could succeed inside or  outside
    the Immigration Rules under Article 8. I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Signed this 6th of December 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed this 6th of December 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




