
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03716/2019
                                                               HU/03719/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2020                            |On 7 February 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                         KEVINKUMAR RAMESHBHAI PATEL
                         SHITALBEN KEVINKUMAR PATEL

                                                                   Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Brien
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellants are husband and wife and were born on 15 June 1982 on 14
    February 1985 respectively. They are citizens of India.  They  appealed
    against decisions of the Secretary of State made  on  8  February  2019
    refusing them leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 13 September 2019, dismissed the
    appeal. The appellants  now  appeal,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  flawed
    by legal error and should be set aside. My  reasons  for  reaching  the
    conclusion are as follows.

 3. First, I am satisfied that judge has failed correctly  to  address  the
    evidence  given  by  the  second  appellant  by  way  of  an   innocent
    explanation for what had happened at the ETS test centre  to  which  he
    had travelled in order to undertake  an  English-language  examination.
    The second appellant's explanation was that the recording of her speech
    was terminated by someone from the centre  who  claimed  the  recording
    equipment was not working properly and that she was asked to leave  the
    premises. The first line of the judges analysis of this explanation  at
    [28] ('the appellant since innocent explanation is simply that  he  who
    sat the tests at the ...') makes no sense and indeed  appears  to  have
    been interpolated from another decision. The judge then  recounts  that
    the appellant claimed never to have submitted  to  a  voice  recording.
    Although the judge does  not  refer  to  the  broken  machine  in  that
    paragraph, he does so earlier in the  decision  during  his  record  of
    second appellant's evidence [22]. However, even assuming that, at [28],
    the judge had recalled that the appellant  claimed  to  have  left  the
    premises after the machine had broken,  his  next  comment  ('thus  she
    cannot be claiming to be one of the 'false  positives'  of  which  Prof
    French speaks in his report') makes no sense in the context.;  for  the
    appellant to have been one of the 'false positives' it follows that her
    voice must have been recorded. The judge then embarks on an  assessment
    as to whether the second appellant's explanation is plausible. In  this
    assessment, he conflates consideration of the explanation (which needed
    only to be brief) with discussion  of  extraneous  matters  such  as  a
    subsequent ETS examination which the appellant had  taken  a  different
    centre and passed. The judge notes that the appellant did not  take  up
    the issue of the broken machine with ETS nor did she seek to be allowed
    to sit the final  element  of  her  examination  at  a  later  date  no
    additional cost. It is not clear what those  observations  have  to  do
    with  determining  the   simple   plausibility   of   the   appellant's
    explanation. Moreover, I agree with Mr O'Brien, who  appeared  for  the
    appellants,  that,  having  introduced  extraneous  matters  into   his
    analysis of plausibility it was incumbent upon the judge  to  be  even-
    handed; he makes no mention, for example, of the fact that  the  second
    appellant did not attempt to use her test result from  the  college  to
    support an application for leave to  remain.  I  acknowledge  that  the
    absence of any evidence from the college regarding the  broken  machine
    may have been a possible factor in deciding whether the respondent  had
    discharged  the  legal  burden  upon  him,  but,  in  my  opinion,  the
    structuring of the discussion by the judge is so poor as to  constitute
    legal error.

 4. Moreover, I agree with Mr O'Brien that  the  judge's  analysis  of  the
    suitability requirements under paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 (as  amended)
    is inadequate. The  judge  was  required  to  consider  the  character,
    conduct and associations of the appellants and,  if  he  considered  it
    appropriate, to find that their presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    undesirable. Instead, the judge makes only an assertion [33]  that  the
    second appellant fails to meet the suitability  requirements.  Even  if
    the judge was correct in finding that the appellant had used  deception
    on one occasion in an English language test which she has not sought to
    use to support any application for leave to remain, he still needed  to
    analyse suitability in greater detail; even on the facts  as  he  found
    them, unsuitability was not axiomatic. The second appellant is entitled
    to know exactly why her  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  deemed
    undesirable.

 5. Finally, the Article 8 ECHR analysis in  the  decision  is  inadequate.
    There is, for example, no analysis at all of the best interests of  the
    appellant's child who is with them in the United Kingdom  (see  section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009). Moreover, the
    judge makes no reference to the existence  or  absence  of  significant
    obstacles which might hinder the return of the appellants to India. The
    reference by the judge at the end of the decision to the  dismissal  of
    the appeal 'under the Immigration Rules' is, perhaps,  some  indication
    of the lack of clarity in his analysis of the issues in this appeal. In
    the circumstances, the decision is set aside. The appeal is returned to
    the First-tier Tribunal  for  that  tribunal  to  remake  the  decision
    following a hearing de novo.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge  Ian  Howard)  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision following a hearing de novo.


           Signed                            Date 5 February 2020

          Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


