
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03422/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Leeds Combined Court Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2019                      |On 13 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     w I
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, Counsel, instructed by Bankfield Health
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the  appellant  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher, sitting at North Shields in  November
    2018, whereby the judge dismissed the human rights claim brought by the
    appellant.  Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal
    in April 2019 on the grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant by  Ms
    Pickering.  Those grounds assert that the judge made a mistake of  fact
    concerning the evidence as to whether the appellant had or had not been
    leading an openly gay life in the United Kingdom  and  that  the  judge
    misapplied the law, when looking at the question pursuant to  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  of  whether  there  were  significant
    obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  in  Pakistan,  if  he  were
    returned to that  country.

 2. Before me, the appellant is represented by Mr Holmes and the respondent
    by Mrs Petterson. I have regard to their oral submissions.

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal records the lengthy immigration
    history of the appellant, who first arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in
    July 2007.  He came as a  student  and  subsequently  obtained  further
    leave in that capacity.  He was refused an  application  for  leave  to
    remain in 2014 as an entrepreneur and appealed  against  that  decision
    but subsequently withdrew the appeal.  He then made  a  series  of  EEA
    applications as an extended family member, each of which  was  refused.
    Finally, in June 2017, he sought indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of long residence.  The respondent considered that  application
    but refused it in a letter dated 8 January 2018.  It is  common  ground
    that the appellant cannot succeed in an  application  under  the  rules
    based on long residence, given the length of time that he has  been  in
    the United Kingdom on a lawful basis.  However, the  refusal  was  also
    the rejection of a human rights claim and it was on that basis that the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The judge began his analysis of that evidence at  paragraph  4  of  the
    decision  and  stated  that  he  had  considered  all  the  documentary
    evidence, as well as the oral evidence,  which  concerned  two  witness
    statements of the appellant.  So far as the appellant's  sexuality  was
    at issue, the judge noted at paragraph 6 that the appellant  said  that
    he was gay man.  He explained how  he  had  been  conflicted  over  his
    sexuality.  He had had a relationship with a man whilst in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His wife, according to the evidence, had discovered  that  he
    was gay through text messages with his ex-partner.  He had married  his
    wife in September 2012.  She discovered his sexual orientation late  in
    2013.

 5. The relationship with the male partner was said to have begun in  March
    or April of 2012.  The appellant said he had  been  threatened  by  his
    wife and her family from 2014 and that he  had  received  a  number  of
    unwanted telephone calls.  Those had been reported to the  police,  but
    he had not claimed asylum because he had been directed, he said, down a
    particular route by the Home Office, as most of his time in the  United
    Kingdom had been lawful.

 6. The appellant told the judge that his relationship with his  ex-partner
    had ended around April 2017.  The partner was not present as a  witness
    because the  relationship  had  broken  down  in  somewhat  acrimonious
    circumstances.  Nor was a previous EEA sponsor present, as that  person
    had not been aware of the appellant's sexuality.   When  he  had  found
    out, he ceased his support of the appellant.

 7. Asked whether he  had  allegedly  been  involved  in  a  five-year  gay
    relationship and whether he had been living openly as  a  gay  man,  or
    whether he had been more discreet, the appellant replied  that  he  had
    been discreet; but over the last few years he said he had lived openly.
     As a result, people from his culture no longer spoke to him.

 8. The judge, having set out the relevant law, proceeded to an analysis of
    the evidence.  The first issue recorded in paragraph 15 of the decision
    was to determine whether the appellant had established that he was gay.
     The judge did not attach any significant adverse weight to the absence
    of his former partner as a witness, owing to the way in which they  had
    parted.  The judge considered he could attribute only limited weight to
    the evidence of work colleagues, who had sent in letters of support  in
    connection with the proceedings, because none of the authors  had  been
    in attendance.  There was  a  similarity  in  phraseology  between  the
    letters that suggested to the judge they had been  prepared  by  others
    and the authors had merely appended their names.

 9. Nevertheless, the judge stated that he accepted the appellant was  gay.
    He did so because the most  significant  evidence  in  the  appellant's
    favour was the disclosure of his sexual orientation to his GP in  2013,
    at a point when I note the appellant was said to have indicated that he
    was bisexual. The judge also placed weight on  the  activation  by  the
    appellant of a Grindr account the appellant had opened in 2014.  It  is
    common ground that Grindr is a website that enables gay people to  seek
    out relationships.  Accordingly, at the end of paragraph 15  the  judge
    recorded that the appellant was "gay or bisexual".

10. At paragraph 16 the judge reminded himself of the case law of the Court
    of Appeal in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ  813  regarding  the  phrase
    "very significant obstacles to integration" in  paragraph  276ADE.   At
    paragraph 17 the judge stated  that  he  was  not  persuaded  that  the
    appellant had been living an openly gay life in the United  Kingdom  as
    he claimed.  None of the letters from his work  colleagues,  the  judge
    said, made any reference to his sexuality.  He would have expected them
    to have done so.  The judge considered  that  the  appellant's  comment
    that people in his workplace thought that the  appellant  was  gay  was
    strong evidence that the appellant was not in fact living an openly gay
    life.  Similarly in cross-examination the  appellant  referred  to  the
    wife of one of his friends who asked why he was not married.  The judge
    said:-

         "In my judgement, she would have known the answer to that  question
         if he were openly gay.  I am satisfied that he  is  discrete  about
         his sexuality in the UK.  Given the tolerance to those who are LGBT
         in the UK, it cannot realistically be said that his  discretion  is
         attributable to a desire to avoid persecution.   If  he  wished  to
         live openly in the UK, he could do so.  I therefore  conclude  that
         his is discrete in  the  UK  through  choice,  and  that  he  would
         continue to live discretely in Pakistan."

11. At paragraph 18, the judge turned to the  position  in  Pakistan.   The
    judge noted that the appellant was 22 years old when he arrived in  the
    United Kingdom.   He  had  visited  Pakistan  on  no  less  than  seven
    occasions between  2008  and  2014.   The  judge  considered  that  the
    appellant had a  good  understanding  of  how  life  was  conducted  in
    Pakistan and the capacity to participate in it.  The judge then said:-

         "Living discreetly as I have found that he would, he would  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted and to operate on  a  day  to
         day basis.  He is an intelligent man who has gained  qualifications
         in the UK which would assist him on return.  He  enjoys  reasonably
         good health.  There is no reason  why  he  could  not  establish  a
         network of relationships, as he has in the UK, to give substance to
         his life."

12. At paragraph 19, the judge reminded himself that the appellant had  not
    made a protection claim.  The judge had observed that  Pakistan  was  a
    huge country with a population approaching 200 million  and  there  was
    not  sufficient  evidence  in  the  judge's  view  to  show  that   the
    appellant's family or his wife's family had influence or contacts which
    would enable them to trace the  appellant  throughout  the  country  on
    return.  Overall, therefore, the judge was  not  persuaded  that  there
    were significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in  Pakistan.



13. The judge then noted that there was no family life advanced  on  behalf
    of the appellant.  There was a private life but  that  would  be  given
    little weight, given that pursuant to  the  judgments  of  the  Supreme
    Court in Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58, the  appellant  had  never  possessed
    anything other than limited leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Overall,  the  judge  considered  that  although  the  decision   would
    interfere with the appellant's private life, in all  the  circumstances
    that interference would be proportionate.

14. The challenge advanced by Mr Holmes  is  based  upon  the  two  grounds
    drafted by Ms Pickering.  Mr Holmes submits  that  the  issue  of  work
    colleagues had been mischaracterised by the judge.  These letters  were
    character references and also included an assertion that the  appellant
    had not been in a relationship at work with a  female  colleague,  this
    being a matter which at one point was taken by the  respondent.   I  do
    not consider that there is substance in this aspect of  the  challenge.
    It is trite law that it  is  for  the  judge  hearing  and  seeing  the
    evidence unfold before him or  her  to  attribute  such  weight  as  is
    appropriate to that evidence.  In the present case,  the  letters  took
    the appellant's case  nowhere.   I  do  not  consider  that  the  judge
    mischaracterised them or advanced a set of  findings  by  reference  to
    them which he was not entitled to do.   Indeed,  overall,  the  judge's
    findings not only about the appellant's perception by  work  colleagues
    but generally strike me as entirely appropriate.  As I have  noted,  in
    paragraph 17 the judge went on to consider the inference  to  be  drawn
    from the fact that the wife of one of the appellant's  friends  clearly
    did not know that the appellant was gay.

15. Mr Holmes submits that the judge paid insufficient regard to  the  fact
    that the appellant had held down a  gay  relationship  for  nearly  six
    years.  Mr Holmes submitted this was evidence of living an  openly  gay
    lifestyle.  With respect, that is not correct.  People may enjoy a  gay
    life with  a  particular  partner  or  partners,  without  making  that
    manifest to others.  This is underscored by the fact that it took  time
    even for the appellant's wife to become aware  of  the  position.   The
    fact that, according  to  Mr  Holmes,  there  came  a  point  when  the
    appellant "came clean to his wife" supports the judge's conclusion.  At
    the very least, there is nothing in this aspect of the  challenge  that
    shows the judge was compelled to take a different conclusion  than  the
    one he reached.

16. So far as the Grindr account is concerned, I also do not find that this
    compels the conclusion, together with  the  other  evidence,  that  the
    appellant was indeed living an  openly  gay  lifestyle  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The documentary material that was before the judge in respect
    of Grindr was extremely limited in nature.  The main bundle has a large
    number of references showing when the account was used by the appellant
    over a number of years, but  nothing  else.   The  photographs  of  the
    appellant in the bundle, said to be posted on Grindr, are in themselves
    entirely unexceptional.  The same is true of the small number of  pages
    that were attached to the supplementary bundle.  The fact  that  Grindr
    is a service that enables gay and bisexual people to  communicate  with
    each other and seek out relationships does not mean  that  anybody  who
    uses it is thereby adopting an openly gay lifestyle  in  any  realistic
    sense of the word.

17. Mr Holmes drew attention to passages in the appellant's  first  witness
    statement.  At paragraph 12, we see the appellant saying  that  he  had
    sought to hide who he truly was and the only reason that  he  did  this
    was because in the Pakistani community such things are not talked about
    openly.  However, at paragraph 13 the appellant said that he could live
    openly as a gay man in the United Kingdom where he was aware there  was
    no risk to his personal safety.  I find, however, that  these  passages
    serve only to confirm the fact that the judge was entitled to take  the
    view he did. In particular, in paragraph 17 the judge said that,  given
    the tolerance of those who are LGBT in the United Kingdom, it could not
    realistically be said that the appellant's discretion was  attributable
    to his  desire  to  avoid  persecution.   In  other  words,  the  judge
    concluded that the appellant was not living an openly gay lifestyle  in
    the United Kingdom and that this was very firmly  not  for  reasons  of
    fear of the consequences.  I therefore find no substance in  the  first
    ground.

18. I turn to the second ground.  This is that it was an error of the judge
    to conclude in effect that paragraph 276ADE could not be satisfied,  in
    that there would be serious obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration
    into Pakistan.  The reason was, again, that the appellant was gay.   Mr
    Holmes  submitted  by  reference  to  the  medical  evidence   in   the
    appellant's bundle that the appellant had been able to converse  freely
    with doctors in the United Kingdom over a period  of  time  as  to  his
    sexuality and to receive appropriate medical responses.  Mr Holmes said
    this may not be possible in Pakistan.  There is,  however,  a  complete
    dearth of evidence that this is so, notwithstanding the legal  position
    regarding homosexuality in Pakistan.  There  is  nothing  to  which  my
    attention has been drawn which shows that gay people in  Pakistan  lack
    access to medical treatment.

19. By the same token, I do not consider that there was  before  the  judge
    any evidence to compel the conclusion that the appellant,  if  returned
    to Pakistan, would not, on the basis of the  attributes  regarding  his
    sexuality that the judge had found, be able to integrate.  At paragraph
    18 of the decision, it is clear that the judge  did  have  in  mind  in
    considering this aspect of the case the fact that the appellant was, as
    he had found, gay.  That is the reason why the paragraph  includes  the
    following: "Living discretely (sic) as I have found that he  would,  he
    would have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted and to operate on  a
    day to day basis".

20. The judge then went on to find that the  appellant  could  establish  a
    "network of relationships, as he has in the UK, to  give  substance  to
    his life".  There was nothing before the judge  to  compel  a  contrary
    conclusion, given the findings that the judge had reached.

21.  Overall, I am satisfied that the judge considered  all  the  evidence.
    The judge also considered the submissions.   The  judge  made  findings
    which he was entitled to reach on that  evidence.   That  included  the
    important finding about integration in  Pakistan.   For  these  reasons
    this appeal is dismissed.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








                      Signed                     Date:

                         2 August 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber



