
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/03223/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |On 13 August 2020                    |
|On 5 August 2020                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                TANZILA RANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Kashif, of Norman Lawson & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated  22  January  2019,  maintained  on
         review on 24 May 2019.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge J C  Grant-Hutchison,  promulgated  on  9
         December 2019.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal dated 17 December 2019.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 13 May 2020.

 2. I conducted the hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended
    remotely.  No member of  the  public  attended,  either  in  person  or
    remotely.  There were some initial technical  difficulties,  but  clear
    communications were then established, and parties had a full  and  fair
    hearing  of  their  respective  cases.   Having  heard  submissions,  I
    reserved my decision.

 3. The application was refused by the ECO partly because the appellant had
    not produced required documents, namely bank statements  to  cover  the
    prescribed period of the sponsor's employment.

 4. Another point of refusal was resolved, because the  evidence  had  been
    provided with the application - [6] of the FtT's  decision.   The  bank
    statements relate to the only remaining issue.

 5. The sponsor accepted that the documents  were  not  produced  with  the
    application.  The FtT admitted  them  into  evidence  at  the  hearing,
    without objection.

 6. The ground of appeal to the UT is that the  financial  requirements  of
    the rules were met, so the FtT should have allowed the appeal.

 7. Mr Kashif said that the appellant did not rely on article 8,  and  that
    the  decision  of  the  FtT  should  be  set  aside,  and  a   decision
    substituted, allowing the appeal under  the  immigration  rules.   When
    replying to the submission for the ECO, he said that this was  a  human
    rights appeal, so the facts were to be considered at the  date  of  the
    hearing, at which stage the bank statements had been admitted.

 8. The submission for the appellant was rather confused about the  grounds
    of appeal available.  The FtT and the UT have jurisdiction to allow  an
    appeal on human rights grounds, but no jurisdiction to allow an  appeal
    "under the rules".  However, as the rules in this area are designed  so
    as to comply as far as possible with article 8, the  distinction  makes
    little difference in this case.

 9. The appeal is premised on production of documents at the hearing  being
    sufficient to satisfy the rules.   That  is  misconceived.   The  rules
    stipulate production of the documents with the application to the  ECO.
    It would be relevant to prove that documents had been  produced,  in  a
    case where the ECO went wrong on what was with the application; but  it
    is beside the point to prove that  satisfactory  documents  might  have
    been produced, if they were not there.

10. The FtT could not rationally have found that the  terms  of  the  rules
    were satisfied; they obviously were not.  There was no route to article
    8 via compliance with the rules.

11. The FtT had to decide whether the appellant had an article 8  right  to
    enter the UK, notwithstanding non-compliance with the  rules.   It  was
    necessary to consider the  extent  of  interference  with  family  life
    brought about by the negative decision.  The key to that is the judge's
    second point at [19].  There is nothing  to  stop  the  appellant  from
    making another application to the ECO, with strong prospects of success
    (although that will be decided on its own merits, if and when  such  an
    application is made).  The FtT was  entitled  to  find  that  there  is
    nothing disproportionate in expecting the appellant to comply with  the
    rules.

12. That may seem technical and harsh, but the rules  are  designed  to  be
    prescriptive, and not to accommodate enhancement of  cases  during  the
    appeals process.  The appellant complained of costs, but  the  FtT  was
    right to give that no weight.  It was up to her to get her  application
    right in the first place.  Having failed to do so, she might have saved
    further time and  money  by  putting  in  a  properly  supported  fresh
    application.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      7 August 2020
      UT Judge Macleman






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

