
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03657/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 October 2018                            |on 05 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MUDUSSAR HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alam, Counsel, instructed by Law Lane Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State.  However, for
    convenience I will refer to the parties as they were referred to in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 15 September 1986.  On
    16 February 2017 his application for leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom as the spouse of a UK citizen was refused by the respondent on
    the basis that there was significant evidence to conclude that he had
    used a proxy test taker in a TOEIC speaking test with Educational
    Testing Service (ETS) on 14 December 2011 and therefore did not satisfy
    the suitability requirements under Appendix FM of the Immigration
    Rules.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Phull.  In a decision
    promulgated on 6 April 2018 Judge Phull allowed the appellant's appeal.



 4. Before Judge Phull, the respondent relied upon a witness statement by a
    senior Home Office caseworker named Afshan Anwar-Tariq dated 7 March
    2018 that refers to the appellant having a pending application for Tier
    4 leave.  The judge observed that this is incorrect as the appellant
    was applying for leave on the basis of his relationship with his
    spouse.  The judge also noted that the statement of Afshan Anwar Tariq
    refers to witness statements of Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington
    but that neither of these statements, nor any expert evidence to
    substantiate the allged deception, were submitted by the respondent.

 5. Appended to the statement of Afshan Anwar Tariq is a printout from an
    "ETS TOEIC test centre lookup tool" stating that the test taken by the
    appellant had been found to be invalid.  The judge found that because
    of this the respondent had satisfied the initial evidential burden of
    establishing deception such that the burden shifted to the appellant to
    provide a plausible innocent explanation.

 6. The judge found that the appellant's explanation was plausible.  At
    paragraph 21 the judge stated

         "I found the appellant to be a credible witness giving his evidence
         in a candid and frank manner.  The Home Office interviewed the
         appellant on 15 July 2015 but failed to disclose the interview
         record and did not curtail the appellant's leave.  I find he
         provides plausible evidence in cross-examination that prior to
         sitting the TOEIC test he had also undertaken the Pearson and IELTS
         test and had hoped to improve his test scores as supported by the
         certificates.  There was no challenge to his evidence that he paid
         the fee in cash and sat the TOEIC test over two days.  I accept his
         evidence in cross-examination that he chose to sit the TOEIC test
         at Alpha College because they gave him an early test date and
         because he had heard it was an easier test.  His evidence is that
         he had hoped to get a better score than the Pearson or the IELTS
         test scores.  In answer to my questions the appellant said that he
         secured a band score of 6.5 in speaking in the IELTS test which is
         equivalent to CEFRB2 level and 140 marks in speaking in the TOEIC
         test which is equivalent to CEFRB1.   As the TOEIC mark was lower
         he did not rely on this certificate in any application.  I find on
         balance that the appellant supports his scores with the copy
         certificates and has provided a plausible innocent explanation and
         therefore the burden shifts back to the Secretary of State."

 7. The judge then at paragraphs 22 and 23 considered whether the Secretary
    of State discharged the legal burden and found that he did not.  The
    judge stated at paragraph 23 that:

         "Although the appellant was challenged about where and how he chose
         the test centre and taking the test I find on balance that the
         appellant gave a consistent and satisfactory explanation of the
         background to how the test was booked and personally attending and
         sitting the test at Alpha College."

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 8. The Secretary of State is appealing against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis that the judge failed to adequately address
    the evidential burden on the appellant to put forward an innocent
    explanation.  In the grounds of appeal it states that "it is not clear
    why the evidence of the appellant which the Tribunal relies upon would
    preclude the use of a proxy test taker during the test."

 9. The grounds take issue with the judge giving weight to the appellant
    recalling details of his journey to the test centre when this does not
    necessarily mean that he personally took the test and maintain that the
    judge erred by failing to give adequate reasons for finding that a
    person who clearly speaks English would have no reason to secure a test
    certificate by deception.

10. Before me, Mr Jarvis on behalf of the Secretary of State argued that
    the judge failed to appreciate the scale of deception.  He referred to
    the evidence of Professor French that there is less than a 1% chance of
    a "false positive".  In response to my comment that there was no
    evidence from a Professor French before the First-tier Tribunal
    Mr Jarvis responded that the judge ought properly to have taken
    judicial notice of Professor French's report given that it has been
    before multiple Tribunals in cases of this nature.  He maintained that
    in any event the judgments in cases such as MA (ETS  - TOEIC testing)
    [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC) which bind the First-tier Tribunal find that
    the ETS process is robust.

11. Mr Jarvis maintained that the judge fell into error by failing to
    explore the multiple reasons why a person proficient in English might
    have engaged in fraud and by placing undue weight on the appellant's
    proficiency, and exam success, in English.  He relied on paragraph 57
    of MA, which states:

         "In the abstract, of course, there is a range of reasons why
         persons proficient in English may engage in TOEIC fraud.  These
         include, inexhaustively, lack of confidence, fear of failure, lack
         of time and commitment and contempt for the immigration system.
         These reasons could conceivably overlap in individual cases and
         there is scope for other explanations for deceitful conduct in this
         sphere.  We are not required to make the further finding of why the
         appellant engaged in deception and to this we add that this issue
         was not explored during the hearing.  We resist any temptation to
         speculate about this discrete matter."

12. The response of Mr Alam, on behalf of the appellant, was that the
    evidence of Mr French as well as that of Rebecca Collings and Peter
    Millington was not before the First-tier Tribunal and therefore the
    judge could not be expected to rely on such evidence.  He noted that
    the only evidence before the Tribunal was the statement of Afshan Anwar-
    Tariq (to which was annexed the lookup tool results) and this statement
    inaccurately described the circumstances of the appellant's
    application.

13. Mr Alam also argued that the judge gave sufficient reasons to justify
    the conclusion that the appellant's innocent explanation was plausible.
     He observed that the judge had correctly identified the burden of
    proof test and had given several reasons for finding the appellant's
    explanation plausible.

Analysis

14. I am satisfied that the decision does not contain an error of law.

15. The judge correctly identified at paragraph 16 of the decision the
    three stage test in respect of the burden of proof, referred to as the
    "burden of proof boomerang" in MA and other cases.

16. Notwithstanding the paucity of evidence adduced by the respondent the
    judge found that the initial evidential burden on the respondent was
    satisfied.




17. The judge then proceeded, as he was required to do under the "boomerang
    approach," to consider the appellant's innocent explanation.

18. At paragraph 21 the judge explained that after hearing cross-
    examination of the appellant he reached the conclusion that the
    appellant was credible and accepted his explanation for why he chose to
    sit the test at the college he chose and why he took the test having
    taken other tests previously.  At paragraph 23 the judge noted that the
    appellant gave a consistent and satisfactory explanation of the
    background of how the test was booked and personally attended.

19. The argument of the Secretary of State, in sum, is that the appellant's
    evidence was not sufficient to satisfy the evidential burden of showing
    a plausible innocent explanation.  I disagree.  It is for the First
    tier Tribunal judge to assess the credibility of the appellant's
    account, having regard to matters such as consistency, response to
    questions under cross-examination and whether the appellant is candid
    and frank.  This is the analysis that the judge undertook.  Having
    found the appellant to be credible, consistent and candid (and having
    given reasons to explain why this view was reached) it was open to the
    judge to accept his evidence.

20. Mr Jarvis sought to rely on paragraph 57 of MA, as cited above.
    However this paragraph cannot be read in isolation.  The appellant in
    MA was found to have given evidence that was inconsistent and
    inadequate.  At paragraph 48 of MA it is stated that there were
    significant gaps in the appellant's witness statement and discrepancies
    between his witness statement and the evidence at the hearing.  It is
    also stated that there was an "abject failure to provide even the most
    basic description of the car journey which he claims to have
    undertaken" or "any physical features of the college."  It is also said
    that there were "self-evident gaps and discrepancies in the account."

21. The difference between the appellant in MA and the appellant in this
    case is stark.  In this appeal the judge has not found the appellant's
    evidence to contain gaps and discrepancies and there has been no
    finding that there is an inconsistency between the oral and written
    witness evidence.  On the contrary, the judge found the appellant to be
    a consistent and reliable witness.  I am satisfied, therefore, that the
    judge's approach was not inconsistent with MA.

22. In light of the judge's findings as to the appellant's credibility he
    was entitled to accept the appellant's innocent explanation and to find
    that the respondent had not discharged the legal burden of proof.  The
    appeal therefore cannot succeed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law and stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 24 October 2018               |


