
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03000/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2019                  |On 16 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     BA
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     In person, not legally represented
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Heatherington promulgated 18.4.19, dismissing his appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 2.2.17, to refuse
    his application made on 28.5.16 for Leave to Remain on the basis of his
    family life,  in  particular  his  contact  with  his  British  citizen
    children.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    16.7.18.

 3. The matter first came before me on 12.6.19, resulting in  the  decision
    promulgated on 25.6.19.

 4. There was no attendance at the error of law hearing by or on behalf  of
    the appellant. Amongst various handwritten letters and submissions is a
    letter from him,  dated  1.6.19,  in  which  he  expressed  a  lack  of
    confidence to represent himself as a litigant in person in  proceedings
    before the Upper Tribunal. He stated that he has been unable to  afford
    any legal representation, though  he  would  wish  to  be  represented.
    Towards the end of his letter he effectively asked for the matter to be
    decided on the papers.

 5. Whilst I did not consider it appropriate to deal with  the  matter  "on
    the papers," I understood but regretted that the appellant felt  unable
    to at least attend the hearing. It  is  the  experience  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal  that  many  appellants   represent   themselves   or   appear
    unrepresented. The appellant should not feel intimidated or fearful  of
    attending the tribunal and getting a fair hearing and in doing  so  can
    expect the tribunal judge to do all within the court's  power  to  help
    him present his case fairly so that justice may be done.

 6. His letter attached various new pieces of  evidence  which  I  did  not
    consider at the error of law hearing, because at that stage I was  only
    concerned with whether there was an error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal. It follows that I could only consider the evidence
    that was before the  First-tier  tribunal,  what  happened  there,  and
    whether in the making of the decision the judge erred  in  law.  Unless
    there is an error of law, there is no basis for the Upper  Tribunal  to
    interfere with the decision made. This is not, at this stage at  least,
    a rehearing or second chance for the  appellant  to  put  his  case.  I
    should add that, for reason given in my decision, without  the  consent
    of the Family Court I declined to take into account  the  Family  Court
    related documentation referred to by the appellant.

 7. The appellant was a litigant in person at the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    attended the hearing without  legal  representation.  He  claimed  that
    although he is separated from his former  partner  he  sees  his  three
    British children regularly, though he had not seen them since  10.3.18.
    he claimed to have a  Child  Arrangements  Order  made  by  consent  in
    January 2017.

 8. In dismissing the appeal, Judge Heatherington concluded on the evidence
    that the appellant did not  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his children, neither  played  a  genuinely  parental
    role in their lives nor contributed to their  lives,  and  any  contact
    with them was no more than minimal.

 9. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Simpson found it arguable  that
    the judge erred in the article 8  assessment  of  the  application  for
    Leave to Remain as a parent of three minor  British  citizen  children,
    his relationship with their mother having broken down.

10. For the reasons set out in my error  of  law  decision  and  summarised
    below, I concluded that the failure of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to
    apply the Family Court Protocol to help establish  the  nature  of  the
    appellant's relationship with his three children. This was  crucial  to
    reaching a proper and  fair  assessment  as  to  whether  his  parental
    relationship was genuine and subsisting. The judge  had  observed  that
    there was  some  evidence  from  the  Family  Court  but  that  it  was
    incomplete. It was also suggested that  there  was  no  Cafcass  report
    (although a number of Cafcass documents appear  at  section  F  of  the
    appellant's evidence). Finally, there was no evidence of the consent of
    the Family Court for its proceedings to be disclosed.

11. The judge would have been aware  of  the  Joint  Protocol  between  the
    Family Court and the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal  (IAC)  and
    should have been mindful of the consequences in law of  the  disclosure
    of family proceedings involving children being disclosed in the absence
    of consent of the Family Court. The judge should also have  been  aware
    that consent to disclosure of the documents could and should have  been
    sought from the Family Court. Unfortunately, the decision contained  no
    reference to the Protocol whatsoever  and  no  regard  was  had  as  to
    whether  to  instigate  the  agreed  procedures  provided  for  by  the
    Protocol. The decision discloses that the judge had regard only at [14]
    of the decision as to whether to adjourn, but concluded that this would
    cause further delay, noting that the appellant  had  failed  to  comply
    with directions issued to help him prepare for the  hearing  and  avoid
    the necessity  to  adjourn  to  produce  further  evidence.  The  judge
    concluded that, "either there is no evidence to support the  claims  he
    makes or, that the information that is present  does  not  support  his
    claims. In these circumstances there was no need to adjourn  to  obtain
    additional evidence. In my view it was in the interests of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing." That decision was procedurally unfair to the
    appellant.

12. The strength of the error of  law  is  indicated  by  the  respondent's
    letter dated 10.9.18,  to  the  effect  that  it  did  not  oppose  the
    application for permission to  appeal  'and  invites  the  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral (continuance)  hearing  for  the
    reasons given at paragraphs 2 (iii-v) of the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal.' Those reasons are in essence the failure to invoke  the  Joint
    Protocol, as explained above.

13. Having set the decision aside, I invoked the Family Court Protocol with
    the result that in due course consent was give  to  disclosure  of  the
    latest Family Court documents and orders.  I  also  directed  that  the
    continuation hearing should not take place until after receipt  of  the
    response from the Family Court. I also invited the appellant to  attend
    and participate in the hearing so that he could update  me  as  to  the
    current situation with his children.

14. The Family Court consent order of 30.1.19 directed the mother  to  make
    the three children available  for  contact  with  the  appellant  every
    fourth weekend Saturday, with dates and times to  be  arranged  between
    the parties. This included short  visits  to  his  flat,  provided  the
    children were in agreement. It was further ordered  that  the  children
    may attend contact with the appellant for any further contact that  may
    be agreed between the parties in advance.

15. The consent order followed two CAFCASS reports from September 2018  and
    January 2019. In summary, these indicated that whilst the children  had
    differing concerns about how the appellant spoke to and  treated  them,
    they wanted to maintain contact with him and spoke  of  their  hope  of
    visits such as  to  the  zoo,  the  cinema,  or  McDonalds.  The  final
    recommendation was in the same terms as the consent order  referred  to
    above.

16. In oral evidence at the hearing before  me  on  9.9.19,  the  appellant
    confirmed that he has been having regular  contact  with  the  children
    about every four weeks. He maintained  that  it  was  going  well.  His
    further documentation includes many photographs of him with  the  three
    children, the eldest of whom is now 11 years old, in various leisure or
    recreational activities. He said he had attended school to  speak  with
    the head teachers and had received copies of  the  school  reports.  He
    explained that the eldest had just started secondary school but he  was
    still waiting for a response to his request to know  which  school,  so
    that he could make contact with the  school  as  a  parent.  In  cross-
    examination by Mr Avery, he was able to speak  of  the  eldest  child's
    career ambitions. He said they children looked forward  to  seeing  him
    and were looking forward to meeting his mother, their grandmother, when
    she visits from Nigeria soon. On the oral and documentary  evidence  it
    was clear that the appellant has continued contact with his children.

17. Mr Avery submitted that the contact was limited  but  deferred  to  the
    tribunal as to whether it amounted to a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship. On the evidence, I was more than satisfied on the balance
    of probabilities that  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship, demonstrated by the evidence and factors set  out  above,
    and for the reasons stated. In reaching that conclusion, I  have  taken
    account, in  the  round,  of  the  other  letters  and  many  documents
    submitted by the appellant both to the First-tier Tribunal and  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, of which it is not necessary to list here.

18. The legal issue is that set out in s117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act,  which
    provides that in the case of person who is not  liable  to  deportation
    the public interest does not require his removal where he has a genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the  UK.  It  is
    common ground that each of the children are qualifying children as they
    are British citizens.

19. In KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, the Supreme  Court  held  that  in  the
    reasonableness assessment it is relevant to consider where the parents,
    apart from the relevant provisions, are expected to be, since  it  will
    normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.  Whilst  children
    are not to be blamed for the  immigration  history  of  a  parent,  the
    assessment must be made on the basis of the facts as they  are  in  the
    real world. It is clear that outside section 117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the appellant has no basis to  remain.
    However, their mother is  settled  in  the  UK  and  the  children  are
    themselves British citizens. It follows that it is not likely that  the
    children would ever leave the UK.

20. Further, in JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT
    00072 (IAC) Rev 1, the Upper Tribunal held that "Section 117B(6) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  requires  a  court  or
    tribunal to hypothesise that the child  in  question  would  leave  the
    United Kingdom, even if this is not likely to  be  the  case,  and  ask
    whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  do  so,"  a
    decision recently endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State
    for the Home Department v AB (Jamaica) & Anor [2019] EWCA Civ 661.

21. It follows that if the appellant's relationship with any or all of  his
    British citizen children is genuine and subsisting,  then  despite  his
    precarious immigration status and immigration history, he has  a  valid
    claim for Leave to Remain on the basis that the public interest in  his
    removal to maintain immigration control is outweighed or neutralised by
    the effect of the s117B(6) reasonableness assessment.

22. On the facts of this case, and for the reasons already  given,  I  have
    found the parental relationship genuine and subsisting, even if  it  is
    limited for the time being by the constraints  of  the  Family  Court's
    contact order. I am satisfied and it is abundantly clear that it  would
    not be reasonable to expect these children to leave the  UK.  They  are
    British citizens with rights and entitlements to enjoy all the benefits
    of life in the UK. I  am  also  satisfied  that  their  best  interests
    pursuant to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009 are surely to remain living in the UK and  to  reside  with  their
    mother but to be able to continue contact with their father. It follows
    it would not be reasonable to expect them, or any of them, to leave the
    UK, even though that would  never  actually  happened  but  is  only  a
    hypothesis. That results in a complete answer to the public interest in
    the  proportionality  balancing  exercise  between  on  the  one   hand
    maintaining immigration control to protect the well-being of the UK and
    on the other the family life rights of  the  appellant  and  his  three
    British citizen children. It follows that the decision must be regarded
    as disproportionate, so that the appeal should be allowed.

Notice of Decision

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remake the decision by allowing the  appeal  on  human
                    rights grounds pursuant to article 8 ECHR.

                    I make no order for costs, there  being  no  application
                    for the same.

                    Signed DMW Pickup


                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated  9 September 2019

