
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03011/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2017                         |On 19 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                          mr Brandon William plitt
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, Counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
Greenwood
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1    This is an appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the  First  tier
      Tribunal Onoufriou dated 23.12.16  dismissing  the  Appellant's  human
      rights appeal.

2    The Appellant is a national of the United States of America aged 44  at
      the date of the Judge's decision.  He entered the UK as a  visitor  on
      or around October 2002 to visit Ms Sandra Baker ('the Sponsor') who he
      had met on line in 1999.  They married in the UK on  25  January  2003
      when the Appellant was present as a visitor. He was removed  from  the
      United Kingdom  by  facilitated  removal  before  applying  for  entry
      clearance to return to the UK as his Sponsor's spouse.  He was granted
      entry clearance in that capacity for a period of 2 years. Although  no
      copy of that grant of entry clearance is available, that  grant  would
      have been under paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules.

3    No application for indefinite leave to  remain  (under  para  287)  was
      made. He has been an overstayer since 20 May 2005.

4    An application for leave to remain on the basis  of  his  married  life
      with the Sponsor was made on or around 22 December 2014 under Appendix
      FM but was refused without a  right  of  appeal.  On  9  June  2015  a
      statement of additional grounds was  submitted  which  the  Respondent
      treated as a human rights application, refusal of  which  on  10  July
      2015 resulted in a right of appeal.

5     The  Respondent  accepted  that  the  Appellant  met  the  suitability
      requirements of Appendix FM and the  eligibility  requirements  of  R-
      LTRP1.1.(d)(ii), (refusal letter, para 10).  This  would  require  the
      Appellant additionally to met the requirements of EX1. The reason that
      the Appellant was not deemed to meet all of the  requirements  of  the
      eligibility  requirements  (and  hence  was  obliged  additionally  to
      satisfy the requirements of EX1) is not stated in the decision letter,
      but will have been because the Appellant did not  meet  the  financial
      eligibility requirement (because he  and  the  Sponsor  did  not  have
      sufficient income) and because, as an overstayer of some 10 years,  he
      did not meet the immigration status requirement.

5    The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant met  the  requirements
      of EX1 because she was of the view that there were not, under  EX1(b),
      insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing  outside  the  UK
      (refusal, para 15). The Appellant appealed against that decision.

6    The appeal came before the Judge on 12 December 2016.  Through  Counsel
      (Mr Jones, who also appears before me)  the  Appellant  accepted  that
      there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
      outside the UK (decision, [26] and [29]).

7     The  Judge  made  findings  at  [29]  that  the  couple   would   have
      accommodation available to them in the USA; there was no evidence that
      the Appellant had any health problems; there  was  no  reason  why  he
      would not be able to be able to obtain employment in the USA;  he  had
      worked in the USA previously; there was no evidence that  the  Sponsor
      required 24 hour care; the Sponsor had type 2 diabetes, but there  was
      no evidence of any mobility problems as asserted. The Judge  concluded
      that there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing
      in the USA.

8    Additionally, the Judge held at [30] that the  Appellant  did  not  met
      the requirements of leave to remain on the  grounds  of  private  life
      under para 276ADE(1)(vi), as there were no serious  obstacles  to  the
      Appellant's integration in the USA.

9    It is to be noted  that  there  are  no  challenges  to  any  of  those
      findings.

10   The Judge proceeded to  consider  (paras  [31]-[35])   the  Appellant's
      right to private and family life and whether the Respondent's decision
      to refuse his human rights claim amounted to an unlawful breach of the
      Appellant's rights under Article 8 ECHR (para [35]).  The  Judge  held
      that medication for the Sponsor's diabetes would be available for  her
      in the USA; she was not immobile; they had savings and would  be  able
      to establish themselves in the USA. There was no reason why they could
      not continue their family life in the USA [31].

11   The Appellant's  private  life  friendships  could  be  continued  from
      outside the UK; the public interest in maintaining immigration control
      was not outweighed; it may well be that his overstaying arose due to a
      mistake or misunderstanding [32], but the Judge did  not  accept  that
      the Appellant was reliant on Harwich immigration [34]; although  there
      was no guarantee that any discretion might  be  applied  by  an  Entry
      Clearance Officers regarding the financial  requirements  of  Appendix
      FM, that did not amount to exceptional circumstances [33].

11   The Judge held that the decision was not unlawful,  and  dismissed  the
      appeal.

12   The Appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  with
      respect unfocussed and fail to state succinctly what material error of
      law, for example as per para 9 of  R (Iran) & Ors v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA
      Civ 982, the Appellant asserts is present within the Judge's decision.




13   The grounds assert in a pre-amble at paras 1-16 that the  a  number  of
      matters were 'accepted' or 'uncontroversial' and were 'settled'  (para
      17), including that:

      (i) the couple existed independent of State assistance and had done so
           throughout the Appellant's long residence (para 8);

      (ii)    the couple possessed the means to remain independent of  State
           assistance, and  that  the  Appellant  could  and  would  obtain
           employment were his status to be regularised (para 9);

      (iii)   the Judge accepted that there were no negative  points  to  be
           derived from the application of s.117B NIAA 2002, in  particular
           'not  demurring'  from  the  contention  that  the   Appellant's
           relationship with the sponsor could not be characterised as  one
           having been formed when his states was precarious (para 11);

      (iv)    had an application for extension of leave  to remain been made
           with the currency of the Appellant's leave to remain  from  2003
           to 2005, his leave would have been extended, and settled  status
           would have been acquired in due course (para 12);

      (v) the Appellant's failure to apply for further leave to  remain  had
           arisen from his lack  of  knowledge  or  misunderstanding,  that
           naivety  being  fixed  around  an  apprehension   that   Harwich
           Immigration Service would facilitate the provision of extensions
           of leave, and the Judge's finding that there was  absolutely  no
           evidence   to   support   the   Appellant's    contention    was
           unsustainable, given the evidence of the Appellant  and  Sponsor
           (para 13);

      (vi)    the Judge accepted that the Appellant had a  private  life  in
           the UK (para 15);

      (vii)   the Sponsor enjoyed a strong private life (para 16);

      (viii)  the Sponsor suffered certain chronic  health  conditions,  and
           found  the  prospect  of  relocation  distressing  and   anxiety
           inducing.

14   The Grounds continue at [17]:

           "It was on those settled and unusual facts  that  the  Appellant
           fixed  his  case  that  there  were  exceptional   circumstances
           orientating against the application (of) immigration control  in
           a manner which  forced  relocation,  or  at  least  a  potential
           prolonged separation whilst entry clearance was again sought."

15   The grounds further argue that:

      (i) the Judge erred in failing to answer the question properly, as  to
           whether the needs  of  a  democratic  society  necessitated  the
           maintenance of strict  immigration  control,  'on  those  facts'
           (para 19-20);

      (ii)    the Judge's conclusion on that point was 'controversial' (para
           20);

      (iii)   the Judge erred in his approach by considering  whether  there
           was any reason why family life could not be continued in the USA
           - this was said not to be 'the issue' (para 24);

      (iv)    the Judge  failed  to  weigh  the  decision's  impact  on  the
           Sponsor's private life interests (para 25);

      (v) the Judge may have misdirected himself in law  if  accepting  that
           Sultana  v  SSHD  [2014]  UKUT  000540  was  authority  for  the
           proposition that an  ECO  can  at  their  discretion  waive  the
           requirements  of  the  financial  eligibility  requirements   of
           Appendix FM (para 27);

      (vi)    the Judge failed to consider the application  of  Chikwamba  v
           SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 on the assessment of proportionality.

16   In a decision dated 10.7.17, FtT Judge Page observed that much  of  the
      Appellant's grounds of appeal amounted to a mere disagreement with the
      Judge's decision, but granted permission to appeal generally.

17   In the appeal before me, I heard from the parties in the appeal.

      Assessment

18   The Appellant's central contention, that the  Judge  failed  to  answer
      'properly' the question as  to  whether  the  needs  of  a  democratic
      society necessitated the maintenance of  strict  immigration  control,
      and that the decision was 'controversial', is premised on the  earlier
      contention  that  certain  facts  were  accepted,  uncontroversial  or
      settled.

19   That is a false premise. Addressing the  issues  set  out  at  para  13
      above:

      (i) Even if the Appellant has not directly received  public  benefits,
           it is not  correct  to  assert  that  the  couple  have  existed
           independently of State assistance,  as  it  is  clear  that  the
           Sponsor receives pension credit, and housing  benefit,  both  in
           significant sums, and both being 'public funds' under para 6  of
           the Immigration Rules.

      (ii)    As regards the suggestion that it was accepted that the couple
           possessed the means to remain independent of  State  assistance,
           and that the Appellant could and would  obtain  employment  were
           his status to be regularised, I cannot for my part see that this
           was accepted anywhere by the Respondent or the Judge.  There  is
           no such favourable finding.


      (iii)   (a)  Whether or not  the  Appellant's  family  life  with  the
                 Sponsor was 'precarious' is potentially relevant as to  the
                 application of s.117B NIAA 2002:

                       "(4) Little weight should be given to-
                            (a)     a private life, or
                            (b)     a relationship formed with a qualifying
                            partner, that is established by a person  at  a
                            time when the person is in the  United  Kingdom
                            unlawfully.
                       (5)  Little weight should be given to a private  life
                       established by a person at a time when  the  person's
                       immigration status is precarious."

           (b)    The relationship was formed on line in 1999  (Appellant's
                 witness statement, para 1). The Appellant entered the UK as
                 a visitor in August 2002 and the couple married on 25.1.03.
                 The Appellant had lawful leave to remain in the UK at  that
                 time, but 6 months  leave  to  enter  the  UK  was  clearly
                 precarious  leave,  applying  relevant  principles  in   AM
                 (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260  (IAC),  Deelah  and  others
                 (section 117B - ambit) (Rev 1) [2015] UKUT  515  (IAC).  He
                 left only after enforcement steps were take against him. He
                 had lawful leave to  enter  from  2003  to  2005  when  re-
                 admitted, but has been present unlawfully since 2005.

           (c)    Para 26 of Deelah also provides:

                       "...The   suggestion   that   the   "little   weight"
                       instruction enshrined  in  section  117B(4)  and  (5)
                       applies only to the beginning of a  person's  private
                       life or the commencement  of  a  relationship  formed
                       with a qualifying partner and not the continuance  of
                       either results in a construction of these  provisions
                       which, in my estimation, is manifestly  unsustainable
                       to the point of absurdity. Why  penalise  the  former
                       and  not  the  latter?  No  rational  explanation  or
                       justification for  this  differential  treatment  was
                       advanced in argument and I am unable to  conceive  of
                       any."


                 Thus, it was arguable that the continuation of the couple's
                 relationship  from  2005  onwards,  when  the   Appellant's
                 presence was unlawful, also militates in  favour,  applying
                 the provisions of  s.117B(4)(b),  of  a  finding  that  the
                 continuation of the Appellant's family life in the UK  from
                 2005 onwards should result in that family life being  given
                 little weight.

           (d)    The Judge does not  in  fact  appear  to  have  made  any
                 specific finding at para 34 as to whether s.117B(4) or  (5)
                 applied in the present matter, or whether the circumstances
                 in  which  the  Appellant's  family  life  was  formed   or
                 continued were such  that  it  should  be  afforded  little
                 weight.

           (e)    However, even in the absence of such a finding, I  reject
                 the proposition, against the factual and  legal  background
                 set out at 19(iii)(a)-(d) above, that the lack of any  such
                 finding should  be  taken  to  amount  to  the  Judge  'not
                 demurring' from the proposition that the Appellant's status
                 was not precarious, when it clearly was.

      (iv)    There was  no  evidence  before  the  Judge  as  to  what  the
           Appellant and Sponsor's financial circumstances  were  in  2005,
           when the Appellant might have made an application for indefinite
           leave to remain, and therefore no  evidence  as  to  whether  he
           would have met the relevant requirements for ILR as a spouse; in
           particular, there was no evidence before the Judge as to whether
           the maintenance requirements were satisfied at that time.  I  am
           unable to find reference to any concession by the Respondent, or
           finding of fact by the Judge,  that  the  requirements  for  ILR
           would have been met at any time. It is  thus  unsustainable  for
           the Appellant to make the  bare  assertion  that  the  Appellant
           would  have  met,  but  for  his  ignorance  or  mistake  as  to
           procedure, the requirements for ILR, and to assert that this was
           accepted, uncontroversial, and settled.

      (v) The Judge does appear to  accept  at  [28]  that  the  Appellant's
           failure to apply for further leave to  remain  appears  to  have
           been due to a lack of knowledge or  a  misunderstanding,  or  at
           [32] that  his  overstaying  may  well  have  arisen  due  to  a
           misunderstanding or a mistake, but there was no finding  by  the
           Judge that his naivety was fixed  around  an  apprehension  that
           Harwich Immigration Service would facilitate  the  provision  of
           extensions of leave. Indeed, the Judge specifically rejects (and
           in no way can be said to have equivocated on the issue (Grounds,
           para 14) at line 3-4, para [34]  that  the  Appellant  had  been
           reliant of Harwich Immigration. The suggestion  in  the  grounds
           that such finding was unsustainable, given the evidence  of  the
           Appellant and Sponsor, is ill founded; there is  nothing  within
           the Appellant's evidence, even taken at face value, that Harwich
           immigration had done or said  anything  to  make  the  Appellant
           believe that he had made an application or that they were in the
           process of considering an such application. The Judge also  held
           at [28] that the Appellant had had every opportunity to make  an
           application but had failed to do so.

      (vi)    The Judge did accept at [32] that the Appellant had a  private
           life in the UK,  and  'will  have  built  up  friendships  here'
           (although there was no evidence of any such  friendships  before
           the Judge), but held that such friendships can be continued from
           abroad by modern means of communication. There is  no  challenge
           to that finding.

      (vii)   The assertion that it was uncontroversial that the Sponsor had
           a strong private life is itself a controversial one, given  that
           Mr Jones drew to my attention, as the evidence before the  Judge
           of what that private life comprised, only a  tenancy  agreement,
           and  a  short  letter  dated  17  June  2015   from   'Signpost'
           Colchester, stating that the Sponsor had volunteered there since
           25 April 2014.

      (viii)  Similarly, the suggestion that it was uncontroversial that the
           Sponsor  suffered  from  certain   chronic   health   conditions
           (pleural) is unsustainable; the Judge accepted that the  Sponsor
           had type 2 diabetes  (for  which,  the  Judge  held,  there  was
           adequate medication available in the USA), but held at [29] that
           there was no evidence that she required  24  hour  care  or  had
           mobility problems. There is no discreet challenge to the Judge's
           findings on the Sponsor's state of health, for instance, that he
           failed to have adequate regard to specific evidence.

20   Thus, most of alleged accepted, uncontroversial  or  settled  facts  of
      the case are nothing of the sort.

21   The Appellant's central contention, therefore, referred to at  para  18
      above, is therefore unfounded.

22    The  suggestion  at  para  20  of  the  grounds  that  any  particular
      conclusion of the Judge was 'controversial' discloses no error of law.

23   The Judge did not limit himself  to  considering  only  whether  family
      life could be continued in the USA, and did not  treat  this  as  'the
      issue' in the appeal; he directed himself appropriately in law at [31]
      and considered all relevant matters.

24   Before me, Mr Jones did not pursue, following the judgment  in  Agyarko
      paras 61-68, any argument that the refusal of  the  Appellant's  human
      rights claim would 'force' the Sponsor to leave  the  United  Kingdom,
      contrary to her rights as an EU national to reside within  the  EU.  I
      find  that  the  Judge  was  well  aware  of  the  Sponsor's   British
      nationality and that she had lived in the UK her whole life,  but,  as
      noted above at para 19(vii) above, evidence of her private life in the
      UK was limited. Any argument  that  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
      account matters relating to the Sponsor's private life which are  only
      established by way of inference fails  to  establish  that  the  Judge
      erred in law.

25   Insofar as the Respondent submitted before the Judge that  Sultana  was
      authority for the proposition that ECOs  had  discretion  to  entirely
      waive the financial eligibility requirements of Appendix FM, there  is
      nothing in the Judge's decision which suggests that he adopted and was
      misdirected by such  submission;  indeed,  the  Judge  determined  the
      appeal on the assumed basis that any discretion that the ECO  had  may
      not be exercised.

26   The Judge clearly did consider the prospect of  the  Appellant  leaving
      the United Kingdom to make an application for  entry  clearance;  para
      33. This was not a case  where,  applying   SSHD  v  Hayat  (Pakistan)
      [2012] EWCA Civ, there was no 'sensible reason' for  the  Respondent's
      insistence  on  the  Appellant  performing  the  procedural  task   of
      departing the UK to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  from
      abroad which was bound to succeed; there were considerable doubts that
      the Appellant met the financial eligibility requirements.   There  was
      no requirement for the Judge to have considered  the  protect  of  the
      Appellant departing to make an application  for  entry  clearance  any
      more than he did at para 33, or to make direct reference to Chikwamba.



27   Overall, the Judge appropriately directed  himself  in  law,  took  all
      relevant matters into account,  and  made  no  error  of  law  in  the
      decision.

28   I observe (although such observation forms no part of the  reasons  for
      my decision) that if the Sponsor's alleged disabilities were such that
      she became entitled to attendance allowance (she now  being  65)  then
      the financial eligibility requirements of Appendix FM  might  possibly
      be more readily satisfied. These are matters  for  the  Appellant  and
      Sponsor to consider.

      Decision

      The making of the decision did not involve the making of any error of
      law.

      The Judge's decision is upheld.

      The Appellant's appeal is dismissed




Signed                     Date: 17.1.18

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

