
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03981/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals, Liverpool|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th September 2018                        |On 25th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     M D
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sills (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Brookfield, promulgated on 14th December 2017, following a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 4th December  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Mali, and was born on 11th July
    1991.  She appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated,
    refusing her application for further leave to remain in the UK  on  the
    basis of her relationship with her daughter, who was born in the UK  on
    21st June 2009, and is not a British citizen.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that, although her  asylum  claim
    was refused on 8th December 2009, she was allowed  to  remain  in  this
    country because of her daughter.  She had been taken into care  by  the
    local authority when she was 1 year old.  The care order was dated  1st
    March 2012. The daughter is in long term  foster  care.   Although  the
    Appellant did not have direct contact  with  her  daughter  since  June
    2011, because the daughter herself did not wish to see  the  Appellant,
    she had made further submissions on 23rd April 2012 on the basis of her
    relationship with her  daughter.   Even  though  her  submissions  were
    rejected by the Home Office on 13th March 2014, her appeal against that
    refusal was allowed by  the  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  the  local
    authority was considering instigating a  care  plan  for  the  daughter
    which included a role for the Appellant.  The Appellant was accordingly
    granted discretionary leave for 30 months up to  12th  September  2016.
    In the meantime, the Appellant gave birth to a second daughter on  14th
    February  2016  in  the  UK.   This  daughter,  however,   enjoys   DRC
    nationality, through her father  and  Malian  nationality  through  the
    Appellant herself.  This daughter does not, as a result,  have  British
    citizenship.

The Judge's Decision

 4. The judge, in refusing the Appellant's appeal, came  to  the  following
    findings of fact.  First, that although the Appellant  had  a  partner,
    who was a national of the DRC, he was not her  husband  nor  her  civil
    partner, and they had not lived in a relationship akin to marriage  for
    a period of two years.

 5.  Second, the Appellant's partner, the national of  the  DRC,  had  been
    granted LTR as the sole carer for his own daughter  until  April  2018,
    and even so, he had not seen his daughter since September 2015.

 6. Third, the Appellant's own child, her first daughter (who  has  so  far
    been referred to above), was a  citizen  of  Mali,  and  there  was  no
    evidence to indicate  that  she  had  been  naturalised  as  a  British
    citizen.  She had been living in the UK for a period  of  seven  years.
    The Appellant had a second  daughter,  who  had  Congolese  nationality
    through her father, and  Mali  nationality  through  her  mother.   The
    second daughter was also not a British citizen.

 7. Fourth, the Appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-
    LTRPT.2.3 of Appendix FM, because she could not  demonstrate  that  she
    had sole responsibility for her  child's  upbringing,  given  that  the
    first daughter was in foster care, and a  care  order  was  made  which
    transferred parental responsibility for this first daughter to the City
    of Stoke-on-Trent Social Services on 1st March 2012.  That  aside,  the
    Appellant could not qualify for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  her
    private life  because  she  was  25  years  old  at  the  date  of  her
    application and had lived in the UK only since June 2009.

 8. Importantly, the judge went on to conclude that the  Appellant's  leave
    was granted to her in June 2014 on the basis that  there  was  evidence
    before the Tribunal that  a  care  plan  for  her  first  daughter  had
    included future contact with the Appellant.

 9. That contact,  however,  had  not  materialised  since  2014,  and  the
    Appellant had not provided any current care plan for social services

         "which includes  that  they  intend  to  continue  to  include  the
         Appellant in their care plan for [her first daughter]. There is  no
         evidence placed before me from any professionals  to  suggest  that
         [her first daughter] benefits from knowing that her mother  remains
         in the UK" (see paragraph 12(xvii)).

10. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  a
    previous decision by Judge  Frankish,  dated  13th  March  2014,  as  a
    starting point, as was required by the  Rule  in  Devaseelan.   Second,
    that the "best interests of the child" a principle had been  overlooked
    by the judge.

12. On 12th July 2018, permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Submissions

13. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Sills,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, submitted that when Judge Frankish  allowed  the  appeal  in
    2014 (see AA/16517/2009 which appears at C2 of the Respondent's bundle)
    that he had done so expressly on the basis that it was not  anticipated
    that the Appellant (as mother) and her first daughter  (as  her  child)
    would have contact for many years.

14. However, despite this  realisation,  Judge  Frankish  had  allowed  the
    appeal, on the basis that, "I suggest that her immigration team is told
    that [the first daughter] will need, Dr Freedman's emphasis, in  future
    to have contact with her mother.  This means that it is  very  much  in
    [the first daughter's] interest that her mother is allowed to remain in
    this country and available or contact, even though we cannot predict at
    present when that will occur (see paragraph 13).

15. The judge also referred to the CAFCASS Report of 1st  March  2012,  and
    observed that,

         "as made clear  by  Dr  Freedman,  in  order  to  meet  [the  first
         daughter's] ongoing needs, it is imperative  that  [the  Appellant]
         remains in  the  United  Kingdom.   This  will  enable  [the  first
         daughter] in the future to have contact with her birth  family  and
         hopefully be able to start to  resolve  the  trauma  that  she  has
         suffered in her early childhood" (see paragraph 14).

    Indeed, Judge Frankish went on to conclude (at paragraph 16) that,

         "it is not possible for [the first daughter]  to  be  rehabilitated
         into the care of her mother due to the reasons stated above ...  It
         is proposed that [the Appellant]  will have no role in the  day-to-
         day arrangements for [her first daughter] ... The [Appellant]  will
         continue to be consulted in regard to subsequent Statutory  Reviews
         and will be granted once every twelve  weeks.   This  will  include
         photographs of [the first daughter] and an update therapy  progress
         of any direct contact" (paragraph 16).

    The fact was, submitted Mr Sills, that  the  Appellant  was  then  also
    provided with photos and information by telephone regarding [the  first
    daughter] as Judge Frankish had  also  found  at  paragraph  8  of  his
    determination back in 2014.

16. Mr Sills went on to say that he had a letter from Stoke-on-Trent Social
    Services dated 6th September 2018,  just  a  week  before  the  present
    hearing before this Tribunal, whereby Sharon Davies (the social worker)
    states that,

         "since my last correspondence to you, progress  has  been  made  in
         respect of contact between [the Appellant] and her daughter,  .....
         The [Appellant] has sent photographs to [the  first  daughter]  who
         has recently been able to view the photographs and not dismiss them
         as she has in the past.  The [Appellant] sent  a  card  to  'mamma'
         which is significant progress".

17. Mr Sills accepted that, although this was information after the date of
    the hearing before Judge Brookfield, nevertheless, it demonstrated that
    there was a continuity of the kind of progress that had been  envisaged
    precisely by Judge Frankish back in 2014.  It was significant that this
    was at the time when he had allowed the appeal on the  basis  that  the
    Appellant, as the mother, is allowed to remain  in  this  country,  and
    available for contact, "even though we cannot predict at  present  when
    that will occur" (at paragraph 13).

18. For his part, Mr Tan submitted that at the time that the  decision  had
    been made by Judge Frankish, the first daughter, the Appellant's  first
    child was only 3 years old.  The decision was based on a care plan that
    had been put into effect.  The family contact, it was envisaged,  would
    develop on the basis of that.  However, there  was  no  development  of
    contact and the Appellant was not in "direct contact"  with  her  first
    daughter.  Therefore, the relationship had  not  developed.   What  had
    been hoped for, back in 2014, had simply  not  happened.   Accordingly,
    the judge was correct  in  concluding  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed.

Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

20. First, the judge is wrong as a question of a  fact  to  conclude  that,
    "there was no evidence placed  before  me  from  any  professionals  to
    suggest that the first daughter  benefits from knowing that her  mother
    remains in the UK" (paragraph 12(xvii)).

21. He is wrong to conclude that:

         "there appear to be no current plans  for  the  Appellant  to  have
         direct contact with [the first daughter] at any time in the near or
         distant future, as the first daughter] does not wish  contact  with
         her mother and the professionals treating [the first daughter] have
         made a decision that contact with the  Appellant  is  not  in  [the
         first daughter's ] best interest" (IBID).

22. The fact is that the Appellant has  remained  in  contact  with  social
    services in Stoke-on-Trent.  At the same time, as Judge  Frankish  made
    it clear, it was not possible to say how the first  daughter  would  be
    rehabilitated into the care of her mother,  or  when  that  would  take
    place (see paragraph 16).




23. Second, the judge had to take the decision by Judge  Frankish  on  13th
    March 2014, as a starting point under  the  principles  of  Devaseelan.
    That being so, Judge Frankish (at paragraph 14) had  accepted  that  it
    was in the best interests of the Appellant's child that  the  Appellant
    remain in the United Kingdom.  He had said that "the [first daughter's]
    needs can only be met if mother  is  entitled  to  continue  to  remain
    mentally well and emotionally available for the [first daughter]".



24. Judge Frankish had also quoted the local authority  in  Stoke-on-Trent,
    in stating that "the [first daughter] will need  to  continue  to  have
    regular correspondence from her mother since the  mother  is  the  only
    link to her birth family that she has now ..."  (paragraph  16).   That
    has indeed been the position throughout this case.



25. In fact the letter at page 70 of the bundle, dated 6th September  2017,
    which was before the judge below, is to the effect that:

         "Dear Mariam,

         I have passed the letters and  photos  to  the  [first  daughter's]
         foster carers who are going to sit with  her  to  explain  you  are
         interested to know how she is doing",

    and it is signed off by Sharon Davies, the social worker.

26. This, indeed, is the clearest evidence that, even as  long  as  a  year
    ago, in September 2017, exactly that which had been envisaged by  Judge
    Frankish, was beginning to take place, and that the social worker,  was
    forwarding letters sent by the  Appellant  for  her  daughter,  to  the
    foster carers, with the undertaking  that  they  would  sit  the  first
    daughter down and explain to her that her mother was interested to know
    how she was doing.




27. All the evidence, accordingly, demonstrated that the process  envisaged
    by the care plan was taking  effect  just  as  well  as  intended.  The
    decision by the judge below, failed to acknowledge  this  and  in  fact
    reached a view that was contrary to the evidence before  the  Tribunal.
    That being so, the decision cannot stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge Brookfield, pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b) because  the  nature
or extent of any judicial fact-finding, which is necessary in order for  the
decision and the appeal to be remade is such  that,  having  regard  to  the
overriding objective in Rule 2, it was appropriate to remit the case to  the
First-tier Tribunal.

This appeal is allowed.

An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th October 2018
