
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03899/2015
     HU/03900/2015
     HU/03901/2015
     HU/03902/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 January 2018                       |On 6 February 2018                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                 Favour [H]
                                  Oddy [O]
                                 Divine [H]
                                 Sandra [I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms N Nmamni (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath Home office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr  [O],  the  main  appellant  in  respect  of  a
    decision and reasons before First-tier Tribunal (Judge Plumptre)  (FTT)
    promulgated on 2 March 2017 in which she dismissed the appeal on  human
    rights grounds.

 2. Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal argued that the FTT  failed  to
    attach weight to the fact that the third appellant  was  a  "qualified"
    child and placed too great weight on the poor history of  the  parents,
    in effect blaming the children for their conduct [47].  The  assessment
    as to reasonableness was inadequate [30]. The FTT failed to carry out a
    proper assessment of risk in respect of the third child as regards  FGM
    [52-64]. Finally it was argued that the FTT was  not  entitled  on  the
    evidence to find that the parents had worked illegally and not paid tax
    or insurance.

 3. Permission was granted on the grounds that the  FTT  failed  to  attach
    significant weight to the length of residence of the  qualifying  child
    pursuant to the guidance in MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

Discussion  and conclusions

 4. I have listened to the submissions made this morning and I have decided
    that there was no arguable error of law in the determination. I dismiss
    the appeal.  My reasons are  as  follows.   In  a  detailed  and  well-
    reasoned decision and reasons  the  FTT  set  out  clear  findings  and
    reasons in support of her decision.  I am satisfied that there  are  no
    arguable grounds in support of the claim that the risk of  FGM  to  the
    third child was not properly assessed.  The decision at  paragraphs  52
    to 62 fully covers the issue and took into account that  there  was  no
    evidence to  show  why  the  particular  child  was  at  risk  of  FGM,
    notwithstanding that her mother comes from a background where  FGM  had
    been practised.

 5. As to the ground that the FTT had in effect blamed the children for the
    sins of the parents in terms  of  their  poor  immigration  history,  I
    conclude that this ground has not been  made  out.   The  FTT  properly
    considered this issue by looking first at where the best  interests  of
    the children lie [31] without reference to the immigration  history  or
    the previous convictions of the first appellant in 2012.

 6. As to whether it is reasonable to expect the  third  child  (who  is  a
    qualifying child by reason of her residence in the  UK)  to  return  to
    Nigeria, this was also an issue that was fully considered  by  the  FTT
    and in terms of the public interest under Section  117B(6)  Nationality
    Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).  I am  satisfied  that  the
    FTT did consider this  aspect  properly  in  the  context  of  all  the
    evidence with reference to the statutory criteria.  The fact  that  FTT
    had not expressed this using the phrase "significant weight" as regards
    to the length of residence, did not make any material difference to the
    outcome.

 7. The FTT found the best interest of the children lay in  remaining  with
    their parents as a family unit.  The FTT considered the age, length  of
    residence  and  education  which  were  all  the  issues  relevant   to
    "reasonableness".  The FTT found no  evidence  of  any  exceptional  or
    compelling factors and in the balancing exercise the FTT found that the
    public interest outweighed any private interests.  I am satisfied  that
    the approach taken was entirely consistent with the  principles  in  MA
    Pakistan.  Although there has  been  criticism  of  the  FTT  having  a
    particular focus on education,  it  is  apparent  from  the  bindle  of
    evidence for the hearing before  the  FTT  there  was  in  fact  little
    evidence available in terms of social and cultural ties and   the  main
    evidence in relation to the children was in regard to their  education.



 8. As to the evidence of employment, paying tax and national  insurance  I
    accepted that there may have been an factual error in the determination
    and that there was some evidence to show that the appellant's wife  was
    working and paying tax and NI at the time she was a  student  in  2013.
    However, it was clear that there was no  further  relevant  documentary
    evidence adduced before the FTT and the appeal was  determined  on  the
    evidence before it.  This  was  confirmed  by  checking  the  file  and
    bundles of the evidence before the FTT. Even if that evidence had  been
    available I am not satisfied that  the  outcome  would  have  been  any
    different.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 2.2.2018

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 2.2.2018

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
