
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03941/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On May 28, 2019                      |On June 06, 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               mr qadeer ahmad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Richardson, Counsel instructed by Morgan Mark
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Pakistani national who is now 32 years of  age.   He
    originally entered the United Kingdom as a student on September 8, 2007
    with leave to remain until December  31,  2010.   He  was  subsequently
    granted leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Highly  Skilled)  Migrant  until
    April 21, 2016.

 2. On April 19, 2016 the appellant lodged an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain under the Tier 1 route, but this  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on April 19, 2016.  There were a  number  of  administrative
    reviews sought by the appellant, but these  were  all  refused  and  on
    August 31, 2016 he lodged a further application for indefinite leave to
    remain under the Tier 1 route which he subsequently  varied  on  August
    11, 2017 to an application under paragraph 276B HC 395.

 3. The respondent refused this application on January  19,  2018  and  the
    appellant  appealed  it  under  Section  82(1)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His appeal came before Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Seifert (hereinafter referred to  as  "the  Judge")
    who in a decision promulgated on March 26, 2019 dismissed  his  appeal.
    I note that the Judge actually heard the appeal on August 31, 2018.

 4. The appellant appealed  this  decision  and  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Grant-Hutchison granted permission to appeal on  May  7,  2019
    finding it arguable that the Judge had failed to make a  clear  finding
    as to whether it was accepted the respondent had met the initial burden
    of proof and that could have infected the remainder of the decision.

 5. A Rule 24 response dated May 14, 2019  opposed  the  application.   The
    respondent argued that the Judge had properly addressed the  issues  in
    paragraph 322(5) HC 395.  He also argued that the Judge had set out the
    correct burden of proof at paragraph 6 of the decision, had gone on  to
    find there had  been  an  element  of  dishonesty  in  the  appellant's
    behaviour and found he had not adequately explained  the  discrepancies
    in the information provided  to  the  Respondent  and  the  information
    provided to HMRC.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Richardson adopted the grounds of appeal  and  submitted  there  had
    been an error in law.  He highlighted the  delay  between  hearing  the
    appeal that had taken place in August 2018 and the promulgation of  the
    decision that took place almost seven months later.  He referred to the
    Court of Appeal decision of SS (Sri Lanka) [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1391  and
    submitted that  whilst  on  its  own  a  delay  would  not  necessarily
    undermine the Judge's decision, it nevertheless remains an  appropriate
    marker which meant the findings of fact needed to be  scrutinised  with
    particular care to ensure the delay had not infected the determination.
     Mr Richardson accepted that the Judge's decision did  not  demonstrate
    that he had forgotten facts due to the passage of time, but  he  argued
    that the assessment of credibility could have been  undermined  by  the
    delay.

 8. Dealing with the remaining grounds of appeal he submitted  that  whilst
    the Judge correctly set  out  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof  at
    paragraph 6 it was unclear in paragraphs 28  and  29  of  the  decision
    whether the Judge was requiring the appellant to prove  his  innocence.
    The burden of proving dishonesty lay on the respondent on  the  balance
    of probabilities.  Whilst the Judge  found  there  was  an  element  of
    deception  he  nevertheless  submitted  that  the  Judge  should   have
    considered the evidence that had been provided to the respondent,  then
    considered his account and reached  a  conclusion  by  identifying  any
    wrongdoing and assessing  whether  that  wrongdoing  justified  refusal
    under paragraph 322(5) HC 395.

 9. Mr Richardson submitted the failure to make full findings and to assess
    whether this provision applied amounted to an error in law as  did  the
    failure by the Judge to thereafter go on to consider whether  to  apply
    the discretion not to refuse in the appellant's favour.

10. Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that  the  Judge
    had made numerous findings that impinged on the appellant's  dishonesty
    and it was not necessary to use the word "dishonest", especially as the
    Judge had found that there had been an  element  of  deception  by  the
    appellant and that it was not simply a genuine mistake.  With regard to
    any delay, he submitted that on its own this was insufficient.

11. Mr Richardson responded and submitted that there was a  big  difference
    between lying to the respondent about the level of income to  earn  the
    necessary points compared to a situation  where  incorrect  information
    was provided and that such actions were not dishonest.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

12. This is an appeal brought by the  appellant  who  argued,  through  his
    counsel, that the Judge had erred by:

      a) Wrongly placing the burden of proving his honesty on him

      b) Failing to make clear findings on the appellant's own actions.

      c) Taking seven months to promulgate the decision.

13. Dealing with the issue of delay I find that delay on its own  would  be
    insufficient to amount to an error in law.  Mr Richardson  appeared  to
    accept this conclusion in  that  he  relied  on  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in SS which made it clear that there had to be a nexus between
    the delay and the safety of the decision.  It is clear from the Judge's
    recounting of the evidence that he was clearly aware  of  the  evidence
    that was given and had carefully set out the information  contained  in
    the paperwork in his decision and had then gone on to consider the oral
    evidence that had been  provided  by  the  appellant  at  the  hearing.
    Without more, this delay, whilst regrettable, does  not  amount  to  an
    error in law.

14. The issue that required  the  Judge's  consideration  was  whether  the
    finding under paragraph 322(5) HC 395  should  be  upheld.   The  Judge
    considered the guidance of Mr Justice  Spencer  in  the  case  of  Khan
    [2018] UKUT 384 and set out  that  guidance  at  paragraph  27  of  his
    decision.  Importantly, the guidance was set out after  the  Judge  had
    chronologically set out the evidence and before any  findings  of  fact
    were made.

15. It was accepted by both representatives that the burden and standard of
    proof was correctly set out in paragraph 6, but  Mr  Richardson  argued
    that in considering the evidence in paragraphs 28  and  29,  the  Judge
    failed to demonstrate that he had applied that test or that he had made
    findings that the appellant had acted dishonestly.

16. In his written and oral evidence, the appellant stated that  whilst  he
    had seen the documents he had relied on his  accountant  and  that  the
    error lay with the accountant.

17. Having considered the evidence, the Judge made  findings  at  paragraph
    28.  As stated above he had regard to the guidance in  Khan  and  found
    there was no satisfactory evidence from the previous accountant,  there
    were no details of relevant correspondence between  the  appellant  and
    his previous accountant at the time of the tax returns  and  the  Judge
    noted that the appellant had  been  sent  his  tax  returns  to  check,
    confirm and sign before they were lodged with HMRC. Mr  Richardson  had
    submitted that the Judge had not made findings, but I am satisfied  the
    Judge has made clear findings and the Judge  did  have  regard  to  the
    issues in this case.  The Judge had to consider whether  the  appellant
    had simply made an error or had acted dishonestly,  and  Mr  Richardson
    submitted that paragraph 28 does neither.

18. The decision needs to be read as a whole rather than having  regard  to
    individual paragraphs.  The Judge noted that whilst the  appellant  was
    not an accountant he did have business qualifications and  had  studied
    finance in his courses and he concluded that there was no  satisfactory
    explanation from the appellant as to why he did  not  realise  that  an
    error had been made in respect of the tax disclosure.

19. The Judge, in paragraph 29, went on to consider  his  explanations  and
    concluded that he had not made a genuine mistake, as was  alleged,  but
    there was an element of deception.  It therefore follows  that  he  did
    apply the correct burden and standard  of  proof.   The  delay  has  no
    bearing on those findings.

20. Mr Richardson  went  on  to  argue  that,  following  the  decision  in
    Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673, there  was  a  duty  on  not  only  the
    respondent but also the Judge  to  consider  whether,  despite  such  a
    finding under paragraph 322(5) HC 395, it would be disproportionate  to
    require him to leave.  The Judge went on  to  consider  the  Article  8
    position at paragraphs 30 and 31 and has provided adequate reasons  for
    finding it would not be  disproportionate  to  require  him  to  leave.
    Those findings were clearly open to him.

21. In the circumstances I do not find there is an error in law.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

22. There is no error in law and I uphold the original decision.

Signed                              Date         31 May 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award made and I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date         31 May 2019


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis












