
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03703/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2017                            |On 18  January 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr Sikander Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Raza


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the Secretary of State throughout as such  and  to  Mr
    Ali as the claimant to avoid confusion.  The claimant is a  citizen  of
    Pakistan who was born on 20 April 1987.  The claimant initially entered
    the United Kingdom in 2006 with a student visa valid until 30 September
    2007.  He made various applications for further leave to  remain  as  a
    student and as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant and  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Migrant with leave valid until 28 July 2014.   On  21  March  2012  the
    claimant's leave to remain was curtailed with no right of appeal to end
    on 20 May 2012.  On 6 December 2012 he applied for leave to remain as a
    Tier 4 (General) Migrant which was refused  on  18  April  2013.   This
    decision was maintained on reconsideration on 18 September 2013 on  the
    basis of deception in obtaining a TOEIC  certificate.  On  11  November
    2013 the claimant's leave was curtailed with no right of appeal because
    his college had ended its sponsorship of him.

 2. On 20 July 2015 he applied for indefinite leave to remain on the  basis
    of long residence (ten years).  The Secretary  of  State  rejected  his
    application  on  4  January  2016.   The  claimant's  application   was
    considered under paragraph 276D  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  also
    outside the Rules.  The application within the Rules on  the  basis  of
    his ten year residence was refused because the appellant had  submitted
    a TOEIC certificate from the Educational Testing Service (ETS)  to  his
    sponsor as part of his application to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Migrant dated 6 December 2012 that the Secretary of State asserted  was
    obtained fraudulently.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The claimant appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 25 August 2017 First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Shore allowed the claimant's  appeal.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal found that the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  meet  the
    evidential burden of proof that the  law  requires  to  show  that  the
    claimant cheated in his TOEIC tests.  The appeal was allowed under  the
    ten year route under the Rules on the basis that the Secretary of State
    accepted that the appellant is eligible other than failing to meet  the
    eligibility requirements because of the fraud.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and  on  28  September  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Page granted the  Secretary  of  State's  permission  to
    appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge materially erred in law  by
    finding  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to  satisfy  the
    evidential burden of proof despite citing the  case  of  SM  and  Qadir
    which is authority for the proposition that the Secretary of State does
    satisfy that burden where the invalid test result and  generic  witness
    statements  have  been  produced.   The  judge  places  no  weight   or
    significance on the  report  of  Professor  French  and  relies  on  an
    unreported determination of the Upper Tribunal in the case  of  SSHD  v
    Kadivar  IA/42545/2014.   There  is  authority  on  the  point  of  the
    probative value of Professor French's report from the High Court in the
    judgment of Gaogalalwe, R (On the application of) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2017] EWHC 1709 (Admin) (6 July 2017) where it
    was described as powerful evidence.  The judge was wrong to rely on  an
    unreported determination of the Upper Tribunal when there  is  in  fact
    higher court precedent on the very point and misdirected himself in law
    as to whether the evidential burden had been discharged.  It cannot  be
    said that the credibility findings render the above immaterial  because
    had he directed himself properly in respect of the French report he may
    have come to a different conclusion.

 6. In oral submissions Mr Mills submitted that the  judge  found  that  no
    weight can be placed on Professor French's evidence.  At  paragraph  27
    the judge instead relied on the decision in Kadivar.   He  referred  to
    paragraph 26 of the decision where the judge found that the evidence of
    the Secretary of State was woefully inadequate.  There was no reference
    to Professor French's report.  In Gaogalalwe at paragraph 37 the  court
    held that Professor French's report was powerful  evidence.   Professor
    French is Professor Harrison's superior.  Professor Harrison's evidence
    was not at odds with Professor French's evidence.  He referred to  gaps
    in the Secretary of State's evidence.  In the main, both experts agree.
     Professor French obtained the necessary evidence to fill in  the  gaps
    and found that false positives were less than 2%.  This  evidence  went
    well beyond the evidence that was available  in  the  Qadir  case.   At
    paragraph 44 the court referred to the Secretary of State's evidence as
    powerful evidence.  This is far from the woefully  inadequate  evidence
    described in Qadir.  The judge has failed to  take  any  of  this  into
    consideration.  He referred to paragraph 16 of the  decision  where  he
    submitted the judge appears to indicate that the position  was  settled
    however it is clear that Professor French's report was  not  considered
    in the case of Qadir.  He handed up two other decisions, both  judicial
    review decisions.  He referred to the case of Abbas v SSHD [2017]  EWHC
    78 (Admin).  At paragraph 8 the court held that Professor French was  a
    preeminent expert in the UK, was worthy of consideration  and  that  he
    was senior to Professor Harrison.  He referred to the case of  Nawaz  v
    SSHD (ETS: review standard/evidential basis) [2017]  UKUT  00288  (IAC)
    paragraphs 39 to  46  where  the  points  made  by  Professor  French's
    evidence carries weight.  He  submitted  that  these  cases  show  that
    Professor French's report needs to be taken into  account.   The  judge
    expressly finds at paragraph 28 that the respondent does not  meet  the
    evidential burden. However, even in the cases of Qadir and Shehzad  and
    Chowdhury on less powerful evidence it was held that the  Secretary  of
    State did meet the evidential burden.

 7. Mr Raza accepted that the judge erred in  paragraph  28  by  concluding
    that the respondent did not meet the evidential  burden.   However,  he
    submitted that this is not material to the outcome  of  the  case.   He
    referred to paragraph 34 of the case of Gaogalalwe which  set  out  the
    approach that should be taken.  What remains material is an  assessment
    of the  appellant's  evidence  and  the  appellant's  credibility.   He
    submitted that there was no dispute with regard to  the  findings  that
    the appellant speaks fluent English and had passed a number of tests as
    set out at paragraphs 19 to 21 of the decision.  He submitted that  the
    report of Professor French goes to the initial burden of proof  but  is
    not relevant to the burden on the appellant.  The judge has  considered
    all the material evidence and made appropriate findings.   There  is  a
    distinction between a finding and  an  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    evidence.  He referred to paragraph 41 of Gaogalalwe and the criticisms
    there made of the evidence, there was no witness statement  etc.   That
    is not the case here.  He referred to paragraph 21 and  submitted  that
    it was reasonable  to  assume  that  this  is  evidence  of  the  judge
    considering the credibility of the  appellant.   Whilst  not  expressly
    stated the fact that there is an absence of any  negative  findings  or
    adverse findings must infer and support that the judge when considering
    all the evidence did make a finding that the  appellant  had  not  used
    fraud.

 8. Mr Mills in reply said that there is a  problem  with  relying  on  the
    findings of the judge, even if  there  are  any,  because  the  judge's
    approach to the Secretary of State's evidence was incorrect and started
    from the wrong position in  assessing  the  appellant's  evidence.   He
    submitted that as described in Qadir the burden once satisfied  by  the
    Secretary of State boomerangs over to the appellant.  If  the  evidence
    is woefully inadequate as described in Qadir then  the  appellant  does
    not have to do much to bat the burden back to the Secretary  of  State.
    However, if the evidence is now much more powerful then  the  appellant
    has to do more to bat that burden back.  He  submitted  MA  (ETS  TOEIC
    testing) [2016] UKUT 450   made it  clear  that  the  judge  should  be
    cautious when placing weight on English  speaking  as  there  are  many
    reasons why a person might cheat,  see  paragraph  57.   If  the  judge
    properly recognised the powerful evidence the judge  might  have  found
    the ability to speak English etc. is not sufficient.

Discussion

 9. The judge in this case set out  at  paragraph  20  that  the  appellant
    asserts vehemently that he took the TOEIC test  himself  and  where  he
    took the tests and that he was used to speaking English.  The judge set
    out:

         "21. The appellant was cross-examined carefully  by  Mr  Graham  at
             some length.  He was asked about the location of the tests and
             how he had got there.  He was asked about the  methodology  of
             the tests and the physical characteristics of the  test  room.
             I found his answers to be cogent, consistent and truthful.

         22.  I read the appellant's bundle, which  contained  a  number  of
             academic certificates that evidenced educational attainment to
             a post-graduate standard.

         ...

         24.  I find  that  the  appellant  has  shown  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities that the documents produced can be relied  upon.



         ...

         26.  I find that the respondent does not meet the burden  of  proof
             that the law requires to show that the  appellant  cheated  at
             his TOEIC tests.  I echo the findings in Qadir and SM that the
             respondent's evidence was woefully inadequate.  The additional
             evidence of Matthew Lister added nothing to  the  respondent's
             case and did not address the  reservations  expressed  in  the
             appellate courts in the aforementioned cases.   I  distinguish
             MA from this case as I found the appellant to  be  a  credible
             witness unlike the finding of the Upper Tribunal in respect of
             the appellant in MA.

         27.  I find the conclusions made in Kadivar in respect of Professor
             French's  evidence  to  be  relevant  and  damaging   to   the
             respondent's ability to meet the burden of proof.

         28.  If the respondent does not meet the evidential burden then the
             appellant's appeal must succeed, as he is  accepted  as  being
             eligible.  The appeal is therefore allowed under the ten  year
             route under the Rules."

10. The burden and standard of proof, where it is alleged that an ETS  test
    is invalid, was discussed in SM and Qadir v  SSHD  (ETS-Evidence-Burden
    of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229). The legal burden of proving that  the  test
    taker used deception lies on the Secretary of State albeit  that  there
    is a three stage process. Firstly, the Secretary of State  must  adduce
    sufficient evidence to raise the issue of  fraud.  Secondly,  the  test
    taker then has a  burden  of  raising  an  innocent  explanation  which
    satisfies the minimum level of plausibility. Thirdly, if that burden is
    discharged, the Secretary of State  must  establish  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that the claimant has used deception to obtain the  TOEIC
    (the legal burden).

11. It is not clear that at paragraph 26 the judge  was  referring  to  the
    evidential burden (the first stage) that lies  with  the  Secretary  of
    State. The Secretary  of  State,  even  if  the  evidential  burden  is
    discharged, also has to meet the legal burden  of  proving  dishonesty.
    However it is clear from paragraph 28 that the judge  is  referring  to
    the Secretary of State failing to meet the evidential  burden.  On  the
    evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  evidential  burden  was
    clearly satisfied as per SM and Qadir.

12. The judge rejected  the  evidence  of  Professor  French  adopting  the
    conclusions  of  the  Tribunal  in  the  unreported  Kadivar  case.  In
    Gaogalalwe the court when considering the evidence of Professor  French
    concluded:

         37.     Professor French provided his report for use in  the  Qadir
         case. Nonetheless, it is relied upon  in  the  present  proceedings
         because it provides opinion evidence on the methodology of ETS. The
         expertise of Professor French to provide opinion evidence  of  this
         sort is not disputed; it  is  clear  from  his  CV  that  he  is  a
         singularly well-qualified expert.

         ...

         44.     In my judgment, balancing the powerful evidence provided by
         the Secretary of State pointing to a conclusion that the claimant's
         test result  was  obtained  by  fraud  against  the  weak  evidence
         provided by the claimant that her  English  language  skills  would
         have been sufficient to make cheating unnecessary, the Secretary of
         State's argument is irresistible. In my judgment the  Secretary  of
         State has made out her case that the claimant used fraud to  obtain
         leave to remain.

13. In this case the judge  dismissed  the  evidence  of  Professor  French
    finding that it not only did not assist but following  the  conclusions
    made in Kadivar found them damaging to the Secretary of State's ability
    to meet the burden of proof. There  have  been  several  cases  in  the
    Administrative  court  (as  referred  to  above)  subsequent   to   the
    unreported decision of Kadivar that have  considered  the  evidence  of
    Professor French and in which the evidence has been  considered  to  be
    'powerful' evidence.

14. The judge has not made specific findings  on  the  claimant's  evidence
    regarding attending the test centre. Mr Raza invited me to assume  that
    at  paragraph  21  this  is  evidence  of  the  judge  considering  the
    credibility of the claimant and whilst not expressly stated it could be
    inferred from the absence of any negative findings that the  judge  did
    make a finding that the appellant had not used fraud. I do not consider
    that such an inference can be drawn.

15. I find that there are material errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

16. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard at
    the First-tier Tribunal  at Taylor House before any judge   other  than
    Judge Shore pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of  the  TCEA.  A
    new hearing will be fixed at the next available date.

18. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. The  case  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a de-novo hearing before any  Judge  other  than
Judge Shore.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 16/1/18

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw





