
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03119/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2017                   |On 7 February 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            John Kingsford Enyiam
                         (anonymity ORDER not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Tampuri, Legal Representative, Chancery CS
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal will require to be reheard and in the  circumstances  I  do
    not propose to devote much time to rehearsing the history of Mr  Enyiam
    and his family - which is in any event summarised in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.



2.   Mr Enyiam - who for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the  proceedings
    before the First-tier Tribunal I shall refer to as the Appellant -  has
    as dependants in his appeal his wife  and  three  children.  All  three
    children were born in the United Kingdom; the oldest  is  presently  10
    years old.



3.   The appeal that came before the First-tier Tribunal  in  July  of  last
    year was an appeal based on human rights grounds against a decision  to
    refuse leave to remain in the United Kingdom. The focus of  the  appeal
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Aziz related to a consideration of the
    so-called 'parent route'  under  Appendix  FM.   It  is  apparent  from
    paragraph 11 of the First-tier Tribunal decision that it  was  conceded
    on behalf of the Appellant by Mr Tampuri  that  he  could  not  succeed
    under the 'partner route', but it was argued that  there  had  been  an
    error of law in relation to the 'parent route'.



4.   I should pause to say that Mr Tampuri tells me  that  he  had  attended
    the hearing at Hatton  Cross  in  July  2016  ready  to  proceed  to  a
    substantive hearing of the appeal and ready  to  present  evidence  and
    arguments in  respect  of  Article  8,  the  family  and  private  life
    established in the  United  Kingdom,  and  issues  of  proportionality,
    irrespective of  any  technical  error  that  might  or  might  not  be
    identifiable in the 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL').



5.   Be that as it may, Judge Aziz determined that the  Secretary  of  State
    had in fact fallen into error in his consideration of the circumstances
    of the Appellant in relation to being a parent of the eldest  child  by
    reference in particular to paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.



6.   At paragraph 12 of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  the  Judge
    identifies that  in  the  RFRL  when  considering  paragraph  EX.1  the
    Secretary  of  State  appeared  to  have  regard   to   the   test   of
    'insurmountable obstacles' rather than the 'reasonableness' test  which
    is  the  appropriate  test  in  respect   of   consideration   of   the
    circumstances of children.



7.   Although it is appropriate to say that there does indeed appear  to  be
    an error in the consideration of EX.1, as the Secretary of State points
    out in the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  EX.1  was  not  a
    material  consideration  under  the  Immigration  Rules   because   the
    Appellant did not satisfy the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRP.2.3 and
    2.4 - which meant that EX.1 was not 'in play'. Moreover,  as  is  well-
    understood, EX.1 has no  freestanding  effect.   Accordingly,  even  if
    there had been an error in what was said in respect of  EX.1  it  could
    not have affected the outcome of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    under the 'parent route' because EX.1 was not reached under the  parent
    route.



8.    The  Secretary  of  State  also  argues  that   in   any   event   the
    'reasonableness' test was given specific consideration in  the  context
    of paragraph 276ADE, and in this regard my  attention  is  directed  to
    paragraph 48 of the RFRL where it is made clear that the  Secretary  of
    State was of the view that it would not be unreasonable to  expect  the
    eldest child to leave the United Kingdom.



9.   So, on the face of it, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  fell  into  error
    in considering that there was any material error on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State, and also in failing to recognise that the Secretary
    of  State  had  given  substantive  consideration  to  the  concept  of
    reasonableness - even if only under paragraph  276ADE  rather  than  by
    express reference to the 'parent route'.



10.  In the circumstances it is absolutely clear to me that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge should have appropriately recognised that there  was  an
    appeal on the merits before him in respect of which  the  Secretary  of
    State had expressed an opinion in the decision letter, and should  have
    proceeded to consider  the  evidence  and  submissions  and  reached  a
    determination.  In effect that is what is now required to be done.



11.  The situation remains that there has been no substantive  consideration
    of any of the evidence by the Tribunal: the Appellant has been denied a
    substantive consideration of his appeal. In  the  circumstances  it  is
    appropriate that the remaking of the decision in the appeal take  place
    before the First-tier Tribunal.



12.  Before leaving this case I should just say a very few words  about  one
    other aspect of the grounds of challenge which is raised  in  reference
    to the powers of the Tribunal pursuant to amendments introduced by  the
    Immigration Act 2014, and in particular in repealing section 87 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  the  comments  and
    observations made in this regard in the case of Greenwood (No. 2) (para
    398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC).  In  short  the  Secretary  of
    State has identified a passage in support of the challenge  herein,  at
    paragraph 21 of the case of Greenwood, with regard to the absence of  a
    power in the 2002 Act for the Tribunal to remit an appeal.



13.  The quotation  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  is
    incomplete in some regards: the full text of  paragraph  21  when  read
    with paragraph 23 holds that the Tribunal retains a power  to  conclude
    that a decision of the Secretary of State was not  in  accordance  with
    the law and to leave the matter there, such that there is in  effect  a
    continuing outstanding application before the  Secretary  of  State  so
    that a lawful decision remains to be made,  albeit  that  the  Tribunal
    does not then have a power to direct remittal.  It is, as  observed  by
    the Tribunal in Greenwood, effectively a declaratory decision.



14.  In substance it seems to me that that  gives  rise  to  differences  of
    procedure  rather  than  practicalities.   The  findings  in  Greenwood
    preserve the power of a Tribunal to conclude that  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was not in accordance with the  law  and  thereafter
    not to proceed to remake the decision  for  itself  but  to  leave  the
    matter outstanding before the Secretary of State and  thereby,  without
    using the language of remittal, effectively  bring  about  a  situation
    where it is incumbent upon the  Secretary  of  State  to  determine  in
    accordance with the law the outstanding decision. I accept  that  there
    is no power to make any directions to the Respondent in consequence  of
    the decision, or to give effect to the decision, but that is likely  to
    be of little consequence where the effect of the Tribunal's decision is
    that an application remains outstanding before the Secretary of  State.
    In all such circumstances, and having regard to an applying  Greenwood,
    I can see no material error in the  Judge's  use  of  the  language  of
    'remittal', and can see no real substance in the Secretary  of  State's
    grounds suggesting the Judge had unlawfully issued  directions  to  the
    Respondent.



15.  That said, it does seem to me that there may yet be an argument  to  be
    had as to whether  the  powers  left  to  the  Tribunal  following  the
    amendments made by the 2014 Act permit such an approach  at  all:  i.e.
    whether the powers of the Tribunal permit the 'fourth outcome' referred
    to at paragraph 21 of Greenwood, or limit the Tribunal to  allowing  or
    dismissing an appeal on its substance.



16.  Section 86(2) provides that "the Tribunal  must  determine  any  matter
    raised as a ground of appeal"; the permissible ground of appeal  for  a
    refusal of a human rights  claim  under  section  84(2)  is  "that  the
    decision is unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998";
    section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998  makes  it  "unlawful  for  a
    public authority  to  act  in  a  way  which  is  incompatible  with  a
    Convention right". Given such a legislative framework it  seems  to  me
    that it is arguable that it is incumbent upon the Tribunal to determine
    substantively whether a decision does or does not  breach  a  protected
    human right, and that the Tribunal's powers thus defined do  not  allow
    of any alternative 'halfway' position where no such decision is made by
    the Tribunal and the  matter  is  left  still  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State. There is no permissible ground of  appeal,  and  no
    correlative power to allow an appeal, on the ground that a decision was
    unlawful (or not in accordance with the law) per  se:  the  permissible
    ground is that the decision was unlawful in  respect  of  the  specific
    identified provision of the Human Rights Act, which requires a decision
    on that specific issue. As such it appears to me that there is scope to
    question whether Greenwood is correctly decided on this point.



17.  Be that as it may, it is not material to  the  matters  before  me.   I
    have heard no arguments on the issue and I express no fixed  view.  For
    the reasons already given, however, the appeal in this case is  now  to
    be relisted and in due course heard before the First-tier Tribunal with
    all issues at large.



Notice of Decision

18.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law.  The decision of  e  First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside.



19.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in front of any Judge other than Judge Aziz.



20.  No anonymity order is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
