
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03560/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 April 2019                      |On 11 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Jarry [D]
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Reza, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 19  December  2018  of
    First-Tier  Tribunal  Loughridge  which  allowed  an   appeal   against
    deportation on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department  as  the  respondent  and  to  Mr  [D]  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia, born on 1 January 1980.  He  came
    to the UK in December 2008 at the age of 18 as a spouse. He was  issued
    with indefinite leave to remain (ILR)  on  4  May  2011.  His  marriage
    subsequently broke down. He formed a new relationship with Ms [MF]  and
    they had a child, a British national, on 3 March 2013. The relationship
    broke down in 2014. In April 2016 Ms  [F]  obtained  a  non-molestation
    order against the appellant prohibiting him from attending her  address
    other than on the day of the week on which he took their son to school.
    The  appellant  breached  that  order  in  December  2016,  received  a
    community order and had to do unpaid work.

 4. On 28 July  2017  the  appellant  received  a  sentence  of  27  months
    imprisonment for conspiring to import a controlled drug Class B.

 5. On 22 January 2018 the appellant was served with a  deportation  order.
    On 30 January 2018 the respondent refused his Article  8  human  rights
    claim.

 6. The appellant appealed against deportation on human rights  grounds  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  His  case  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Loughridge on 11 December 2018.  The First-Tier Tribunal found at
    [36] that it would be in the child's best interests for  the  appellant
    to remain in the UK but that the appellant's deportation did not amount
    to an "unduly harsh" impact on  the  child.  Paragraph  399(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. There did not appear to be an assessment of the private life provisions
    contained in paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules but the First-Tier
    Tribunal went on to allow the appeal on "very compelling circumstances"
    grounds, taking  into  account  the  appellant's  behaviour  since  his
    release from detention (see [38]), his involvement in the community, in
    particular  working  with  young  people,  for  example  offering  them
    apprenticeships in his barber's shop and acting as a mentor (see [39]).



 8. The judge concluded at [41]:

         "... whilst I am conscious that the public interest in the  removal
         of foreign criminals carries significant  weight,  in  the  present
         situation it would be disproportionate not to  give  him  a  second
         chance. I recognise that at the present time he does not have  day-
         to-day contact with his son but I have no doubt that the  level  of
         contact will increase substantially in the future and that he  will
         play a full and active role as a father,  and  provide  a  positive
         role model".

 9. The grounds of appeal maintained that the First-Tier Tribunal judge was
    incorrect in criticising the "shortcomings" of paragraphs  398-399A  of
    the Immigration Rules. She erred in failing to conduct a paragraph 399A
    assessment, additionally so as, if this rule was not met,  this  was  a
    factor she should have taken  into  account  in  the  "very  compelling
    circumstances" assessment. The decision did not explain, if  paragraphs
    399 and 399A  were  not  met,  what  it  was  that  amounted  to  "very
    compelling circumstances", consistently stated by the higher courts  to
    be a high threshold which only a small number of cases could meet.  The
    respondent maintained that the material before the First-Tier  Tribunal
    did not permit a finding of "very compelling circumstances"  where  the
    appellant had only resumed contact with his son in November  2018,  did
    not live with him, did not see him every day and had, in the past,  had
    access restricted following incidents of  violence  in  the  home.  The
    appellant's conduct since coming out of detention as recently  as  July
    2017 was not sufficient to diminish the public interest in  deportation
    to any material degree; .

10.  Further,  the   "very   compelling   circumstances"   assessment   was
    additionally flawed in failing to take  into  account  the  appellant's
    significant unreliability as a witness, for example at [29] which  sets
    out that, "certain aspects of what he has said should be  treated  with
    caution", that he was "evasive" about why the non-molestation order was
    made and as to there having been additional "safeguarding concerns"  in
    2014. The appellant had also exaggerated the contact he  had  with  his
    son  whilst  in  prison,  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  stating  that  the
    "impression the Appellant was seeking to give was  clearly,  therefore,
    inaccurate." The First-Tier Tribunal went on to find in [30]  that  "my
    impression is that the Appellant is an individual who from time to time
    seeks to stretch the truth, sometimes beyond breaking point."

11. The Supreme Court in the case of Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 set out the correct approach  to
    deportation cases coming under the provisions contained in Part  5A  of
    the Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 and Part 13 of the Immigration
    Rules. The Supreme Court indicated at [38]:
         "38. The implication of the new rules is that rules  399  and  399A
         identify particular categories of case in which  the  Secretary  of
         State accepts that the public interest in the  deportation  of  the
         offender is outweighed under article 8 by  countervailing  factors.
         Cases not covered by those rules (that is to say, foreign offenders
         who have received sentences of at least four  years,  or  who  have
         received sentences of between 12 months and four  years  but  whose
         private or family life does not meet the requirements of rules  399
         and 399A) will be dealt with on the basis that great weight  should
         generally be given to the public interest  in  the  deportation  of
         such  offenders,  but  that  it  can  be  outweighed,  applying   a
         proportionality test, by very compelling  circumstances:  in  other
         words, by a very strong claim indeed, as  Laws  LJ  put  it  in  SS
         (Nigeria).   The  countervailing  considerations   must   be   very
         compelling in order to outweigh the general public interest in  the
         deportation of such offenders, as assessed by  Parliament  and  the
         Secretary  of  State.   The  Strasbourg   jurisprudence   indicates
         relevant factors to consider, and rules 399  and  399A  provide  an
         indication of the sorts of matters which  the  Secretary  of  State
         regards as very compelling.  As explained at para  26  above,  they
         can include factors bearing on the weight of the public interest in
         the deportation of the particular offender,  such  as  his  conduct
         since the offence was committed, as well as factors relating to his
         private or family life.  Cases falling within the scope of  section
         32 of the 2007 Act in which the public interest in  deportation  is
         outweighed, other than those specified in the new rules themselves,
         are likely to be a very small minority (particularly in non-settled
         cases).  They need not necessarily involve any  circumstance  which
         is exceptional in the sense of being extraordinary (as counsel  for
         the Secretary of State accepted, consistently with Huang  [2007]  2
         AC 167, para 20), but they can  be  said  to  involve  'exceptional
         circumstances' in the sense that they involve a departure from  the
         general rule. (my emphasis)"

12. The Court  of  appeal  in  NA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662  also
    considered the meaning of "very compelling circumstances" and  how  the
    test might be met. The  Court  concluded  at  [29],  referring  to  the
    exceptions in section 117C which mirror paragraphs 399 and 399A, that a
    foreign criminal facing deportation is not "altogether disentitled from
    seeking  to  rely  on  matters  falling  within  the   scope   of   the
    circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking  to  contend
    that "there are very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2". The position is rather that:
         "a foreign criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters, but he
         would need to be able to point to features of his case of a kind
         mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paragraphs 399 or 399A of
         the 2014 rules), or features falling outside the circumstances
         described in those exceptions and those paragraphs, which made his
         claim based on article 8 especially strong. (my emphasis)".
    In the case of a medium offender, the Court sets out, at [32]:
         "if all he could advance in support of his article 8 claim was a
         'near miss' case in which he fell short of bringing himself within
         either Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be possible to say
         that he had shown that there were 'very compelling circumstances,
         over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2'. He would
         need to have a far stronger case than that by reference to the
         interests protected by article 8 to bring himself within that fall
         back protection. But again, in principle there may be cases in
         which such an offender can say that features of his case of a kind
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2 have such great force for article 8
         purposes that they do constitute such very compelling
         circumstances, whether taken by themselves or in conjunction with
         other factors relevant to article 8 but not falling within the
         factors described in Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision-maker, be it
         the Secretary of State or a tribunal, must look at all the matters
         relied upon collectively, in order to determine whether they are
         sufficiently compelling to outweigh the high public interest in
         deportation. (my emphasis)"

13. The First-Tier Tribunal found that it would not be "unduly  harsh"  for
    the appellant's child if  the  appellant  were  to  be  deported.  That
    finding was not subject to a cross-appeal. The evidence here  permitted
    no other conclusion given the appellant's limited contact with his  son
    prior to, during and after his imprisonment, the issues that led to the
    non-molestation  order  being  made.  The  child's  autism  was  not  a
    significant factor; see [35]. There was the additional evidence  of  Ms
    [F] caring for the  child  well  and  the  additional  support  of  her
    brothers; see [36]. The evidence was not capable of showing  "a  degree
    of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be  involved  for  any
    child faced with the deportation of  a  parent";  see  KO  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.

14. In light of the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan),
    this was not a "near miss" under paragraph 399 and the appellant needed
    to show an "especially strong" factor  to  meet  the  "very  compelling
    circumstances" test. Thedecision here does not identify  what  evidence
    here could meet that threshold, the assessment focussing in large  part
    on the situation for the child, already found not to be  sufficient  to
    show an Article 8 ECHR breach.

15. Further, there was no assessment of whether  paragraph  399A  was  met.
    This is an error as an assessment of those factors was a required  part
    of the "very compelling circumstances  assessment",  without  which  it
    cannot be said that the outcome would have been the same.

16. In addition, the evidence before the First-Tier  Tribunal  was  clearly
    incapable of showing that the provisions of paragraph  399A  were  met.
    The appellant came to the UK in 2008 aged 28 and is now 39. He has  not
    lived in the UK lawfully for more than half his life. He has been  here
    for only 11 years after growing up and living the rest of his  life  in
    Gambia. Setting aside whether his conduct can show that he is  socially
    and culturally integrated, albeit his  sisters  were  in  the  UK,  the
    evidence was that his father remained in Gambia,  was  a  chief  and  a
    businessman, the appellant had been able to establish his own  business
    as a barber in the UK and could be expected to do the same  in  Gambia,
    having lived there for by far the majority of his life, coming  to  the
    UK as an adult. These matters indicated that the  appellant  could  not
    show very significant obstacles to re-integration  in  Gambia.  He  was
    again required to show "especially strong" factors to  meet  the  "very
    compelling circumstances" test and the decision here does not  identify
    what evidence here could meet that threshold.

17. The "very compelling circumstances" decision  was  also  based  on  the
    judge's view that  the  appellant's  conduct  since  his  release  from
    imprisonment showing the "weight of the public interest in  removal  is
    towards the lower end of the spectrum"; see [42].  This does not show a
    proper application of the "great weight" to be given to deportation  in
    light of the sentence here, following Hesham Ali and NA (Pakistan).  As
    the grounds set out, it was not  for  the  respondent  to  justify  the
    public interest in  deportation  but  for  the  appellant  to  identify
    factors  capable  of  outweighing  the  high  public  interest  in  his
    exclusion.

18. For all of these reasons, it is my judgment that the grounds of  appeal
    have merit. The First-Tier Tribunal took an incorrect approach  to  the
    "very compelling circumstances assessment" in  omitting  to  take  into
    account that the appellant's relationship with his son could  not  meet
    paragraph 399 by some margin, that he did not meet paragraph 399A by  a
    similarly large margin, that the factors on  which  weight  was  placed
    were not capable of being found to be "very compelling" over and  above
    paragraphs 399 and 399A or to amount to a "very strong  claim  indeed".
    The First-Tier Tribunal also erred in weighing the public  interest  in
    the deportation, finding that the appellant was at the  "lower  end  of
    the spectrum" despite his conviction of drugs offences and sentence  of
    27 months, the guidance being that "great weight  should  generally  be
    given to the public interest in the deportation of such offenders".

19. I therefore found a material error of law in the decision of the First-
    Tier Tribunal and set it aside to be re-made. I heard submissions  from
    Mr Reza and Mr Bramble on the re-making.

20. As above, the provisions of paragraphs 399 and 399A are not met and are
    not met by a significant margin. The appellant's relationship with  his
    son, the length of time that he has been here and his circumstances  on
    return to  Gambia  are  not  factors  capable  of  amounting  to  "very
    compelling circumstances". I must therefore assess  whether  there  are
    other factors making this  appellant's  claim  "especially  strong."  I
    could not identify such  factors  here.  The  appellant  has  conducted
    himself reasonably well since coming  out  of  prison,  re-establishing
    limited contact with his son, starting  a  small  business,  supporting
    young people and not re-offending. He has only been  out  of  detention
    since July 2018, however. The OASys report shows  that  he  denied  any
    responsibility for his offences for an extended period of  time  whilst
    in prison, having pleaded not  guilty  at  trial.  His  expressions  of
    remorse since leaving prison have to be considered in  the  context  of
    the findings of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  as  to  his  willingness  to
    "stretch the truth, sometimes beyond breaking point", set out  in  [10]
    above.

21. In my judgment the factors weighing on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
    balance, even weighed cumulatively and holistically, are not capable of
    outweighing the public interest in deportation where the appellant  has
    received a 27 month sentence for drugs convictions. As in  Hesham  Ali,
    Parliament has decided that only  "a  very  strong  claim  indeed"  can
    outweigh the public interest here and the evidence does not  show  that
    that threshold is met.

22. I make this decision aware that that it  will  bring  distress  to  the
    appellant, his ex-partner and their child. It remains the case that the
    approach set down by Parliament and  clarified  by  the  higher  courts
    affords of only one outcome on the evidence presented here, that  there
    are not very compelling circumstances capable of outweighing the public
    interest in the appellant's deportation.

23. For these reasons, therefore, I remake this appeal as refused.

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be remade.

25. I remake the appeal as refused.

Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 9 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
