
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03766/2017
                                                               HU/03768/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 September 2019                          |On 12 September 2019          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               1) MA (aLBANIA)
                               2) DA (ALBANIA)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Metzer QC and Mr P Slatter, Counsel
     instructed by Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge O'Hagan sitting at Priory Court, Birmingham on 9  January  2019)
    dismissing their appeals against the  refusal  of  their  human  rights
    claims under Article 8 ECHR, in which the principal argument  was  that
    the removal of mother and child to  Albania  would  have  unduly  harsh
    consequences for the child in  circumstances  where,  on  the  evidence
    available, there could be no confidence that the treatment she required
    to manage her chronic condition would be accessible in Albania.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 22 May 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted permission to  appeal
    for the following reasons:  "As  is  recognised  in  the  grounds,  the
    success or otherwise of the  appellants'  case  turns  on  the  medical
    condition of the minor  appellant.   In  an  otherwise  very  carefully
    reasoned decision, it is arguable that the Judge has erred  in  failing
    to take into account when considering the child's best  interests,  the
    importance to her of receiving treatment for her condition in the UK."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellants are nationals of Albania.  The first appellant was  born
    on 28 March 1989, and she gave birth to the second appellant in Albania
    on  4  November  2011.   The  appellants  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally on 5 December 2014, and have been here ever since.  The first
    appellant claimed asylum, but her  asylum  claim  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on 27 March  2015.   On  9  February  2016,  the  appellants
    applied for leave to remain outside the  Rules  on  the  basis  of  the
    child's health.

 4. On 17 February 2017 the respondent gave his reasons  for  refusing  the
    applications.  The first appellant had provided evidence of her child's
    condition, along with documents from Albania  detailing  her  treatment
    there.  She stated that the doctors in Albania were unable to correctly
    diagnose her daughter's condition.  However, the doctors in the UK  had
    now done so.  Her daughter successfully underwent an operation for  her
    achalasia in January 2017 and as such she should now be able to  return
    to Albania with her, as her condition had been diagnosed and there  was
    no evidence to suggest that she was unfit to travel.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellants were represented by Mr Slatter of Counsel at the hearing
    before Judge O'Hagan.  There was no representation  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.  The documents filed for the  hearing  included  up-to-date
    evidence of the child's state of health and  also  evidence  about  the
    availability of medical treatment in Albania.

 6. In his subsequent decision, Judge O'Hagan reviewed the child's  medical
    history at paragraphs [6]-{10].  At about the age  of  one,  the  child
    displayed problems swallowing food and she had an associated propensity
    to vomit.  She was treated in Albania where it was assumed that she had
    gastro-oesophageal reflux disease.  As a result of  her  problems,  she
    was notably failing  to  thrive,  as  she  displayed  delayed  physical
    development compared to other children of the same age.  She  had  been
    under the care of Birmingham Children's Hospital since she came to  the
    UK.    She  was  initially  diagnosed  with  achalasia,   a   life-long
    oesophageal disorder.  In January 2017, the child underwent surgery  to
    the oesophagus.  The purpose of that was  to  reduce  the  symptoms  of
    achalasia that she was experiencing.  Subsequently, she experienced on-
    going symptoms of acid reflux and difficulties in swallowing.  She had,
    nonetheless, regained her pre-surgery weight by January 2018.  In March
    2018, it was found that she had  inflammation  of  the  lining  of  her
    oesophagus around the scarring caused by the operation.

 7. Writing on 8 February 2019, Doctor Whyte noted that  the  child's  most
    recent endoscopy showed on-going ulceration, and  inflammatory  changes
    at the lower end of  the  oesophagus,  despite  medical  therapy.   She
    anticipated that the  child  would  require  regular  endoscopies,  and
    assessment of growth.  She would also need to be monitored  because  of
    the risk of developing Addison's disease.  She would  require  dietetic
    support.  There was a possibility that she would need further  surgical
    intervention.

 8. On the topic of the global clinical picture and the child's  prognosis,
    the Judge quoted Dr Whyte as follows at  paragraph  [9]:  "Despite  her
    mother repeatedly seeking advice for recurrent vomiting in Albania, the
    diagnosis was missed and as a result she  was  unable  to  swallow  any
    solids at the time when I first met  her.  She  required  a  period  of
    nutritional rehabilitation as her nutritional state was very  poor  and
    the risk of surgery was significantly high  due  to  her  malnutrition.
    With intensive input and nutritional support, [the child] gained weight
    and was then safe to proceed with surgery to manage her  achalasia.  It
    is well understood that children who have achalasia, particularly those
    who  present  late,  have  worsened  outcomes  and  ongoing   problems;
    vomiting,  dysphagia  (things  getting  stuck   in   the   oesophagus);
    oesophageal dysmotility (abnormal contractions of the  oesophagus)  and
    oesophagitis  (inflammation  of  the  oesophagus).   They  often   have
    problems with poor growth which has been displayed by  [the  child]  as
    her growth has been slow."

 9. At paragraph [10], the Judge expressly accepted Dr Whyte's  summary  of
    the child's clinical history and the  ongoing  problems  that  she  was
    likely to face as an achalasia sufferer who had presented late with the
    condition.

10. The Judge recorded Mr Slatter's closing submissions at  paragraph  [17]
    of his decision.  Mr Slatter asked him to allow the appeal outside  the
    Rules on the basis  that  a  refusal  would  have  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the child.  He asked the Judge to find that the  child
    had a private life in the UK, independent of her medical condition.  He
    asked the Judge to find that  the  necessary  treatment  would  not  be
    available in Albania.  She had tried to organise a conference call with
    the hospital in Tirana, but they  would  not  cooperate.  The  lack  of
    treatment in Albania was a factor in  the  proportionality  assessment.
    It pushed it "over the line" as  there  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences.  He reminded the Judge of the need not to visit the  sins
    of the parents on the child.

11. The Judge set out his analysis, findings and conclusions at  paragraphs
    [18] onwards.  At paragraph [19], he observed that it  was  established
    law that in cases where someone  might  suffer  harm  as  a  result  of
    cessation of medical treatment in this country, that could  potentially
    give rise to a finding that such cessation  breached  Article  3  ECHR.
    The threshold was, however, set very high.   It  had  not  been  argued
    before him that the child's circumstances had  reached  the  very  high
    threshold required for a breach of Article 3 EHCR.

12. At paragraph [21], he directed himself that, before moving on to  carry
    out his substantive Article 8 assessment, he should explore in  general
    terms the issue of whether a case which did not succeed under Article 3
    on medical grounds could succeed instead under Article  8.   The  Judge
    went on to consider the guidance given by the Court  of  Appeal  in  MM
    (Zimbabwe) -v- SSHD [2012] EW Civ 279 and in GS (India)  &  Others  -v-
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40.

13. The Judge began to address the substantive Article 8 claim at paragraph
    [25].  In his discussion about proportionality,  the  Judge  adopted  a
    balance sheet approach.  He considered the public interest  factors  at
    paragraphs [31]-[33], and at paragraph [34] he turned to  consider  the
    other side  of  the  balance  sheet,  "the  factors  which  favour  the
    appellants."   With  regard  to  the  first  appellant,  he  held  that
    realistically the  only  interests  that  she  could  advance  was  the
    position of her daughter.  If he accepted that  the  interests  of  the
    child were sufficient to outweigh the public interest, it would  follow
    that he would grant the first appellant leave to remain  alongside  her
    daughter.

14. At paragraph [35], he turned to consider the position of the child.  He
    reminded himself that no adverse inference should be drawn against  the
    child for the fact that her time in the UK was accrued  while  she  had
    been here unlawfully or with a precarious status.

15. At paragraph [38], the Judge reminded himself that the welfare  of  the
    child was a primary consideration, but not the paramount consideration.

16. At paragraph [39], the Judge observed that the child was  aged  7,  and
    she was aged 3 when she arrived.  He did not doubt that the  child  had
    formed friendships, and that she had  achieved  that  level  of  social
    integration which  most  children  of  her  age  would  have  achieved.
    Nonetheless, she was still of an age at which the primary focus of  her
    life would be within her family.  He was  satisfied  that  the  child's
    best interests lay with her mother.  In his view,  with  the  love  and
    support of her mother, the child would be able to  adjust  to  life  in
    Albania.

17. At paragraph [42], the Judge reminded himself of the guidance given  in
    Zoumbas -v- SSHD [2013]  UKSE  74  at  paragraph  [24]:  "There  is  no
    irrationality in the conclusion that it  was  in  the  children's  best
    interests to go with their parents to the Republic of Congo.  No  doubt
    it would have been possible to have stated  that,  other  things  being
    equal, it was in the best interests of the children that they and their
    parents stayed in the United Kingdom so that  they  could  obtain  such
    benefits  as  healthcare  and  education   which   the   decision-maker
    recognised might be of a high standard that would not be  available  in
    the Congo.  But other things were not equal.   They  were  not  British
    citizens.  They had no right to future education and healthcare in this
    country."

18. At paragraph [44], the Judge said that while the child  had  sufficient
    private life in the UK to engage Article 8, the factors weighing on her
    side of the balance in the assessment of proportionality, excluding her
    health problems, fell far short of those  weighing  in  favour  of  the
    public interest. At paragraph 45 the Judge said:

         I  have  considered  whether  the  impact  of  the  child's  health
         condition, and the ongoing need for treatment, is sufficient to tip
         the balance the other way.  I have real sympathy for the fact  that
         the child has a difficult and life-long condition.  Nonetheless,  I
         must and do conclude that it not only falls short of the Article  3
         threshold, but it is insufficient, in the context of  an  otherwise
         weak Article 8 claim, to tip  the  balance  away  from  the  public
         interest  and  to  the  child's  private  interests.    I   readily
         acknowledge that the child may well struggle in Albania  to  access
         healthcare of the quality that she has had in this country.  I note
         Dr Whyte's forcefully expressed concerns in  that  regard.   Whilst
         that may be right,  it  is  not  my  place  to  engage  in  such  a
         comparative exercise.  In the language of MM (Zimbabwe), to  do  so
         would offend against the principle that "... the United Kingdom  is
         under no Convention obligation to provide  medical  treatment  here
         when it is not available in the country to which the  appellant  is
         to be deported ..."

19. The Judge held at paragraph [46] that the  public  interest  outweighed
    the private interests of both  appellants.    While  he  regretted  the
    impact of this decision on the child, "the weight of case law  is  such
    that I find myself unable sustainably to reach any other conclusion."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

20. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr  Metzer  QC  developed  the  case  pleaded  in  the  permission
    application.  He had no quarrel with the Judge's  analysis  up  to  and
    including  paragraph  [44].   However,  he  submitted,  paragraph  [45]
    contained two errors.  Firstly, the Judge had  misdirected  himself  in
    law in declining to  engage  in  a  comparative  exercise  between  the
    treatment and medical expertise that the child was accessing in the  UK
    to manage her condition as against what was likely to be  available  to
    her in Albania on the grounds that this would offend  against  the  "no
    obligation to treat" principle.  Alternatively, insofar  as  the  Judge
    could be taken to have  accepted  Dr  Whyte's  concerns  regarding  the
    absence of adequate medical treatment for the  child  in  Albania,  the
    Judge had materially erred  in  law  by  failing  to  provide  adequate
    reasons as to why it was not therefore overwhelmingly  in  the  child's
    best interests to remain in the UK  such  as  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of effective immigration controls. Ms Jones
    submitted that the Judge had directed himself appropriately,  and  that
    no error of law was made out.

Discussion

21. In paragraph [23] of MM (Zimbabwe),  cited  by  the  Judge  O'Hagan  at
    paragraph [21] of his decision, Moses LJ (with whom  McFarlane  LJ  and
    the Master of the Rolls agreed) said:

         The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate  medical
         treatment in the country to which a person is to be  deported  will
         be relevant to Article 8, is where it is an additional factor to be
         weighed in the balance, with  other  factors  which  by  themselves
         engage Article  8.   Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  appellant  had
         established firm family ties in this country, then the availability
         of continuing medical treatment here,  coupled with  dependence  on
         the family here for  support,  together  establish  "private  life"
         under Article 8.  That conclusion would not  involve  a  comparison
         between medical facilities here and  those  in  Zimbabwe.   Such  a
         finding would not offend the principle expressed above but that the
         United Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to provide medical
         treatment here when it is not available in the country to which the
         appellant is to be deported.

22. As stated by Judge O'Hagan at [22], the Court of Appeal in  GS  (India)
    affirmed the reasoning in MM (Zimbabwe).  Giving the leading  judgment,
    at paragraph [86] Laws  LJ  cited  the  above  passage  with  approval,
    adding: "If the Article 3 claim fails (as I would hold  it  does  here)
    Article 8 cannot prosper without some separate  or  additional  factual
    element which brings the case within  the  Article  8  paradigm  -  the
    capacity to form and enjoy relationships - or a state of affairs having
    some affinity with the paradigm." At [87] he said that  the  rigour  of
    the D exception applied "with no less force"  when  the  claim  is  put
    under Article 8.

23. My attention was also drawn to paragraph  [111]  of  GS,  where,  after
    quoting the passage from MM (Zimbabwe) I have set out  at  {21]  above,
    Underhill LJ said:

         There  are  possibly  some  ambiguities  in  the  details  of  the
         reasoning of that passage,  but  I  think  it  is  clear  that  two
         essential points are being made.  First, the absence or  inadequacy
         of  medical  treatment,  even  life-preserving  treatment,  in  the
         country of return, cannot be relied on at all as a factor  engaging
         article 8; if that is all there is, the claim must fail.  Secondly,
         where article 8 is engaged by other  factors,  the  fact  that  the
         claimant is receiving medical treatment in this country  which  may
         not be available in the country of return may be a  factor  in  the
         proportionality exercise, but that factor cannot be treated  as  by
         itself giving rise to a breach, since that would contravene the "no
         obligation to treat" principle.

24. I do not consider that Ground 1 is made  out.   The  passage  from  the
    judgment of Moses LJ at paragraph [23] of  MM  (Zimbabwe)  contains  an
    implicit  prohibition  against  the  decision-maker  embarking   on   a
    comparison between medical facilities here and those in the country  of
    return.  This is borne out by the hypothetical  example  given  in  the
    same passage.  The example does not involve a  comparison  between  the
    quality of the medical treatment that the appellant has been  receiving
    in the UK as against the  absence  of  adequate  medical  treatment  in
    Zimbabwe, but on the availability of continuing  medical  treatment  in
    the UK coupled with his dependence on his family here for support, both
    of which factors combine to establish and enhance his private  life  in
    the UK.

25. Although the passage was not cited by Judge O'Hagan, his discussion  in
    paragraph [45] is also consonant with the reasoning of Underhill LJ  at
    paragraph [111] of GS.  Judge  O'Hagan  accepted  that  Article  8  was
    engaged by other factors, and he  expressly  took  into  account  as  a
    factor in the proportionality exercise that  the  child  was  receiving
    medical treatment in the UK which might not be  available  in  Albania.
    He acknowledged that the child might well struggle in Albania to access
    health care of the quality that she had in the UK,  noting  Dr  Whyte's
    forcefully expressed concerns in that regard.

26. I do not consider that it was incumbent on the Judge to make a specific
    finding that adequate medical care would definitely not be available or
    to make a specific  finding  on  how  much  worse  the  monitoring  and
    treatment of the child's condition was likely  to  be  in  Albania,  in
    circumstances where it was not the evidence that there was likely to be
    a complete absence of treatment; when the accepted  prognosis  did  not
    disclose the need for life-saving treatment; and  when  the  degree  of
    medical expertise which would be required in the future to  manage  the
    child condition's appropriately was to a significant  extent  dependent
    on whether and in what respects child's symptoms  worsened.  Mr  Metzer
    submitted that the Judge had "downplayed" the  difficulties  the  child
    was likely to encounter in Albania. But I consider that his finding  at
    [45] fairly reflected the thrust of the evidence. In the report  of  Dr
    Whyte quoted at [9], Dr Whyte explained how she had not  been  able  to
    ascertain from the private hospital in Tirana that would be responsible
    for the child's  care  the  treatment  that  would  be  available.  She
    reasoned that as the child had a life-long condition  that  was  poorly
    managed in her home country initially, she did not have confidence that
    Albania  had  the  expertise  to  manage  appropriately   the   child's
    gastrointestinal and endocrinology problems. She went  on  to  identify
    potential problems that might emerge in the future and also the complex
    investigations which she would in any event like to carry  out  in  the
    future, using highly specialised equipment which  she  suspected  would
    not be available in Albania.

27. Turning to Ground 2, the Judge did not  explicitly  state  that,  other
    things being equal, it was in the best interests of the child  to  stay
    in the UK with her  mother  so  that  she  could  continue  to  receive
    monitoring and treatment for her chronic condition which was of a  high
    standard and probably considerably  superior  to  that  which  she  was
    likely to be  able  to  access  in  Albania,  where  the  diagnosis  of
    achalasia was missed with the consequence that she had  presented  late
    with achalasia to Dr Whyte. However, it is  tolerably  clear  from  the
    Judge's line of reasoning, including his citation from Zoumbas, that he
    took this into account when assessing proportionality.

28. It was open to the Judge to find that the child had a  relatively  weak
    private life claim, absent her health problems, for the  reasons  which
    he gave in paragraphs [35]-[44] and which are not  the  subject  of  an
    error of  law  challenge;  and,  having  earlier  accepted  the  global
    clinical picture and prognosis given by  Dr  Whyte,  he  gave  adequate
    reasons for holding that the child's condition did not tip the  balance
    the other way.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands. This appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the first appellant  and  to  the  respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                          Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson         6 September 2019
