
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03081/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 June 2019                      |On 30 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                    S.R.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STTE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Rodger promulgated on 6 September 2018 refusing the appeal against a
decision of the Respondent dated 12 January 2018 refusing a human rights
claim.


2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 8
May 2019 following an initial refusal of appeal by the First-tier Tribunal.
 The grant of permission to appeal was on a narrow basis.  It was indicated
that the grounds advanced in support of the application were of no merit,
but that permission to appeal was granted in any event because of the
consequences of the recent decision in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53: it was
arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had fallen into error in
balancing the Appellant's own immigration history (in particular her use of
a proxy tester to secure an English language certificate) in the
consideration of whether or not it was reasonable for her British citizen
child to leave the United Kingdom.  Accordingly, the issue before the Upper
Tribunal relates to the Appellant's British citizen child born on 24 March
2016, and the application of section 117B(6) of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


3.   Ms Jones for the Secretary of State very properly acknowledges that
the case law is such that the Tribunal is bound to find error on the part
of the First-tier Tribunal. Further she acknowledges that in remaking the
decision the case law points only in the direction of allowing the appeal.
(I pause to observe that in making such acknowledgements Ms Jones was
careful to point out that she was reflecting the Respondent's recognition
of the condition of the case law rather than expressly conceding the
ultimate correctness of the position stated in the case law.)


4.   The error of law is to be identified in particular at paragraphs 56
and 74 of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


5.   At paragraph 56 the Judge gives consideration to the best interests of
the Appellant's child, noting not only his citizenship but that he is
undergoing review at Moorfields Eye Hospital.  The Judge describes the
matter as "finely balanced" but determines that the best interests of the
child are to remain in the United Kingdom. The Judge then states:

"The finely balanced decision on best interests does not automatically lead
to a conclusion that it would be unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK
as there are other factors that need to be considered including those
matters set out above in relation to the Appellant's immigration history
and likely situation on return to Pakistan."

It is, of course, the reference to the immigration history of the Appellant
that is in error.


6.   This ultimately finds expression at paragraph 74 of the Decision,
which begins with a phrase indicating that consideration is being given to
the question of whether it is unreasonable to expect the child to leave the
United Kingdom, and then in part states:

"However, I also have to take into account the fact that his mother
fraudulently submitted an English speaking test as part of her application
and has shown a blatant disregard to the immigration laws of the UK by
relying on a proxy test taker to take her English language test on her
behalf.  Whilst this may have been assisted by her cousin, the Appellant
would have known that this was wrong and in breach of the immigration laws
and overall I am satisfied that the fraud outweighs the child's finely
balanced best interests of where he should live and on balance I am not
satisfied that it is unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  The
public interest does require the Appellant's removal as s.117B(6) has not
been made out.  ..."


7.   As is now common ground, the impact of KO (Nigeria) renders the
Judge's approach wrong in law, and necessarily requires that the decision
of the First-tier Tribunal be set aside.


8.   In remaking the decision the focus is again on the question of
'reasonableness' pursuant to section 117B(6).  This of course is
essentially the same question as is asked in paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM
of the Immigration Rules.  In this regard, it is to be noted that in the
'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') the Secretary of State acknowledged
that paragraph EX.1 was engaged:

"We have considered whether you are exempt from meeting certain eligibility
requirements under Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM because paragraph EX.1
applies.  We  have carefully considered whether paragraph EX.1 of Appendix
FM applies to your application and therefore whether you meet the
requirement of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.d(iii) of Appendix FM.  It is accepted
that you have a qualifying relationship contained within EX.1 and therefore
meet the requirements of R-LTRP.1.1.d(iii)."

Such a position, whilst not the invariable position of the Respondent, is a
common position adopted in circumstances where a British citizen child is
involved.


9.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge gave some consideration to this aspect
of the RFRL at paragraph 72 of the Decision and concluded that that aspect
of the RFRL must have been in error.


10.  I am afraid I am quite simply unable to follow the reasoning at
paragraph 72.  Similarly, Ms Jones helpfully and frankly acknowledges that
she is not able to support that reasoning, and does not seek to do so.  She
acknowledges the position as stated in the RFRL.


11.  The consequence of the latter acknowledgement is that I find that
section 117B(6) is engaged.  Consequently, in turn, pursuant to KO
(Nigeria) - and more particularly JG (Turkey) [2019] UKUT 0072 which has
been cited with approval in the case of Secretary of State for the Home
Department v AB (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661 - the public
interest does not require the removal of the Appellant, notwithstanding the
entirely justifiable observations of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in
respect of her immigration history and conduct.


12.  The appeal must be allowed accordingly.


Notice of Decision

13.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside


14.  I remake the decision in the appeal.  The appeal is  allowed  on  human
rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although I have allowed the appeal I make no fee award. This is because  the
Respondent's decision reflected the understanding of the applicable  law  at
that time, and on that premise there was an  element  of  justification  for
the Respondent's decision in light of the conduct of the Appellant.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)

