
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/03880/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9th April 2018                        |   On 3rd May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    L K Gibbs dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to grant leave to remain on the basis of her  access
    to her child.

 2. The decision of Judge Gibbs was promulgated  on  6th  June  2017.   The
    Appellant was granted permission to  appeal  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Storey.   The  grounds  upon  which  permission  was  granted  may   be
    summarised as follows:

         "The grounds disclose an arguable error of law in  respect  of  the
         judge's refusal to consider that in order  to  satisfy  the  access
         rights requirements of the relevant Immigration Rules the Appellant
         had to show she had direct access to her child.  The judge  clearly
         had other concerns about the Family Court order and the  extent  to
         which the Appellant was adhering to it (see paragraphs 13  to  14);
         but I cannot exclude that the  arguable  error  regarding  indirect
         access had a material impact on the judge's subsequent assessment."



 3. I was provided with a Rule 24 response from the  Respondent  which  all
    parties had the opportunity to consider before the hearing commenced.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of submissions I indicated I  would  reserve  my  decision
    which I shall now give.  I do not find that there is an  error  of  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.  My reasons for so  finding
    are as follows.

 5. The grounds in essence argue that the  judge's  decision  is  wrong  in
    relation to the interpretation of paragraph E-LTRPT.2.4(a) in  relation
    to the access rights to a  child  in  the  UK.   The  appeal  does  not
    explicitly seek to challenge the judge's findings under Article 8 ECHR.



 6. In relation to that paragraph of the rules,  paragraph  E-LTRPT.2.4.(a)
    and (b) read as follows:

         E-LTRPT.2.4.

         (a)  the applicant must provide evidence that they have either -

             (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child, or  that  the
             child normally lives with them; or

             (ii) direct access (in person) to the child,  as  agreed  with
             the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives  or  as
             ordered by a court in the UK; and

         (b)  the applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,  and
         intend  to  continue  to  take,  an  active  role  in  the  child's
         upbringing.

 7. As the Respondent's Rule 24 response  correctly  states,  the  relevant
    immigration rule specifies that there must be direct access  in  person
    to the child (my emphasis).  Having  discussed  this  matter  with  the
    parties it is plain that the Appellant's reliance upon the decision  of
    JA (meaning of "access rights") [2015] UKUT 225  (IAC)  promulgated  on
    17 April  2015,  is  not  helpful  to  her  appeal  as  following  the
    promulgation of that decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Clive  Lane,  the
    Respondent amended her immigration rules by virtue of  a  Statement  of
    Changes which were placed before parliament  on  13th  July  2015  (see
    Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC 297).  As reflected on
    page 21 of 25 of that Statement of Changes, against paragraph FM6,  the
    following wording appears:

    FM6. In Appendix FM in paragraph E-ECPT.2.4.(a)(ii) for "access  rights
           to the child" substitute  "direct  access  (in  person)  to  the
           child, as agreed with the parent or carer with  whom  the  child
           normally lives or as ordered by a court in the UK".

 8. Thus it can be seen that the Immigration  Rules  were  amended  by  the
    Secretary of State to incorporate a much more  detailed  definition  of
    access rights to the child which were substituted with the  terminology
    that included direct access to the child  which  should  be  in  person
    explicitly.

 9. The difficulty the Appellant faces is that the judge was plainly  aware
    of the fact that the Appellant does not have direct access to  her  son
    as reflected at paragraph 10 of her decision.   Thus,  given  that  the
    Appellant does not have direct access to her son, either by way  of  an
    informal agreement with her son's biological father or  stepmother,  or
    as ordered by the Family Court, the rule cannot be met.   It  is  clear
    from the rule (and also from the accompanying FM.1.0(a) guidance)  that
    the definition of 'direct access' to the child does mean "in person" as
    opposed to "indirect access" as the rules previously  stated  when  the
    decision of JA was promulgated.

10. The further difficulty that the Appellant has is that,  notwithstanding
    the rule change, Appendix 3 and 4 annexed to JA  indicate  that  whilst
    the previous Rule could have given rise to indirect access (by means of
    letters, telephone calls, etc.) and access via  an  informal  agreement
    (between parents where there is no court order - see Section 151(5)  of
    the Children Act 1989 (as amended)), as head note 4 of JA makes  clear,
    it is likely to be unusual that a person having  only  indirect  access
    rights will be able to satisfy the rule in its previous form, and  that
    in some cases, Tribunals may need to examine the reasons why the Family
    Court has ordered indirect, rather than direct access.

11. In that regard the judge noted that the Appellant's child did not  want
    contact with the Appellant which the judge said was  important  to  her
    assessment of the best interests at paragraph 13 of her  decision,  but
    moreover at paragraph 14 of the decision, the judge stated that despite
    the court order which indicated that the Appellant and  the  stepmother
    were ordered to "promote the relationship" between  the  Appellant  and
    her son, this had not happened.  The judge  correctly  noted  that  the
    stepmother  was  in  breach  of  the   Family   Court's   order,   but,
    notwithstanding minimal telephone contact and no direct contact in 2007
    at all, the judge found that the  Appellant  had  failed  to  make  any
    application to return to the Family Court  since  13  October  2015  to
    enforce the terms of the court order  against  the  stepmother  and  to
    enforce the promotion of the relationship with her child (my emphases).

12. Thus, it was not only open to the judge to find that the interpretation
    of direct access had not been fulfilled in  terms  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, but also it was open her to find that, in any event, even if the
    old rules were to be an aid to interpreting access rights  to  a  child
    (notwithstanding that the rules had also changed), indirect  access  in
    this event had been ordered because the child did not want contact with
    his mother and, notwithstanding that also, even though the Family Court
    had ordered the promotion of the relationship between  the  mother  and
    child, the Appellant as the child's mother had not pursued  enforcement
    of the Family Court's order which led the judge  to  find  that  family
    life also did not exist between the Appellant and her son.   As  stated
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, this is an  extremely  sad  situation
    for the Appellant but the judge's decision was correct based  upon  the
    evidence before her.

13. In this appeal as the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  find  that
    family life existed between the Appellant and her son due to  the  lack
    of any contact between the Appellant and her son  for  some  time,  the
    appeal was also sadly going to fail under Article 8 as  notwithstanding
    the Family Court's order that indirect  access  or  contact  should  be
    promoted with a view to direct access or contact, the Appellant had not
    sought to enforce that order and for that reason there was no  indirect
    access which could give rise to Article 8 being engaged.

14. In light of the above findings the decision and findings of the  First-
    tier Tribunal is affirmed.

15. I would make a further obiter observation however in relation to access
    rights having considered this area with some care and given that  there
    was no explanation for the statement of changes that could be discerned
    which effectively  rendered  the  decision  in  JA  out  of  date  when
    considering a rules-based assessment alone.   Notwithstanding  that  E-
    LTRPT.2.4(a) has been amended since July 2015 so that access rights  to
    a child must be "direct" in order to secure leave under the immigration
    rules, that of course will not be the end of the matter (as the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge here also realised). In my view,  in  harmony  with
    the  view  of  UTJ  Lane  in  JA,  indirect  access  can  still  be  of
    significance, as a matter to  be  considered  outside  the  rules  when
    applying a fair  balance  approach  and  performing  a  proportionality
    assessment, for example, if indirect access or contact is given with  a
    view to securing direct access or contact with a child at some point in
    the future to facilitate the  development  of  family  life  between  a
    parent in child (in accordance with the European Court of Human Rights'
    decision in Keegan v  Ireland  [1994]  ECHR  18;  [1994]  18  EHRR  342
    concerning the 'proper development of ties with a child' - which if not
    recognised would constitute a lack of respect for family life in breach
    of a positive obligation imposed by Article 8 - see [48]  to  [50]  of
    that judgment).  However, it is hard to see  the  utility  in  granting
    leave to a parent outside the rules or an appeal succeeding outside the
    rules if there is no direct  contact  and  crucially  if  there  is  no
    prospect of contact developing at some point in the future also.



Notice of Decision

16. The  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's anonymity direction is maintained.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

17. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date 02 May 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini




