
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03405/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 January 2018                            |On 20 April 2018              |
|Prepared 31 January 2018                      |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                             MS GURMEL KAUR BRAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra, Counsel instructed by Lex Sterling
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of India, appealed against  the  Respondent's
    decision dated 18 September 2015 to refuse leave to remain.  The appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Woolf who on 25 May 2017 dismissed  the
    appeal for want of jurisdiction.

2.   Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pickup  on
    7 December 2017.  By a Rule 24  response  dated  18  January  2018  the
    Secretary of State through the Specialist Appeals  Team  conceded  that
    the Judge did  have  jurisdiction  and  the  Tribunal  was  invited  to
    determine the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral  hearing  to  consider  the
    individual appeal on the facts and merits.

3.   At the hearing today, the parties  were  agreed  that  that  concession
    will stand and that there has  never  been  any  consideration  of  the
    merits of the human rights based claim  which  largely  appears  to  be
    health related reasons.  The absence of any consideration of the  human
    rights claim does in the light of the Presidential Statement, paragraph
    7.2, indicate that this is a case which is suitable  for  consideration
    by the First-tier Tribunal and  notwithstanding  the  directions  given
    which contemplate a hearing of the matter in the Upper Tribunal, it  is
    clear that further evidence needs to be  prepared  in  support  of  the
    human rights based claim bringing it up-to-date  and  fully  addressing
    the medical grounds as a basis of the claim under Articles 3 or 8 ECHR.
     I agree that the Judge made an error of law in relation to  the  issue
    of jurisdiction and there was a valid appeal on  human  rights  grounds
    advanced.

4.   In the circumstances  the  appropriate  course  is  that  the  Original
    Tribunal's decision cannot stand and the matter will be returned to  be
    dealt with in the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with the law.

5.   No anonymity order was sought nor one made.

DIRECTIONS

1.   List for hearing at the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross not  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Woolf.

2.   List for two hours.

3.   Punjabi interpreter required.

4.   Appellant's bundle of documents and medical reports  to  be  filed  and
    served not later than 21 days before the further hearing.

5.   Skeleton argument addressing Articles 3  and  8  and  any  other  human
    rights issues, if applicable not later than seven working  days  before
    the further hearing.

6.   The Respondent to serve any documents or skeleton argument relied  upon
    not less than seven working days before the further hearing.






Signed                                  Date 26 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
