
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03030/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunals      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st August 2018                           |On 25th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                          mr shamar michael morgan
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Sarwar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    E Young-Harry, promulgated on 22nd September 2017, following a  hearing
    at Birmingham Sheldon Court on 26th July 2017.  In  the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Jamaica, and  was  born  on  12th
    September 1998.  He appealed against the decision  of  the  Respondent,
    Entry  Clearance  Officer,  dated  20th  October  2015,  refusing   his
    application to join his mother, Marie  Hall-Wilson,  as  her  dependent
    child under, what is  known  as  the  "sole  responsibility"  Rule,  in
    paragraph 301 of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that his mother left him in the
    care of his grandmother when he was 2 years of age, to come to the  UK.
    She was granted discretionary leave to remain  in  2010.   Subsequently
    she was granted full settlement.  She has since then been in a position
    to Sponsor the Appellant to come to the UK.  She has  done  so  because
    the Appellant's grandmother is no longer able to  care  for  him.   The
    Appellant's sponsoring  mother,  Marie  Hall-Wilson,  has  visited  the
    Appellant once in 2011.  She keeps in touch with him and there is phone
    card evidence.  She sends him money.  She  takes  an  interest  in  his
    education.  She supports him.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge, at the outset, referred to the guidance in TD (Yemen) [2006]
    UKAIT 49, that the Sponsor has to show that she has "continuing control
    and direction of the Appellant's upbringing which includes  making  the
    important decisions" in his life  (paragraph  10).   However,  in  this
    case, the sponsoring mother, having left  Jamaica  in  2000,  when  the
    Appellant was only 2 years of age, only visited him once in 2011,  even
    though she had discretionary leave by that stage  from  2010,  and  has
    only seen the Appellant once in seventeen years (paragraph 12).   There
    was phone card evidence (paragraph 13).  The Sponsor  sent  money,  but
    she only had before her produced  one  piece  of  documentary  evidence
    dating back to 2010 to support this claim (paragraph 14).  The  Sponsor
    had identified the school that the Appellant should go to  because  she
    had been to the school herself, but that "I  note  this  was  the  only
    important decision she was able to refer to" (paragraph 16).  When  the
    Sponsor was asked about the progress of the Appellant  at  school,  she
    was able to say that he struggled with maths, and this  was  consistent
    with the school reports that the Appellant often was absent from  maths
    classes (paragraph 17).   The  judge  made  positive  findings  in  the
    Appellant's favour (at paragraph 20), but concluded that these  do  not
    go far enough (paragraph 21).  There was insufficient evidence to  show
    that the Sponsor had sole responsibility for the Appellant's upbringing
    (paragraph 21).  As for the Appellant's claim that the grandmother  was
    too unwell, the Appellant had now reached the age of majority  and  was
    an adult and the medical evidence provided was not relevant  (paragraph
    25).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge, although referring  to
    the decision in TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT  49,  proceeded  on  the  wrong
    footing.  The proper basis of approach to a case such as this was  that
    the Appellant was applying as a child of a  single  parent,  where  the
    father had abdicated responsibility.  This was clear from the  decision
    in TD (Yemen) where it was stated that,

         "Where one parent has disappeared from the  child's  life,  and  so
         relinquished or abdicated  his  (or  her)  responsibility  for  the
         child, the starting point must be that it is the  remaining  active
         parent who has 'sole responsibility' for the child" (paragraph 49).



 7. In the circumstances where the Sponsor was the remaining active  parent
    who had sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellant,  the  judge  had  to
    approach the matter from this basis as a  starting  point.   The  judge
    failed to do so (see paragraphs 10 to 21 of the determination).

 8. Second, with reference to the decision in TD  (Yemen),  in  any  event,
    there was no reference in substance or form in the determination to the
    test in TD (at paragraph 49), or to adopting it as a starting point.

 9. Third, the decision in TD (Yemen) also made clear that in a "one parent
    case" that whilst the starting point or sole responsibility is with the
    single parent, this may be negated where there  is  evidence  that  the
    carer abroad has shared responsibility for decisions  with  respect  to
    the child's life.  Thus, TD (Yemen) makes clear that, "if the UK  based
    parent has allowed the carer abroad to make some 'important  decisions'
    in the child's upbringing,  then  it  may  readily  be  said  that  the
    responsibility for the child has become 'shared'" (see  paragraph  50).
    In this case, Judge  Young-Harry  had  failed  to  demonstrate  in  the
    conclusions how it was that the child's upbringing had been shared with
    the carer in Jamaica.  At no stage in the determination (see paragraphs
    11 to 21) are there findings reached in  relation  to  the  grandmother
    (carer's) decision-making in the Appellant's upbringing.

10. Finally, that being so, it could not be overlooked that the  judge  had
    reached certain fundamental findings  in  relation  to  the  Appellant,
    which did demonstrate that there was sole responsibility on  behalf  of
    the sponsoring mother.   These  were,  first,  that  the  Sponsor  used
    calling cards to contact the Appellant (paragraph 13); second, that the
    Sponsor provided financial support (see paragraphs 14  to  15);  third,
    that the Sponsor chose the school of the Appellant (paragraph 16);  and
    finally, that the Sponsor had knowledge  of  the  Appellant  struggling
    with maths at school (see paragraph 17).

11. Mr Sarwar submitted that in the light of these favourable  findings  of
    fact the judge ought to have directed herself to  the  starting  point,
    namely, that the one remaining parent should be taken to have had  sole
    responsibility for the child's  upbringing,  in  a  case  such  as  the
    present.

12. For her part, Ms Aboni, submitted that the judge had  directed  herself
    appropriately.  She did accept that the financial support was given  by
    the sponsoring  mother  from  the  UK  to  the  Appellant  in  Jamaica.
    However, she was not satisfied that  the  only  decision-maker  in  the
    Appellant's life was the mother in this country.  The Sponsor had  made
    no contact with the school itself.  She had only visited once in  2011,
    despite having had leave to remain since 2010.  Furthermore, the  judge
    observes that the Appellant himself, as a  child  chose  his  religion,
    with no involvement of the Appellant in that regard.

13. In reply, Mr Sarwar simply stated that if the judge wished to say  that
    the grandmother had been engaged in a "shared" decision-making  process
    with her daughter, the sponsoring mother, the judge would have said so.
     This was not stated anywhere in the determination.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

15. First, this is a case of a "single parent".   The  starting  point,  as
    made clear by the Tribunal by TD (Yemen) is that "it is  the  remaining
    active parent who has 'sole responsibility' for the  child"  (paragraph
    49).  The judge  did  not  proceed  from  this  basis.   Secondly,  and
    following on from that, if it was the case that responsibility in  this
    case was "shared" because, plainly, the grandmother abroad was  looking
    after the Appellant since the age of 2, then there had to  be  findings
    of fact made in relation to what these "important  decisions"  were  in
    the child's upbringing (see paragraph 50 of TD).

16. Second, given that none of this was done, the areas where the judge did
    make findings of fact in the  Appellant's  favour,  assumed  a  greater
    importance.  Thus, the judge's finding that the Sponsor did use calling
    cards to maintain contact with the Appellant, did provide the Appellant
    with financial support, did choose  the  Appellant's  school,  and  was
    aware  of  his  struggles  with  maths  at  school,  were  such  as  to
    demonstrate that she did have sole responsibility  for  the  Appellant.
    It has to be remembered that the phrase "sole responsibility" can never
    be literally construed.  This is because in the very nature of  things,
    where responsibility is being shared with the carer  abroad,  there  is
    bound to be a distinction between day-to-day care provided by the carer
    abroad, and overall care, in terms of "continuing control and direction
    of the Appellant's upbringing", as Judge Young-Harry, correctly put  it
    (at paragraph 10).  In short, the word "sole responsibility" is not  to
    be literally taken.

17. Finally, I should just add that the fact that  "when  asked  about  the
    Appellant's religious inclinations, the Sponsor  honestly  stated  that
    the Appellant has made his own choices about religion contrary  to  her
    advice and guidance" (paragraph 19), does not  necessarily  imply  that
    she did not have "sole responsibility" over the Appellant's  life.   It
    would have been otherwise had the choice of his  religious  orientation
    lay with the carer in Jamaica.  The fact that he had made his  decision
    "contrary to her advice  and  guidance"  (paragraph  19)  can  just  as
    equally suggest that she did set out to exercise the necessary  control
    and direction over his upbringing.   That,  however,  must  remain  the
    matter for decision by the Tribunal below, as I remit  this  matter  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is  allowed
to the extent that it is remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant
to Practice Statement 7.2(b) to be heard by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  E
Young-Harry.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd September 2018
