
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03517/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 18 November 2016                  |On 21 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Ivan George Dennis
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr M Aslam, instructed by Metro Law
For the appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Herbert  promulgated  11.7.16,  allowing  on
    article 8 ECHR grounds the claimant's appeal against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State, dated 5.8.15, to  refuse  his  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK on private  and  family  life  grounds.   The
    Judge heard the appeal on 4.7.16.

 2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Safer  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    27.10.16, though without identifying reasons for doing so.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 18.11.16 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons briefly summarised below, I find that  there  was  such
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    as to require the decision of Judge Herbert to be set aside and  remade
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Having found that the claimant could not meet the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and in  particular  the  'insurmountable  obstacles'
    test for continuing family life outside the UK, and without referencing
    SS (Congo), the First-tier Tribunal purported to consider whether there
    were compelling circumstances insufficiently recognised under the Rules
    that justified granting leave to remain outside the  Rules  on  private
    and family life grounds pursuant to article 8 ECHR, on the  basis  that
    the decision of the Secretary of State would otherwise be unduly harsh.
    However, the judge relied on factors set out at [18]  of  the  decision
    which cannot reasonably amount to compelling circumstances.

 6. Although  the  judge  accepted  that  the  claimant  had  instructed  a
    solicitor to make an application based on  family  life  in  2003,  and
    through no fault of his own, the solicitor failed to do so,  the  judge
    failed to take into account some  9  years  since  2003  and  his  next
    application in 2012. That delay was not attributable to any fault of  a
    representative. In effect, the claimant came to the UK as a visitor  in
    2001 and simply overstayed. He has never had any legal status in the UK
    and it is no more than speculation to suggest that any application made
    in 2003 had any prospect of success. It is also clear that the claimant
    worked illegally in the UK. It is surprising, therefore, that the judge
    suggested that apart from the fact of overstaying, the claimant was  of
    good character and led an industrious life. No  credit  ought  to  have
    been attached to that consideration.

 7. The claimant established  his  family  relationship  with  his  partner
    whilst his presence in the UK was entirely unlawful.  It  follows  that
    that relationship was entered into with full knowledge that he  had  no
    legitimate basis to expect  to  be  able  to  remain  in  the  UK.  His
    relationship was throughout entirely precarious. Whilst the  judge  has
    referenced section 117B of the 2002 Act, and at [24] acknowledged  that
    "little weight should be given to a private life or relationship formed
    with  a  qualifying  partner  whilst  the  (claimant)  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully," the judge appears at [24] to  consider  that  because  the
    relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting,  those   public   interest
    considerations were outweighed. I find that whilst the judge  mentioned
    the provisions of section 117B, in  effect  they  were  not  adequately
    taken into account in the proportionality balancing exercise.

 8. I also note that at [24] the  judge  incorrectly  gave  credit  to  the
    claimant for speaking English. As  explained  in  AM  (S  117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC), "An appellant can obtain no positive right to a
    grant of leave to remain from either s117B (2)  or  (3),  whatever  the
    degree of his fluency in English, or  the  strength  of  his  financial
    resources."

 9. Neither is it rational to find at [18(3)] that because a person has  no
    accommodation or employment to return to in Jamaica and has been in the
    UK for some 14 years the return would  be  on  its  face  unjustifiably
    harsh.

10. The judge also took into account that the claimant and his partner were
    undergoing IVF treatment in the UK. Whilst his partner  is  settled  in
    the UK, the claimant has no entitlement to such treatment on  the  NHS.
    Effectively, the judge concluded that  the  claimant  was  entitled  to
    remain in the  UK  in  order  to  continue  IVF  treatment  that  would
    otherwise be prohibitively expensive in Jamaica. However, there  is  no
    clear reason given why a person with no  right  to  remain  in  the  UK
    should be entitled to remain in order to benefit from  such  treatment.
    There cannot be any duty  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  allow  the
    claimant to remain, even  for  a  limited  period,  for  this  purpose,
    especially  when  the  relationship  itself  was  formed  in   entirely
    precarious circumstances. In this regard, the Secretary  of  State  has
    referred to Erimako, R (on the application of) v SSHD [2008]  EWHC  312
    (Admin).

11.  At [23] the judge also appears to have given weight in the  claimant's
    favour because of the practicalities of his  returning  to  Jamaica  to
    make an entry clearance application "are simply that it would be almost
    certainly bound to fail or face significant delays  and  difficulties."
    It is not open to the First-tier Tribunal to base its decision  on  the
    prospects of success or otherwise of any future application, as held in
    SB Bangladesh [2007] EWCA Civ 28. In any event,  the  judge  failed  to
    explain what difficulties and delays were being referred to.

12. Even if the judge was entitled to conclude that the  circumstances  are
    compelling, which must be  doubted,  taking  an  overall  view  of  the
    proportionality assessment, it was entirely one-sided in the claimant's
    favour, relying on factors that should  not  have  been  taken  in  the
    claimant's favour, and with no real or discernible or adequate  account
    or assessment of the public interest. It follows that the  decision  is
    flawed for error of law and cannot stand.

13. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.

14. I considered with the representatives as to the  appropriate  venue  to
    remake the decision. Given that it may well require further evidence to
    address the claimant's current circumstances, I relist this appeal  for
    a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I do so on the  basis  that
    this is a case which  falls  squarely  within  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement at paragraph  7.2.  The  nature  or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal
    to be re-made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
    in rule 2 to deal with cases fairly  and  justly,  including  with  the
    avoidance of delay, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the decision in the appeal to be  remade  afresh
                    in the First-tier Tribunal.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Consequential Directions

16. The decision in the appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    sitting at Taylor House;

17. No findings of fact are preserved and the appeal  is  to  be  heard  de
    novo;

18. The estimated length of appeal is 2 hours;

19. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  except
    Judge Herbert and Judge Saffer;

20. Not later than 10 working days before the listed date for the appeal in
    the First-tier Tribunal, the claimant shall serve on the  Secretary  of
    State and lodge  with  the  Tribunal  a  revised  single,  indexed  and
    paginated bundle of all subjective and objective  evidence  relied  on,
    together with any skeleton argument and copies of any case  authorities
    relied on. The Tribunal will not accept documents submitted on the  day
    of hearing.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

