
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/03806/2018

                                               HU/03808/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 July 2019                       |     On 06 November 2019               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                    D J M
                                    S J M
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Frantzis,
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are sister and  brother  were  born  in  2007  and  2002
    respectively. They are citizens of Tanzania. They appealed against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 2 January 2018 to  refuse
    them entry clearance to the United Kingdom  to  join  their  aunt,  the
    sponsor Mrs T. The First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated  on  1
    April 2019, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside. My reasons are as follows. First, I  find  that  the  judge  has
    misunderstood or misinterpreted the oral evidence which was put  before
    him. At  [17],  judge  recorded  that  'I  asked  the  sponsor  further
    questions to identify how her mother's functionality had been  affected
    by her medical conditions. Response was clear about  this:  her  mother
    was still able to self-care and still did the cooking for  the  family.
    She did not employ a maid.' The appellants have produced  a  record  of
    the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  taken   by   their
    representative. Mrs Pettersen, who appeared for the Secretary of State,
    did not dispute the accuracy of that record. In evidence,  the  sponsor
    had told the Tribunal that her mother was  not  capable  physically  of
    looking after the appellants because she had 'a lot of pain and  is  on
    medication.' In answer to questions put to her by  the  judge,  sponsor
    had said, 'when [my mother] is normal, she can [care for her own needs]
    but she is old and tired.' The sponsor also  clearly  stated  that  her
    mother no longer cooked meals for the children because 'for a long time
    she [has been] very sick' and so could not do so. I consider  that  the
    judge's  summary  of  this  evidence  is  not  accurate.  If   he   has
    misunderstood the evidence of the sponsor, then it follows that he  has
    proceeded on a false basis.

 3. I find that the judge also erred in law at [15] when  he  states  that,
    'despite claiming to  be  regularly  hospitalised  due  to  high  blood
    sugars, [the sponsor's] mother was not  on  insulin.  I  take  judicial
    notice that those whose blood sugars are not  well  controlled  put  on
    insulin this was not the case here...diabetes was said to be  her  main
    problem. I was satisfied that  the  evidence  did  not  show  that  the
    condition was such as  to  require  hospitalisation.'  The  grounds  of
    appeal make the valid point the judge is not a medical expert.  He  has
    purported to take judicial notice of medical matters which  are  beyond
    the proper scope of judicial  notice  and  are  properly  addressed  by
    expert evidence only. I find that he grounds of appeal  establish  that
    the judge did improperly reach conclusions regarding  the  severity  of
    the sponsor's mother's medical condition where there  was  insufficient
    relevant evidence to enable him to do so.

 4. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the judge had not fallen into legal error.
    Whilst I am grateful to her for her submissions, I find that the  judge
    did err in law for the reasons I have given above. It will be necessary
    for the First-tier Tribunal to hear the appeal de novo.

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge A K  Hussain)  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision at or following a hearing.



Signed                              Date 21 October 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
