
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03013/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15th October 2019                  |On 07th November 2019                 |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                              mr Kamran Waheed
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Dingley of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 14th January 1987 is a citizen of Pakistan.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Dingley of Counsel.  The Respondent was
    represented by Mr Singh a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application on  26th  June  2018  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of  family  life  with  his  spouse  Miss
    Begum.  That application was refused by the Respondent on 29th  January
    2019.  The Appellant had appealed that  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    heard by a panel of judges namely Judges  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Abdar and Loke sitting at Taylor House on 24th April  2019.   They  had
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 3. Application for permission to appeal was made and granted on 24th  July
    2019.  It was said that it was arguable that an error of law  had  been
    made by the judge when looking at  the  ETS  matter  and  arguably  had
    incorrectly identified the burden of proof.  Permission to  appeal  was
    limited to the ETS and  deception  matter  only.   The  Respondent  had
    issued a response letter opposing the appeal dated 24th September 2019.
     Directions had been issued for the Upper Tribunal  firstly  to  decide
    whether an error of law had been made in  this  case  or  not  and  the
    matter came before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 4. Mr Dingley helpfully referred me to his skeleton argument in respect of
    the submissions raised namely that there had been an error by the judge
    when identifying the appropriate burden of proof when looking at  cases
    of deception.  He also noted that the judge had failed to deal with EX1
    under the Immigration Rules.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Singh referred me to the Rule 24 response in this case.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the  evidence  and
    submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The judge granting permission had found an arguable error in respect of
    the panel's assessment of the burden of proof in respect of the alleged
    ETS deception matter.  However he did not  find  merit  in  the  ground
    raised under the  Immigration  Rules  and  limited  permission  to  the
    deception point only.

 8. Mr Dingley sought to raise afresh the point concerning the  Immigration
    Rules namely that the judge had  failed  to  consider  the  case  under
    EX1(b) of the Immigration Rules.  His skeleton argument referred me  to
    the central points in respect of both that matter and the ETS matter.

 9. I deal firstly with the decision in respect of the ETS/deception point.
     The judges referred at paragraph 15 to the Respondent's bundle without
    identifying specific documents.  I have checked  the  documents  within
    that Respondent's bundle that were available to the panel of judges  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In these types of cases the first  generation
    Respondent's  bundles  containing  little  more  than  generalised  and
    largely hearsay evidence from Millington and Collings were evidentially
    of little value.  It was only after time that the most recent  type  of
    bundle produced by the Home Office contains sufficient that allowed the
    court in SM and Qadir [2016] UKUT 00229 and other cases to  state  that
    the Home Office in  the  presentation  of  such  a  bundle  passed  the
    evidential burden of proof.  In particular  in  this  case  the  bundle
    contains the ETS look-up tool, which described the Appellant's test  as
    being invalid rather than questionable and further  there  was  a  full
    report into the college where the Appellant took his test and  covering
    a period of time during which the Appellant claimed to have  taken  his
    test.  There are also further statements within  this  latest  type  of
    generic bundle.

10. The judges at paragraph 35 specifically referred to SM  and  Qadir  and
    set out the three-stage burden of proof  in  these  cases  referred  to
    within that case.  They correctly set out those stages at paragraph 35.
     Thereafter under the heading "prima facie case against the  Appellant"
    they briefly  set  out  the  features  of  the  Respondent's  case  and
    acknowledge that in SM and Qadir and other  cases  heard  the  evidence
    presented by the Respondent was sufficient to discharge the  evidential
    burden upon the Respondent.  They had then moved to  the  second  stage
    under the heading "innocent  explanation  from  the  Appellant".   They
    provided at paragraphs 39 to 47 reasons for the findings they made  but
    the Appellant had failed to  provide  an  innocent  explanation.   They
    found as stated at paragraph  48  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    discharge the burden on him albeit  the  burden  being  a  low  one  to
    provide an innocent explanation.  At paragraph 48 they had specifically
    referred to the Appellant failing to discharge the burden  "albeit  the
    burden being a low one".  That is a reference to the  second  stage  of
    the burden of proof that they had outlined at paragraph 35  namely  the
    burden shifting to the  Appellant  to  raise  an  innocent  explanation
    namely an account which satisfies the minimum  level  of  plausibility.
    The phrase "albeit the burden being a low one"  is  it  seems  a  clear
    enough reference to "the minimum level of plausibility".   Having  made
    that finding they concluded at paragraph 48 by  stating  "therefore  we
    uphold  the  Respondent's  allegation  against  the  Appellant".   That
    essentially refers to the third stage of the burden of  proof  test  as
    set out at paragraph  10  of  SM  and  Qadir  namely  "where  (innocent
    explanation) is satisfied the burden rests on the Secretary of State to
    establish on the balance of  probability  that  the  Appellant's  prima
    facie innocent explanation is to be rejected".   The  judges  found  no
    innocent explanation had been provided by the Appellant  even  applying
    that minimal level of plausibility.  They were  therefore  entitled  to
    conclude by  finding  that  they  found  in  favour  of  upholding  the
    Respondent's  allegation.   They  could  perhaps  have  used  different
    phraseology but when looking at the  relevant  paragraphs  as  a  whole
    there was no material error of law in the manner in  which  they  dealt
    with this case.

11. In respect of the Immigration Rules  the  judges  perhaps  should  have
    begun  their  examination  of  the  facts  to  see  if  the   Appellant
    theoretically came within the terms of EX1(b)/EX2 i.e. were there  very
    significant obstacles to family life continuing  outside  the  UK.   In
    their examination of Article 8 outside of the Rules they had looked  at
    the same factual matrix including an assessment of removal to  Pakistan
    of the Appellant and the potential for his wife to accompany him.  They
    had found in  all  the  circumstances  including  those  features  that
    removal was proportionate.  The reasons given were clear and  adequate.
    They were not irrational or unlawful.  Having found  on  the  basis  of
    proportionality the  Appellant  could  return  and  such  consideration
    taking into account his family life it is highly unlikely that had  the
    judges looked  at  EX1(b)/EX2  where  the  test  is  "very  significant
    obstacles" they would have reached different  conclusions.   There  was
    therefore no material error of law in this case.

Notice of Decision

12. There was no material error of law made by the judges in this case  and
    I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    Anonymity not retained.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

