
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03853/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 January 2017                         |On 6 February 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE SUPPERSTONE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                             Mrs toritse fakeye
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walsh
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 26 September  1976.   She
    applied to remain in the UK  with  her  husband  Mr  Michael  Fakeye  a
    British citizen on 9 June 2015.   Her  application  was  refused  by  a
    decision made on 28 July 2015 and she appealed against  that  decision.
    Her appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Reid  in  a
    decision promulgated on 28 July 2016.  She now appeals to this Tribunal
    with permission granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  on  22
    November 2016.  The facts are these.

 2. The appellant had married her husband on 11  December  2010  in  Lagos.
    She had made an unsuccessful application for entry  clearance  to  join
    him in the UK which was refused by a decision dated 8  September  2012.
    She then attempted to enter the UK as a visitor on 7 December 2012  and
    had been given temporary admission following a decision to  cancel  her
    leave as a  visitor.   That  visitor  decision  was  appealed  and  the
    decision was upheld by Judge Denson in a decision dated 13 May 2013.

 3. The appellant then made a further application on  16  October  2013  to
    remain on the basis of her life in  the  UK  which  was  refused  by  a
    decision dated 31 March 2014.  In the decision dated 28 July  2015  the
    Secretary of State accepted  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her British partner.  However whilst it is
    acknowledged that her partner has lived in the UK all his life  and  is
    in employment here, this does not mean that they  are  unable  to  live
    together in Nigeria.  The appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM R-LTRP1.1.(d) nor did she qualify for leave under  the  ten
    year route.  In refusing her application consideration was given to her
    private life under Article  8  which  from  9  July  2012  falls  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  Rules.   However  she  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.

 4. Finally the  Secretary  of  State  considered  whether  the  particular
    circumstances  set  out  in  her  application  constituted  exceptional
    circumstances which, consistent with the right to respect  for  private
    and family life contained in Article 8 ECHR, might warrant a  grant  of
    leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  outside  the  requirements  within  the
    Immigration Rules.  In support of her  claim  the  Secretary  of  State
    noted that it is stated in  her  solicitor's  letter  that  during  the
    course of residing in the UK the appellant met up with  her  ex-husband
    and her daughter whom she had not seen since her  ex-husband  took  her
    daughter away from  her.   She  was  reunited  with  her  daughter  but
    unfortunately her daughter passed away after a brief illness on 23 July
    2013.  The appellant stated that she had visited her  daughter's  grave
    every month in the UK since then but that it would  be  impossible  for
    her to continue to do this should she  be  returned  to  Nigeria.   The
    Secretary of State took the view that this did not warrant a  grant  of
    leave outside the Rules as the appellant could apply in the future as a
    visitor and return to visit her daughter's grave.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid then noted in the reasons promulgated on
    28 July that the respondent was represented by a Presenting Officer but
    the appellant was not represented and  did  not  attend.   The  hearing
    proceeded in the absence of the appellant pursuant to Rule  28  of  the
    Tribunal Rules of 2014 in the interests of justice.  An application  on
    behalf of the appellant to change the hearing to a  paper  hearing  had
    been made on 15 July but refused by letter from the Tribunal  dated  18
    July.  A telephone call was made to the appellant's  representative  at
    9.55am on 20 July and the Tribunal was informed that  no-one  would  be
    attending the hearing.  Subsequent to the hearing at 11.51am a fax  was
    received from the appellant's representative.  There appeared  to  have
    been some confusion  but  it  was  confirmed  in  any  event  that  the
    appellant wanted a paper hearing and so would not have attended  on  20
    July or on any other date in any event.

 6. Judge Reid identified the issue before the Tribunal as being whether by
    virtue of Section 6 of the HRA 1998 there was a breach of  any  of  the
    appellant's rights under the ECHR and  in  particular  as  regards  the
    claimed breach of Article 8.  The judge's conclusions are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 39 to 40 and they read as follows:

         "39. I conclude that the decision does  not  breach  Article  8  as
             regards the appellant's family life or private life in the  UK
             taking into account the above findings.  Although Article 8 is
             engaged as regards  her  relationship  with  her  husband  the
             decision is proportionate taking into account the  maintenance
             of   immigration   control   (Section   117B(1)    Nationality
             Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002),  the  public  interest  in
             financial independence (Section (117B(3)) and  the  fact  that
             her  private  life  was  established  whilst  her  status  was
             precarious (Section  117B(5)).   Although  there  has  been  a
             longer period of residence in the UK with her husband than had
             applied  when  Judge  Denson  found   the   visitor   decision
             proportionate in 2013, I conclude that this longer period does
             not justify a departure from Judge Denson's  finding  in  2013
             that the decision was proportionate as regards both family and
             private life in the UK.

         40.  I have weighed in the balance the fact  that  a  part  of  the
             appellant's life in the UK is the fact her daughter is  buried
             here and whilst this is very sad and the decision removes  the
             possibility of regular visits, it does not  tip  the  decision
             over into no longer being proportionate.  In  coming  to  this
             conclusion I have taken into account that the  law  recognises
             the importance of the ability to enter as a visitor to visit a
             family member's grave depending on the  circumstances  (Abbasi
             and Another (visits - bereavement - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 463
             (IAC))."

    Accordingly the judge dismissed the appeal.

 7.  Granting  permission  to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Osborne
    summarised the grounds of appeal at paragraph 2  of  his  reasons.   He
    noted  that  the  appellant  contended  that  she  was  not  given  the
    opportunity of commenting upon new documents A to  E  provided  by  the
    respondent  at  the   hearing.    Copies   were   not   sent   to   her
    representatives.  The judge, she contended, should  not  have  accepted
    that evidence without an adjournment.  Further the appellant  contended
    that the  judge  arguably  erred  when  he  found  that  there  are  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life outside the UK.  Judge  Osborne
    in his reasons  expressed  the  view  that  it  was  arguable  that  in
    permitting the respondent  to  adduce  new  evidence  in  the  form  of
    documents at A to E and in failing to ensure that the appellant had the
    opportunity of considering those documents,  the  judge  erred  in  law
    and/or caused the appellant to suffer a  procedural  unfairness.   That
    being so he considered all the issues  raised  in  the  grounds  to  be
    arguable.

 8. Mr Walsh who appears on  behalf  of  the  appellant  has  in  his  oral
    submissions focused on two points.  First, in relation to  documents  A
    to E, the new documents, he contends that the appellant would not  know
    that the judge would rely on the previous decision of Judge Denson; and
    second, Mr Walsh mounts a  perversity  challenge  to  the  findings  in
    relation  to  whether  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to   the
    appellant's ability to visit her daughter's grave  and  whether  family
    life could be pursued outside the UK.

 9. We accept  that  there  was  a  procedural  irregularity  in  that  the
    respondent's bundle of documents was supplemented by further  documents
    at the hearing and to that extent the appellant and her representatives
    did not have an opportunity  to  consider  those  documents  and  their
    relevance  to  the  appeal.   However  we  are  satisfied   that   that
    irregularity had no material bearing on  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.
    Although Judge Reid  referred  to  the  judgment  of  Judge  Denson  in
    relation to his assessment of proportionality, it is clear  that  Judge
    Reid reached her own conclusion on  proportionality.   We  are  further
    satisfied that there is no basis for the perversity  challenge  to  the
    judge's findings as to there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life outside the UK in the light of the evidence before her.

10. Finally we would observe  that  the  judge  dealt  in  our  view  in  a
    compassionate  way  with  the  sad  circumstances   relating   to   the
    appellant's child.  For the reasons we have given we find there  is  no
    material error of law in this case and accordingly this appeal fails.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Supperstone



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Supperstone

