
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03420/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 August 2019                    |On 20th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 Jocelyn [G]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mark Mullins, Counsel instructed by Bonningtons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Laurence Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal from  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Abebrese sitting at Taylor House on 6
    March 2019) dismissing her appeal against  the  refusal  of  her  human
    rights claim in which the central issue identified  by  the  Judge  was
    whether family life between the appellant and her partner,  who  is  an
    Afghan national, could continue in the appellant's home country of  the
    Philippines. Judge Abrebrese found that there were  not  insurmountable
    obstacles to the couple carrying on family life in the Philippines with
    their young child.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do
    not  consider  that  the  appellant  requires   anonymity   for   these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of the Philippines, whose date of birth  is
    30 November 1970.  She claims to have entered the UK on 8  August  2002
    as a visitor, and to have overstayed.  On 4 December 2015  she  applied
    for leave to remain on human rights grounds on the basis of family  and
    private life established in the UK as an overstayer.

 4. On 17 January 2018 the Department gave their reasons for  refusing  the
    application.  She was not eligible to apply as  a  partner,  parent  or
    child under Appendix FM because her partner was not  British,  settled,
    or in the UK with refugee or HP leave, and also because she lived  with
    her partner and child as part of a family unit.

 5. Consideration had been given as to whether there were  any  exceptional
    circumstances.  The appellant maintained that  family  life  could  not
    continue outside the UK.  She  said  that  she  and  her  family  faced
    discrimination in the Philippines as she had converted to Islam for the
    purposes of marriage.  Alternatively, she said that she and her  family
    could not go to Afghanistan because she was Christian  and  her  family
    were Westernised.  She also stated that her partner had previously been
    tortured by the Taliban, and that the  continuing  presence  of  terror
    groups in Afghanistan would put them in danger.

 6. However, her partner had previously been denied asylum and he  had  had
    several further submissions claims rejected.  It  was  considered  that
    family life could continue outside the UK. She  was  not  obligated  to
    travel to Afghanistan.  Her child was a national  of  the  Philippines,
    and so would be able to enjoy the benefits of being a national of  that
    country, including enrolling in education there.  Her  child  was  only
    one year old, and so he would be able to relocate  to  the  Philippines
    with little disruption to his private life in the UK.  It was generally
    accepted that the best interests of a child whose parents  were  facing
    removal from the UK were best served by that child remaining with their
    parents and being removed with them.  This represented  the  centrality
    of a child's relationship  with  their  parents  in  determining  their
    wellbeing.  It was therefore decided that it was  both  reasonable  and
    section 55-compliant for her child to return to  the  Philippines  with
    her.  She had established a family in the UK in the knowledge that  she
    had no legitimate expectation  of  being  able  to  remain  in  the  UK
    indefinitely.  From the outset, all parties should have been  aware  of
    the possibility that family life might not be able to continue  in  the
    UK.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant's appeal came before Judge  Abebrese  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 6 March 2019.  Both  parties  were  legally  represented.   Mr
    Mullins of Counsel appeared on behalf of the appellant.

 8. In his subsequent decision, at paragraph [8], Judge Abebrese identified
    the core issue in  the  appeal  as  being  whether  family  life  could
    continue in the Philippines between the appellant and her partner.   Mr
    Mullins' submission was that  the  appellant's  partner  would  not  be
    allowed a spousal visa to reside in the Philippines because  he  was  a
    national of Afghanistan, and that was not  one  of  the  countries  for
    which spousal visas were granted.  The Judge noted from the  file  that
    at an earlier hearing on 18 September 2018 the respondent had confirmed
    that, while further submissions from the appellant's partner  regarding
    a fresh protection claim were pending, "they would not be pursuing  the
    argument that family life could continue in  Afghanistan."   The  Judge
    also noted that the Tribunal on the same occasion had made a  direction
    that the appellant's representatives should file and serve any  further
    evidence, such  as  "evidence  from  a  lawyer  and/or  other  reliable
    source", regarding the partner's ability or otherwise to obtain a  visa
    for the Philippines in order to allow family life to continue there for
    the foreseeable future.

 9. At paragraphs [20]-[22] of his decision, the Judge gave his reasons for
    rejecting  the  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  regarding   the
    inability of her partner to obtain a visa.

10. At paragraph [20], the Judge said:

         "The appellant relies on evidence from a claimed expert lawyer from
         the Philippines and she provided details  of  the  contact  to  her
         solicitor and a  letter  was  provided  which  states  that  it  is
         unlikely that a visa would be granted to  the  appellant's  partner
         because of his nationality.  The solicitor, on the evidence  before
         me, did not have any direct [contact] with the claimed  expert  and
         it appears that no payment  was  made  to  him  for  providing  the
         letter/advice.  There was no follow-up letter from the  appellant's
         solicitor.  There is, in my view, doubt in relation to the credence
         of this letter and the reliability of  the  advice  that  has  been
         provided.  I note that  the  respondents  were  provided  with  the
         information for at least a month prior to the hearing of the appeal
         and they did not make any inquiries  of  their  own  regarding  the
         reliability of the advice which had been provided  by  the  claimed
         expert.  This, however, in my view is not overridden  by  the  fact
         that the appellant's solicitor herself did not obtain  a  follow-up
         letter to verify the information.

11. At paragraph [21], the Judge said that  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    information provided by the expert was credible, "primarily  because  a
    solicitor did not have any contact with the expert  and  there  was  no
    follow-up letter to the expert confirming his  credibility."   Further,
    he noted that the expert had been referred to the appellant by a friend
    who worked at the same company as the expert.

12. In paragraph [22], the Judge reiterated his finding that  the  evidence
    provided by the appellant regarding her partner's ability to  obtain  a
    visa from the Philippine Government was not credible.  He observed that
    neither she nor her partner had valid leave in  this  country,  and  he
    held that there was nothing preventing them from  seeking  to  continue
    their "private life" in the Philippines.



The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

13. On 15 July 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson granted permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons: "It is at  least  arguable  that  the
    Judge failed adequately or at all to consider  the  Philippine  Embassy
    web page.  That is potentially significant, is definitely material  and
    is arguably a material error."

The Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

14. The evidence relied on before the First-tier Tribunal to  establish  an
    insuperable legal barrier was two-fold.  Firstly, reliance  was  placed
    on a letter of certification dated 19 October 2018  purportedly  issued
    by Attorney Charlie D. C. Pascual.  In his letter he said that  he  was
    an accredited lawyer of the Philippine Bureau of Immigration and he was
    authorised to provide  immigration  advice  as  to  whether  an  Afghan
    national married to a Filipino  national  could  or  could  not  obtain
    permanent residency in the Philippines.  He  certified  that  an  alien
    validly married to a Filipina might only be eligible  to  apply  for  a
    permanent residence visa if his country  had  an  existing  immigration
    reciprocity agreement with the Philippines pursuant to  the  Philippine
    Immigration Act 1940.  He continued:

         "Based on the circular information  of  the  Philippine  Bureau  of
         Immigration,  the  country  of  Afghanistan  is  not  among   those
         countries  listed  to  have  a  reciprocity  agreement   with   the
         Philippines.

         Hence, an  Afghan  national  is  disqualified  in  applying  for  a
         permanent residence visa in the Philippines."

15. The second source of information relied on  was  a  printout  from  the
    website of the Embassy of the Philippines in Singapore dated 1 December
    2017.  Under the heading of "Residence visa for spouse  of  a  Filipino
    citizen", the Embassy stated that the Philippine Immigration  Authority
    issues a permanent  residence  visa  (specifically  the  13A  Non-Quota
    Immigrant Visa) to the qualified  non-Filipino  spouse  of  a  Filipino
    citizen only to  nationals  of  specified  countries,  which  are  then
    listed. Afghanistan is not one of the specified countries on the  list.
    The following is stated at the end of  the  list:  "The  13A  permanent
    residence visa is not issued to nationals not included in the preceding
    list."

16. The provenance of the letter from the Attorney  was  unsatisfactory  in
    that it had not been obtained pursuant to a letter of instruction  from
    the appellant's solicitors and  they  had  not  sought  to  verify  the
    Attorney's credentials.  The appellant had obtained the advice  through
    a friend who was said to work at the same office as the  Attorney,  and
    the Judge was misinformed that the Attorney had not been paid  for  the
    provision of his professional services.  In the  circumstances  and  on
    the information available to him, I consider that there was  sufficient
    doubt surrounding the reliability of the letter that it was open to the
    Judge not to attach credence to it, viewed in isolation.

17. However, the Judge wholly failed to engage with the  second  source  of
    evidence relied upon,  which  was  the  information  contained  on  the
    website of the Philippine Embassy in  Singapore.   Not  only  did  this
    evidence buttress the credibility, and hence the  reliability,  of  the
    letter of from the Attorney - which was to the same effect - but it was
    also capable of proving  the  appellant's  case  independently  of  the
    letter from the Attorney.

18. The upshot is  that  the  Judge  did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence deployed by  the  appellant  to  show  that  her
    partner was not eligible for a spousal visa.

19. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated  by  a
    material error of law such that it must be set aside and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

20. Following my error of law ruling, which I gave orally in short form,  I
    invited submissions  from  the  legal  representatives  as  to  how  to
    proceed.   It was agreed that the appeal  should  be  retained  by  the
    Upper Tribunal and that no further hearing was necessary.

21. The evidence for remaking comprises the evidence that  was  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  additional  evidence  served   by   the
    appellant's solicitors in advance  of  the  hearing  before  me.   This
    comprises a witness statement from Ms Kapilla Ram dated 1 August  2019,
    to which various documents are exhibited.  She explains  that  she  did
    not think it necessary to verify Mr Pascual's credentials prior to  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal as she had no reason to believe that
    his letter was not from a genuine lawyer in the Philippines.   However,
    she has now carried out various checks to confirm his credentials.   On
    1 August 2019 she checked the website  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the
    Philippines' list of  lawyers  and  established  that  he  was  on  the
    Attorney roll with the corresponding roll number set out in his  letter
    of certification.  She has  also  checked  the  Philippine  Immigration
    Bureau online and established that his law office is an accredited  law
    office.  On 30 July 2019 she wrote to him  requesting  confirmation  of
    his accreditations and confirmation of his advice.  On 1  August  2019,
    she was able to speak to Mr Pascual to confirm that  he  was  indeed  a
    practising Lawyer registered with the  Philippine  Supreme  Court,  and
    also an accredited Immigration Lawyer.  He verbally  confirmed  to  her
    his written advice, namely that an Afghan national would not be  issued
    with a permanent residence visa as the spouse of  a  Filipino  national
    and that was because the Philippines would need to  have  a  reciprocal
    agreement with the country of the non-Filipino national, which it  does
    not have with Afghanistan.

22. In his submissions on remaking, Mr Tarlow submitted that the  issue  of
    whether there is an  insuperable  legal  obstacle  to  the  appellant's
    partner carrying on family life with the appellant and their  child  in
    the Philippines turned on the reliability of the information  given  on
    the Embassy web page.  There is nothing before me which casts doubt  on
    the reliability of this information, and  Mr  Tarlow  did  not  suggest
    otherwise.  In addition, I have had the benefit of receiving additional
    evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal, which  adequately
    addresses the concerns raised by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  about
    the credibility of the letter of certification from Mr Pascual.

23. Accordingly, I find that the appellant has  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving on the balance of probabilities that there  is  an  insuperable
    legal obstacle to family life being  carried  on  in  the  Philippines,
    which is that her partner is not eligible  to  apply  for  a  permanent
    residence visa in the Philippines as the spouse of  the  appellant,  by
    virtue of being a national of Afghanistan.   Mr Tarlow has  not  sought
    to persuade me that this  obstacle  can  be  obviated  by  the  partner
    seeking to enter or remain in the Philippines on a different basis.  Mr
    Tarlow does not dispute the underlying premise of the appellant's  case
    which is that, absent the partner's ability to enter or remain  in  the
    Philippines on a 13A Non-Quota Immigrant Visa,  it  is  impossible  for
    family life between the appellant and her partner to be carried on  the
    Philippines for the foreseeable future.

24. Nonetheless, the appellant does not qualify for leave to  remain  under
    EX.1 of Appendix FM, as her partner does not have the requisite  status
    in the UK to enable her to invoke EX.1.  So I turn to consider  whether
    the appellant's human rights claim succeeds outside the Rules.  I do so
    within the framework of the five-point Razgar test.

25. Questions 1  and  2  of  the  Razgar  test  must  be  answered  in  the
    appellant's favour with regard to the establishment of family  life  in
    the UK.  Questions 3 and 4 of the  Razgar  test  must  be  answered  in
    favour of the respondent.  On the issue of proportionality, the  public
    interest considerations arising under section  117B  of  the  2002  Act
    either militate in favour of the appellant's removal  or  they  are  at
    best neutral.  However, there are  exceptional  circumstances  in  this
    case which tip the balance in the appellant's favour, as Mr Tarlow  has
    effectively conceded by the stance he took in his closing submissions.

26. The exceptional circumstances are that family life between the  parents
    and their child cannot be carried on outside the UK for the foreseeable
    future, and so maintenance of  the  refusal  decision  will  inevitably
    split up the family.  They cannot be removed together, as envisaged  in
    the RFRL. The appellant's partner cannot be removed to the  Philippines
    as he is not a national of the Philippines, and he  cannot  voluntarily
    accompany the appellant and their child  to  the  Philippines  for  the
    reasons given earlier.

27. While the parents have never had a legitimate expectation of being able
    to carry on family life in the UK, given the  irregular  or  precarious
    status of each of them, maintenance of the refusal decision  will  have
    unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  their   blameless   child   in
    circumstances where, as acknowledged in the RFRL, his remaining in  the
    same household  as  his  parents  is  central  to  his  wellbeing.  The
    inability of the family unit to  be  reconstituted  elsewhere  for  the
    foreseeable future engenders a very strong  claim  under  Article  8(1)
    ECHR such as to outweigh the pubic interest in the appellant's removal,
    and to make her removal disproportionate to the legitimate  public  end
    sought to be achieved: see R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] 1 WLR 824 at  [19]
    and [40]-[60].


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly  the  decision  is  set  aside  and   the   following   decision
substituted: this appeal  is  allowed  on  human  rights  (Article  8  ECHR)
grounds outside the Rules.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date 13 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed this appeal, I have given consideration as to  whether  to
make a fee award in respect of any fee which has been paid  or  is  payable,
and I have decided to make no fee award as the  appellant  needed  to  bring
forward further evidence by way  of  appeal  in  order  to  succeed  in  her
appeal.


Signed   Date 13 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

