
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03626/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30th June 2017                         |On 11th July 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                  bablu dey
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Basith (instructed by Taj Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge  Robson,
    promulgated on 28th November 2016 following a hearing in Bradford.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India born in 1979.   The  case  revolved
    around his application to remain in the United Kingdom  with  his  wife
    who has a right of abode and their two children.  The couple have lived
    apart for a significant number of years and the Appellant  had  visited
    his wife in the UK and his wife had visited him in India.  On the final
    occasion however, he decided to stay and make an application to remain,
    realising that he could not meet the Immigration Rules because his wife
    was existing on benefits.  It might  be  considered  that  this  was  a
    pretty hopeless case on the facts, and indeed the judge did dismiss the
    appeal.  However, the  judge  did  not  give  appropriate  or  adequate
    consideration to Article 8.  There is no consideration of 276ADE.   For
    some reason the judge found that the Appellant was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his wife and considered that, but did  not
    consider that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  the
    children, which clearly he is, and did not consider that  and  did  not
    consider why EX.1. does not apply in relation to  that.   There  is  no
    consideration anywhere of where the best interests of the children lie,
    no balancing exercise at all and virtually no reference to Section  117
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. It is a wholly inadequate decision  which  cannot  be  defended  and  I
    therefore set it aside in its entirety.  Both the  representatives  are
    of the view that considering it has to be heard  afresh  it  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I agree, given that  no  findings
    are preserved that that is the appropriate step.

Notice of Decision

 4. Therefore the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed  to  the  extent
    that the case is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing, the appropriate hearing centre being Bradford.

 5. No anonymity direction having been requested nor appropriate,  none  is
    made.






Signed                              Date 10th July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin





