
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03684/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 6th December 2016                   |On 20th December 2016         |
|Prepared on 7th December 2016                |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                              MS SUSAN NANGONZI
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G. S. Peterson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on 21st of March  1969.  She
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Turquet
      sitting at Hatton Cross on 16 June 2016 who dismissed the  Appellant's
      appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 21 July  2015.  That
      decision was to refuse the Appellant's application for leave to remain
      made on Article 8 grounds.

   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom with  entry  clearance  as  a
      family visitor on 10 October 2002 with leave valid until 7th of  April
      2003. On 26th of May 2004  her  partner  Michael  Kintu  ("Mr  Kintu")
      arrived in the United Kingdom with a visit visa valid  until  24th  of
      November 2004. The parties began their relationship  in  October  2004
      and on 28th of April 2006 the couple's daughter  J  was  born  in  the
      United Kingdom. Mr Kintu's application for leave to remain  dated  5th
      of August 2010 was refused on 26th of August 2010 and  he  was  served
      with a notice of removal on form IS151A on 6th of September 2012.  The
      Appellant was served with a similar notice on 11th September 2012.  An
      application made for leave to remain  with  Mr  Kintu  and  J  as  her
      dependents was refused on 6th of July 2013. After  the  submission  of
      further evidence to the Respondent a fresh decision of  21st  of  July
      2015 was made refusing the Appellant's application for  leave.  It  is
      that decision which has formed the basis of these proceedings.

   3. The Appellant's case was based on her daughter J and on the  Appellant
      and Mr Kintu's involvement in their local church. At the time  of  the
      further submissions J was 9 years old. She had never left  the  United
      Kingdom. She attended school and was well settled in her studies.  She
      loved swimming and other school activities. She would soon be entitled
      to be registered as a British  citizen.  She  had  a  wide  circle  of
      friends. She only spoke English. The Appellant and Mr Kintu  had  been
      members of the Brooks of life ministry for over  5  years.  They  were
      part-time volunteers and served as  ushers.  The  Appellant  spoke  to
      teenagers at the church on ways to avoid gangs and  she  had  assisted
      many young people. The couple had  a  strong  committed  relationship.
      They wished to raise J as a British citizen.

   4. The Respondent refused the application, accepting that J had lived  in
      United Kingdom for over 7 years but stating that it was reasonable  to
      expect her to leave the United Kingdom. She  would  be  relocating  to
      Uganda with both her parents who would be able to support her whilst J
      adjusted to life in Uganda. The Appellant had family  members  already
      in Uganda who would be able to assist the  Appellant  and  her  family
      until she was able to support herself. Whilst  the  Appellant  and  Mr
      Kintu had established some form of private life any relationship  they
      had built up had been in the knowledge that they did not have leave to
      remain and their private and  family  life  could  continue  overseas.
      Should the Appellant or her  family  wish  to  return  to  the  United
      Kingdom they could apply for the appropriate entry clearance.

      The Decision at First Instance

   5. It was argued  before  the  Judge  that  J  met  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 276 ADE (1) of the Immigration Rules. She was under the  age
      of 18 and had lived in the United  Kingdom  continuously  for  over  7
      years and was thus a qualifying child. It would not be  reasonable  to
      expect her to leave. The Judge rejected this argument at paragraph  28
      of the determination where she wrote: "[ J ]  would  be  returning  as
      part of a family unit with her parents to the country of her heritage.
      She was born in this country when her parents did not have  leave.  An
      IS151A notice of removal was  issued  to  them  in  2012.  She  speaks
      English, the language of Uganda. She is not at a critical point of her
      education and there is no evidence of health problems. I find it would
      be reasonable for her to accompany her family back to Uganda."

   6. The Judge did not find that the Appellant had demonstrated exceptional
      circumstances such that the application should be granted outside  the
      Immigration Rules. Both the Appellant and Mr Kintu  had  come  to  the
      United Kingdom with leave as visitors for 6  months  but  had  had  no
      leave since that date.  The  Appellant  had  sought  to  remain  as  a
      dependent of her uncle but that application was refused in March 2003,
      13 years ago. There was no attempt by the Appellant or her partner  to
      regularise their stay until the application in 2010 which was  refused
      in August 2010. The basis of their  appeal  was  on  their  daughter's
      entitlement to British citizenship and not being able to continue  her
      education plus the lack of ties to Uganda. The family could  have  had
      no legitimate expectation that  they  would  be  allowed  to  continue
      living indefinitely in United Kingdom when the parents entered into  a
      relationship and when they decided to start  a  family.  Although  the
      Judge accepted that J had not been to Uganda as she had  been  growing
      up in a wholly Ugandan household she would  not  be  returning  to  an
      alien culture.

   7. The Judge agreed with the Respondent's  consideration  of  the  duties
      under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009
      (see paragraph 30 of the determination). She considered that it was in
      the best interests of a child to be with  her  parents  and  J's  best
      interests would be met by being with her parents as a family  unit  in
      their home country. The Judge further directed herself  in  accordance
      with the Court of Appeal decision in EV (Philippines). In  determining
      whether the need for immigration control outweighed the best interests
      of a child it was necessary to  determine  the  relative  strength  of
      factors which made it the child's best interests to remain here and to
      take account of any factors that might point the other  way.  In  this
      case the Judge did not find it was in J's best interests  to  stay  in
      education in United Kingdom even if that were  of  a  higher  standard
      than in Uganda. It was in J's best interest to return to  Uganda  with
      her parents. She would not be leaving behind a parent as no one in the
      family had British nationality.

   8. The Judge  proceeded  to  analyse  the  case  using  the  step-by-step
      approach required by the authority of Razgar  [2004]  UK  HL  27.  The
      Judge found the Appellant and Mr  Kintu's  account  of  how  they  had
      supported themselves in United Kingdom to be vague  and  unconvincing.
      Although there was a letter of support from the Bishop of  the  church
      it made no  mention  of  any  support  given  to  the  Appellant.  The
      Appellant had indicated that someone called Edna paid  most  of  their
      bills but there was no supporting evidence of that. Mr Kintu  admitted
      that he had worked in the  United  Kingdom  until  2010  but  was  now
      supported by friends in the church. He had never had leave to work. He
      was inconsistent when saying on the one hand there was not much  money
      received from the church and then on the other hand  that  the  church
      was supporting the couple very much. There was no explanation for  the
      lack  of  supporting  evidence  for  the  financial  support  of   the
      Appellant, Mr Kintu and child. There were no supporting  witnesses  at
      the  hearing  whose  evidence  could  have  been  tested   in   cross-
      examination. Both the Appellant and Mr Kintu had shown utter disregard
      for the immigration laws of this country. The best  interests  of  the
      child were not in themselves determinative of  the  reasonableness  or
      otherwise of expecting the child to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  The
      Appellant had been dependent upon  other  persons.  She  had  received
      healthcare and J  had  been  educated  at  public  expense  and  would
      continue to receive education if allowed to stay. The public  interest
      in respect of economic self-sufficiency applied.

   9.  The  Judge  directed  herself  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
      Directorate Instructions regarding the consideration of cases where  a
      child had been in United Kingdom for more than 7 years. The  longer  a
      child had resided in the United Kingdom the  more  the  balance  would
      begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable to expect  the  child
      to leave the United Kingdom and strong reasons would  be  required  in
      order to refuse a case with continuous  United  Kingdom  residence  of
      more than 7 years. In this case the Judge accepted  that  the  parents
      had a genuine and subsisting relationship with J but it was reasonable
      to expect J to leave the United Kingdom with her parents. The test  of
      exceptional  circumstances  was  not  satisfied  in  respect  of   the
      Appellant such that her appeal could be allowed outside the Rules. The
      appeal was dismissed.

      The Onward Appeal

  10. The grounds of onward appeal took issue with the Judge's finding  that
      following the refusal of the Appellant's application in 2003  she  had
      not made any further applications for a considerable  period  of  time
      until 2010. In fact it was argued the Appellant's  evidence  was  that
      she had made an application but had not heard back from the Respondent
      and had had to contact a Member of Parliament. Whilst English was  the
      official language of Uganda it was not "the language of the  country".
      There were multiple languages in use in Uganda of  which  English  was
      one. J did not speak any other Ugandan language. She was at a critical
      stage of her education as she was due to complete her  primary  school
      education that year and embark on her secondary school  education  the
      following year. Engaging in a completely different system of education
      in Uganda was likely to destabilise her.

  11. At the time the appeal was heard J had submitted an application to  be
      naturalised as a British citizen under section 1 (4)  of  the  British
      Nationality Act 1981 and was for all intents and  purposes  a  British
      citizen. Subsequently on 15 July 2016 (4 weeks after the hearing)  she
      received  her  naturalisation  as  a  British  citizen.  The   welfare
      considerations of the child must rank higher than any other. The Judge
      had not applied the Upper Tribunal case of PD correctly.  It  was  not
      relevant that J had grown up in a Ugandan home  just  as  it  was  not
      relevant that in PD the child had grown up in a Sri Lankan  home.  The
      length of residence  in  United  Kingdom,  full  integration  into  UK
      society, J's age and her minimal ties with Uganda were  factors  which
      weighed heavily in her favour. The grounds relied on section 117B  (6)
      of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  that  the  public
      interest did not require a person's removal where that  person  had  a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child
      and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
      Kingdom. The grounds quoted from PD that the parents' appeal  in  that
      case could only succeed outside the Rules and therefore  there  needed
      to be compelling circumstances to allow that.

  12. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 28 October  2016.  In
      granting permission to appeal he found it arguable  that  the  Judge's
      reasoning in relation to the duty under section 55 of the 2009 Act was
      inadequate. The Judge should have set out fuller reasoning showing the
      route to her conclusion that it was not in J's best interests to  stay
      in education in the United Kingdom. The  Judge  should  arguably  have
      considered the question of reasonableness in relation to J's departure
      from the United Kingdom across the entirety of the spectrum  embracing
      the culture and society of the United Kingdom and the educational part
      of that spectrum given the period of time which J  had  spent  in  the
      United Kingdom having been born here. Further the  Judge  should  have
      attached  greater  weight  to  the  eligibility  of  J   for   British
      citizenship which was under consideration at the time of the decision.
      The Judge had placed excessive emphasis on Uganda being the country of
      J's heritage without balancing the basis of that conclusion against  a
      full analysis of integration across the spectrum  in  United  Kingdom.
      The distinction between those factors to  be  assessed  in  the  wider
      proportionality exercise in relation to  reasonableness  had  affected
      the section 55 analysis.

  13. The cost of providing education to J was not an issue for J. The Judge
      appeared to be considering the application of  section  55  throughout
      the entirety of paragraph 33 of the determination [where the Judge had
      considered J's education and that she would be living in  the  country
      of her heritage with both her parents]. Given the length of time J had
      spent in the United Kingdom the Judge  had  provided  an  insufficient
      analysis of the conclusion that Uganda was the country of J's  culture
      and heritage and she would easily integrate  into  Uganda.  J  was  10
      years old and had lived in United Kingdom all her life. She was  about
      to complete a primary school education that never been to Uganda.

  14. Following the grant of permission to appeal the Respondent submitted a
      Rule 24 reply which maintained that the Judge  had  properly  directed
      herself and the decision to dismiss the appeal should be maintained.

The Hearing before Me

  15. Consequent upon the grant of permission  to  appeal  the  matter  came
      before me to determine whether in the first place there was  an  error
      of law such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set
      aside and the decision remade. Counsel submitted a  skeleton  argument
      on behalf of the Appellant which contained a chronology. The  skeleton
      argued that the  Judge  had  not  properly  weighed  all  the  factors
      inherent in whether it would be reasonable to expect J  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom. The Judge had made a number  of  entirely  unsupported
      statements in respect of the child's private life in this country such
      as that Uganda was the country of J's heritage, that English  was  the
      language of Uganda and that J was not  at  a  critical  point  in  her
      education. By saying that the factors relied upon by J were a wish  to
      continue in education plus a lack of ties to Uganda the Judge fell far
      short of a proper consideration of the merits of the case.


  16. I pause to note here that this summary of what  the  Judge  has  taken
      into account critically omits to mention that the Judge was well aware
      that the Appellant was also relying upon J's  entitlement  to  British
      citizenship, see paragraph 6 above.  This  is  an  important  omission
      because the appellant has sought to argue (wrongly) that the Judge had
      not paid any or any sufficient attention to the entitlement to British
      citizenship. One week [in fact 4 weeks] after the determination of the
      appeal, the skeleton argument continued,  the  Respondent  had  judged
      that J's connections to United Kingdom was such that she qualified  to
      be naturalised as a British citizen. This was a factor which was given
      no weight in the analysis of whether it was reasonable  for  J  to  be
      removed to Uganda. The Judge had failed to properly  assess  the  best
      interests of J or section 117 B (6) of the 2002 Act.

  17. In oral submissions Counsel argued  that  it  was  difficult  for  the
      Tribunal to ignore that after the hearing J was  naturalised  and  she
      now held a United Kingdom passport. The child's  ties  to  the  United
      Kingdom were not adequately explored. Secondly  there  was  a  reasons
      challenge to the determination based on the finding that J's  heritage
      was entirely Ugandan. J had passed not just the 7-year  milestone  but
      the 10-year milestone. Requiring J to leave the United  Kingdom  would
      mean abandoning her British citizenship and all that went with it. J's
      length of residency had not been considered properly. The Judge should
      have analysed what ties J had to the United  Kingdom.  There  were  no
      family members remaining in Uganda. This case was not just  about  J's
      education but all of her activities  for  example  she  was  the  only
      African member of the swimming team.

  18. In reply the Presenting Officer noted that at the date of decision and
      indeed at the date of hearing J was not a United Kingdom citizen.  The
      Judge could not be criticised for saying that J had Ugandan  heritage.
      Whilst she only held a United Kingdom passport that  did  not  stop  J
      from being entitled to a Ugandan passport. The Judge had  applied  the
      ratio of the Court of Appeal decision  in  MA  Pakistan.  All  of  the
      section 117 B factors had to be considered and this was what the Judge
      had done at paragraph 32 of her determination (where the Judge had set
      out the determining factors in the case of EV Philippines). The  Judge
      was entitled to look at the cost to the public funds of J's  education
      when the parents had no right  to  be  here.  There  was  no  lack  of
      consideration of the best interests of  J.  Even  if  a  child's  best
      interests were to remain in this country the case of MA Pakistan  made
      clear that it could still be reasonable to expect a child  to  go.  It
      was not a trump  card  that  J  had  now  got  UK  citizenship.  Cases
      involving qualifying children whether  they  were  qualifying  because
      they had been here for more than 7 years or  qualifying  because  they
      were British citizens were to be treated in a similar way. There  were
      no material errors of law in this  determination.  If  necessary,  the
      Appellant could make a  further  application  based  on  a  change  of
      circumstances.

  19. In conclusion Counsel relied on the grant of permission to appeal that
      the Judge had not properly reasoned her conclusions. J had other  ties
      to United Kingdom besides the acquisition of her citizenship but these
      had not been analysed.

      Findings

  20. It was accepted in this  case  that  the  Appellant  could  not  bring
      herself within the Immigration Rules. Although she was  in  a  genuine
      and subsisting relationship with Mr Kintu, he had no leave to be  here
      either. Both parents had a poor immigration record and had  overstayed
      in this country for several years. The Appellant's claim that she  had
      sought to regularise her stay by making an application  before  J  was
      born was not accepted by the Respondent who said she had no record  of
      any such application and it was rejected by the Judge at paragraph  29
      of the determination. Although the adults  claimed  to  have  a  close
      relationship with their church the Judge was  evidently  sceptical  of
      this evidence for  the  reasons  she  gave  (not  least  the  lack  of
      supporting evidence) and did not consider that she had  been  given  a
      truthful account of how the parties were in fact supporting themselves
      in situation where neither adult had the right to work (see  paragraph
      36). The case turned entirely on a consideration of  the  position  of
      the couple's child J who was born in the  United  Kingdom,  has  never
      left this country and is  now  a  British  citizen  (although  as  the
      Respondent pointed out she was not a British citizen at  the  time  of
      the decision or the date of hearing).

  21. Contrary to the argument put forward by the  appellant  the  Judge  in
      fact considered the factors raised on the Appellant's behalf  at  some
      length in her determination. She noted the evidence that J had settled
      well into school, had had educational certificates and was  completing
      her primary school  education.  The  Judge  has  been  criticised  for
      concentrating  on  the  educational  aspect  of  J's  welfare  to  the
      exclusion of a consideration of J's other ties to this  country,  that
      criticism being made both in  the  grant  of  permission  and  in  the
      submissions made to me. I do not consider that point is a fair one. It
      is clear from the evidence that  was  given  to  the  Judge  that  the
      submissions  made  about  J's  best  interests  concentrated  on   her
      education. I was not told of other matters  which  might  be  relevant
      save in the most general terms that as a British citizen J  would  not
      be able to access all of the benefits that citizenship  confers.  That
      however is different to the Judge being given  a  list  of  particular
      matters besides education which might impact on the case. There was no
      evidence of  health  requirements  and  although  there  was  a  vague
      reference to J  having  a  circle  of  friends,  the  Judge  noted  at
      paragraph 38 of  the  determination  that  there  were  no  supporting
      witnesses at the hearing. Whilst this remark was made in  the  context
      of the Appellant's private life claim and her connection to the church
      it could equally apply to witnesses giving evidence as to J's ties  to
      the United Kingdom.

  22. The Judge could only deal with the  case  on  the  evidence  that  was
      before her. It was not for her to speculate  on  what  other  evidence
      might exist. Given the concentration on J's education in the  evidence
      and submissions put forward by the Appellant it  was  inevitable  that
      the Judge would have to analyse the case in that  light.  The  Judge's
      duty was to consider the best interests of J as a primary  concern  of
      the Tribunal. In other  words,  whilst  it  was  not  the  primary  or
      paramount consideration it fell  to  be  dealt  with  first  and  once
      established it would become a significant factor to be weighed in  the
      Article 8 balancing act outside the Rules. I pause to note  here  that
      the Judge's finding was that it was not unreasonable to  expect  J  to
      return with her parents to Uganda. The Judge did not find that J would
      be entitled to succeed under the Rules if she J made an application in
      her own right. Although the Judge did not refer  to  the  case  of  MA
      Pakistan her reasoning in her determination was clearly in  accordance
      with that case. The debate prior to MA Pakistan had  been  whether  in
      considering whether it was reasonable to expect a qualifying child  to
      leave the United Kingdom one focused only  on  the  child  or  whether
      wider considerations could come into play in determining what  was  or
      was not reasonable. The wider considerations in this case just as they
      were in MA Pakistan were the poor immigration records of  the  parents
      and the fact that substantial public costs had already  been  incurred
      in this case not just in J's education but also the Appellant's health
      care. Whilst I take the point made in the  grounds  of  onward  appeal
      that a child should not be punished for the sins of its  parents,  the
      test of reasonableness is a wide one and a variety of relevant factors
      will come into play in assessing reasonableness including the  conduct
      of the parents.

  23. The key issue relied upon by the Appellant in  this  case  in  arguing
      that her claim should succeed outside the Rules is that her daughter J
      has now been granted British citizenship and at the  date  of  hearing
      had satisfied the 10 year  qualifying  period  and  was  about  to  be
      naturalised. It is important to emphasise however that  the  grant  of
      British citizenship to a child is not a trump card. It still has to be
      balanced  by  other  factors.  The  Judge  recited   the   Appellant's
      contention that J was about to receive her citizenship  and  that  for
      all intents and purposes was to be treated as a British citizen child.
      That however was not determinative of the appeal the Judge  still  had
      to weigh J's best interests against the other factors in the case.

  24. The Appellant disagrees with the Judge's assessment of  what  are  J's
      best interests in terms of her education. The  Judge  was  aware  that
      Ugandan education might not be equivalent  to  British  education  but
      given the Judges view of J's ties to her Ugandan  heritage  the  Judge
      was evidently of the view that an education grounded in  her  parental
      heritage was more in J's best interests than continuing to  reside  in
      this country and receive an education  here.  That  was  a  matter  of
      judgement for the for the Judge to make and for  which  she  gave  her
      reasons. The disagreement with that conclusion is therefore  merely  a
      disagreement not an indication of an error of law.

  25. The Judge's view was that J  was  not  at  a  critical  point  in  her
      education. She was well aware of how long J had been in this  country,
      that is since birth. Whilst it might  be  argued  that  another  Judge
      would have come to a different view on the facts of  this  case,  that
      two Judges might disagree on the conclusions to be drawn from the same
      set of facts is not an indication that either is wrong in  law.  I  do
      not agree with the criticism of the Judges  analysis  of  J's  Ugandan
      heritage. English is an official language of Uganda and  J  can  speak
      that language perfectly. She would  be  assisted  by  her  parents  in
      making such adjustments as were necessary to  live  in  a  country  to
      which she is entitled to citizenship. Her  parents'  poor  immigration
      record was a factor which the Judge was entitled to take into  account
      in the balancing exercise  when  considering  Article  8  outside  the
      Rules. The Judge's view was that it was  reasonable  to  expect  J  to
      travel with her parents to Uganda. Whilst she cannot be  compelled  to
      travel there because of her British citizenship, she will be  entitled
      to return to this country at any time and she is still at an age where
      much of her focus has been on her life with her parents. The Judge was
      criticised for not giving weight to  J's  connections  to  the  United
      Kingdom but as I have indicated  the  evidence  on  this  was  sparse,
      neither parent had leave to be here, the evidence of a  connection  to
      the church was not accepted and both parents had strong connections to
      Uganda. The Judge's view that there was an absence of evidence of  the
      parents having a strong connection to the  United  Kingdom  inevitably
      undermined the concept that J would have strong  connections  to  this
      country independent of her parents, given her age.


  26. Whilst Judge Hollingworth referred  to  the  need  for  the  Judge  to
      consider the question of reasonableness of return "across the entirety
      of the spectrum" the Judge could only deal with this case on the basis
      of the evidence that was before her as I have already indicated. I  do
      not consider the criticism made in the grant of permission  to  appeal
      to be a fair one. The Judge  directed  herself  appropriately  at  the
      various stages both in relation to the EV Philippines factors  and  in
      relation to the step-by-step approach required by Razgar. J was not  a
      British citizen at the time of the hearing, she was a  child  who  had
      passed both the 7-year and the 10-year milestones but  the  Judge  was
      aware of that and a fair reading of the determination shows  that  she
      took J's residence in this country into account.


  27. The decision to refuse the Appellant's application for leave to remain
      was a disappointing one for the Appellant. It may even  to  a  certain
      extent be a perplexing one given  that  at  the  same  time  that  the
      Respondent was contesting the Appellant's appeal she was also granting
      British citizenship to J. Nevertheless the issue I have to  decide  is
      whether the Judge at first instance was  wrong  in  law.  I  find  she
      directed herself correctly, she weighed up all of  the  evidence  that
      was before her and she arrived at a sustainable conclusion even if  as
      I have indicated above another Judge might have arrived at a different
      one. I therefore dismiss the onward appeal.




Notice of Decision

     The decision of the first tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold the decision to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's decision.

     Appellant's appeal dismissed

     I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy  reason  for  so
    doing.


Signed this 16th day of December 2016

.......................................................

Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal was dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed this 16th day of December 2016


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

