
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03622/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing                    |On 11th September 2020               |
|9th September 2020                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 THABO MOYO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. FtT Judge S Aziz dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal
       of his human rights claim seeking entry clearance as a dependant of
       his  father for  reasons  set  out  in   a   decision   promulgated
       on 19th August   2019.   Permission   to   appeal   was   granted
       by FtT judge Scott Baker on 26th January 2020. Directions for the
       further conduct of the appeal were sent on 28th April 2020 and, in
       the circumstances surrounding COVID 19, provision was  made  for  the
       question of whether there was an error of law and if so  whether  the
       decision of the FtT Judge should be set aside to be determined on the
       papers.

    2. The appellant did not, either in person or through  his  father  make
       any further submissions. The respondent made submissions  in  writing
       on 18th May 2020. The appellant has not sought to respond to  those
       submissions; no extension of time has been sought. The respondent has
       expressed her consent to the decision on error of law being taken on
       the papers; the appellant has not  objected, and  I  note  that  the
       decision on the original appeal  was  taken  on  the  papers  at  the
       request of the appellant.

    3. I was satisfied that the submissions made on behalf of the respondent
       together with the papers before me were sufficient to enable me to be
       able to take a decision on whether there was an error of law  in  the
       decision of the FtT and if so whether the decision  should  be  set
       aside, on the papers and without hearing  oral  submissions. On  1st
       June 2020 I took  the  following  decision  and  set  aside  the  FtT
       decision to be remade.

                "FtT decision

             1. The appellant had sought entry clearance because his sister,
                with whom he had been living for about a year, was no longer
                able to look after him. The appellant said that  his  father
                had looked after him in Zimbabwe. The respondent refused the
                application on the basis that the appellant had not provided
                evidence that he had been looked after by  his  father,  who
                had arrived in the UK when the appellant was 8  months  old
                and he was now 16, that the appellant had been in the  care
                of his  mother  and  sister  and  the  respondent  was  not
                satisfied the appellant's father had sole responsibility for
                the appellant or that  there  were  serious  and  compelling
                family or other reasons which made exclusion undesirable.

             2.  The FtT judge noted  the  evidence  before  him,  which
                included an affidavit from the appellant's mother confirming
                the father has legal custody; that  the  appellant's  school
                and boarding fees are paid by the father; that the appellant
                wrote a letter that his father returned to Zimbabwe  between
                2012 and 2017 and that they lived together when he was  not
                at boarding school. The judge found the  appellant's  father
                had been exercising parental responsibility for a number of
                years  and  in  particular that the  appellant had  been
                financially  maintained  by his  father  for  school  fees,
                accommodation costs and all living expenses and plays a key
                role in the appellant's upbringing.

             3.  The  judge  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  mother had
                completely abrogated her responsibility as a mother  on  the
                father's return to Zimbabwe in 2012 by leaving to live in a
                remote village; he found the evidence vague and  lacking  in
                detail  on  that  key  issue. He   found   she   had   not
                relinquished all parental responsibility and that parental
                responsibility was shared; that the appellant was currently
                at boarding school and has other family members in Zimbabwe
                such that there were no  serious  or compelling  family  or
                other considerations which made his exclusion undesirable.

                Error of law

             4. The grounds relied  upon  place  weight  upon  the  asserted
                failure of the FtT judge to give  adequate  consideration
                to the fact that the appellant's father has legal custody.
                The judge accepts that the father has legal custody but does
                not accept that he has sole  responsibility.  They  are  two
                different things and there is no error of law by the judge
                in failing to give adequate weight to that document.

             5. Nevertheless, the judge appears to have equated parental
                responsibility  with  sole  responsibility.  A  person   may
                retain parental  responsibility  but   not   have   actual
                responsibility.  The   judge   has   not   addressed   this.
                Furthermore, the judge seems to have required  reasons  for
                the mother going to live in a remote village and  it  is  in
                the absence of those reasons that  he  finds  she  has  not
                abrogated       her       responsibility       for       the
                appellant. Furthermore the  judge  does  not  appear  to
                have taken into account that during the period 2012 to 2017
                the appellant lived with his father, stepmother and siblings
                rather than with his birth mother.

             6. The respondent relies upon the established case law  as  to
                sole responsibility not equating to financial responsibility
                but the decision by the FtT judge has failed to take into
                account  the evidence that  was  before  him  as  to  the
                family being together until 2017  and  the  moving  between
                family members since then.

             7. The FtT judge has erred in law in failing to properly apply
                and consider the evidence as to sole responsibility.

             8. I set aside the decision to be remade."

    4. I made the following directions:

           "I direct that both parties, within 21 days of  the  sending  of
           this decision, notify the Tribunal IF THEY DO NOT AGREE to the
           decision in the appeal being  remade  on  the  papers  presently
           before the Upper Tribunal. If there is no objection raised, with
           reasons,  the  Upper  Tribunal  will  proceed  to   remake   the
           decision on the basis of the papers before it."

    5. Neither party raised an objection to my taking the  decision  on  the
       appeal on the papers before me. The appellant  and  his  family  have
       sent in letters which in essence repeat information that was  already
       before the Tribunal. The respondent has made no submissions  and  has
       raised no credibility or other challenge to  the  evidence  that  was
       before the FtT other than was made in  submissions  relating  to  the
       error of law which I took into account  in  my  decision  as  outline
       above.

    6. On the basis of the unchallenged evidence before me, the  appellant's
       father was in Zimbabwe between 2012 and 2017 and  that  although  the
       appellant was at boarding school they lived together as a family when
       he was not at school. The  appellant's  father  had  been  exercising
       parental responsibility for a number of years and in  particular  the
       appellant was financially maintained by his father for  school  fees,
       accommodation costs, all living expenses and the father plays  a  key
       role in the appellant's upbringing. There was no  challenge  to  that
       finding of the FtT judge by the respondent. The evidence  before  the
       first tier tribunal and before me was that the appellant's mother had
       abrogated her responsibility as a mother  in  2012  having  left  the
       appellant with  his  father.  She  played  no  further  role  in  the
       appellant's upbringing.  The  appellant's  mother  retained  parental
       responsibility even though the father has  legal  custody.  The  fact
       that she has parental responsibility does not mean however  that  she
       exercises that parental  responsibility.  The  unchallenged  evidence
       before the Upper Tribunal is that she does not.

    7. Further unchallenged evidence is that  the  appellant's  sister  with
       whom he was living after the father returned to the UK, was no longer
       able to look after him. He had only been with his sister when he  was
       not at boarding school and his father continued to take all necessary
       decisions in connection with his life. There was  evidence  that  the
       appellant's sister with whom he  was  living  when  not  at  boarding
       school was unwell. The fact that the appellant was at the time of the
       decision of 16 or 17 years old and therefore did not require  day-to-
       day care does not mean that his sister took over or  participated  in
       responsibility  for  him  such  as  to  amount  to   a   sharing   of
       responsibility between the appellant's father and her.  The  evidence
       is that the father continued to bear the full financial and emotional
       care of the appellant, taking all  necessary  decisions;  the  sister
       merely enabled him to continue to have somewhere to live  whilst  not
       at boarding school. There was no challenge to this  evidence  in  the
       respondent's submissions.

    8. On the basis of this evidence it is clear that the appellant's father
       has had since 2012  and  retains  sole  responsibility  now  for  the
       appellant. The appellant meets the requirements  of  the  immigration
       rules and I allow the appeal against the decision to refuse him entry
       clearance.




       Decision

       The making of the decision of the FtT did involve the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

       I set aside the FtT decision and remake the decision.

       I allow the appeal of the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
       respondent refusing the appellant entry clearance.


Jane Coker
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
Date 9th September 2020
