
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03755/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Thursday 25 March 2021                  |On Thursday 25 March 2021       |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                          MR IRFAN SARDAR MUHAMMAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by M & K Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Secretary of State is the appellant in this appeal.  For ease of
   reference, however, I refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier
   Tribunal.  The Respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Steer promulgated on 2 December 2020 ("the Decision"). By
   the Decision, the Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal against the
   Respondent's decision dated 13 February 2019, refusing his human rights
   claim based on his private life in the UK.  The claim was made in the
   context of an application for indefinite leave to remain ("ILR") based on
   ten years' continuous lawful residence in the UK.


2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He came to the UK in March
   2004 as a student.  His leave in that category was extended to August
   2012.  He then sought leave as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  Whilst
   that application was pending, he completed his period of ten years in the
   UK.  The Respondent accepts in her decision that the period of residence
   was lawful.  However, the Respondent rejected the application on the
   basis that an English language test certificate used in support of an
   application in 2012 had, she asserted, been obtained using a proxy test
   taker. This is therefore a so-called ETS case.

3. Based on the ETS allegation, the Respondent refused the application on
   the basis that it would be undesirable to permit the Appellant to remain
   in the UK (paragraph 276B(ii) of the Immigration Rules - "the Rules") and
   that the general grounds of refusal apply (paragraph 276B(iii) of the
   Rules).  In addition, the Respondent refused the human rights claim on
   suitability grounds (paragraph S-LTR of the Rules).

4. As an appeal against a refusal of a human rights claim, the only ground
   of appeal available to the Appellant is that the Respondent's decision
   breaches his rights under section 6 Human Rights Act 1998 (on the basis
   that refusal is a breach of his right to respect of his private life
   under Article 8 ECHR).  Notwithstanding that the appeal could not be
   allowed or dismissed solely on a determination of the ETS allegation,
   that was accepted by both parties to be the central issue in the appeal.

5. The Appellant's appeal came first before First-tier Tribunal Judge E B
   Grant who, in a decision promulgated on 21 May 2019, dismissed the
   Appellant's appeal.  However, by a decision promulgated on 19 February
   2020, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral found there to be an error of
   law in Judge Grant's decision.   She therefore set aside Judge Grant's
   decision and remitted the appeal for a de novo hearing before another
   Judge.

6. So it was that the appeal came back before Judge Steer.  In short
   summary, the Judge found that the Respondent had discharged her initial
   evidential burden as she had "adduced sufficient evidence, raising an
   issue, as to whether the Appellant used a proxy test taker" ([27] of the
   Decision).  However, at [28] of the Decision, the Judge made findings in
   relation to the Appellant's credibility and concluded that the Respondent
   had not discharged her legal burden (in other words that the Appellant
   had discharged the evidential burden which had shifted to him and the
   Respondent's evidence was not strong enough thereafter to satisfy the
   legal burden).  Having so concluded, the Judge found that the Appellant
   meets the requirements for ILR on grounds of long residence and proceeded
   to allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

7. The Respondent challenges the Decision on one ground only albeit formed
   of two parts.  Since that is pleaded relatively shortly, I set it out in
   full as follows:

         "1.  It is respectfully submitted that FTTJ Steer errs in finding
         the APPG report is capable of allowing departure from current
         caselaw dealing with the ETS issue and subsequently therefore
         capable of displacing the SSHD's evidence.  It is asserted that the
         report only reiterates what certain experts expressed, and has been
         judicially considered in the joined case of MA/Saha/Mohibullah
         (UTT) [2016].  It is asserted that its conclusion is not consistent
         with decisions reached by the UT where the Presidential panels
         considered all appropriate evidence, including that of the SSHD who
         was not heard by the APPG [All Party Parliamentary Group].  It is
         respectfully asserted that the decision to prefer the views of the
         APPG amounts to an error of law for the reasons explained by
         Stanley Burnton J in OGC v ICO, [57]


         "It was the duty of the tribunal to determine the issues before it
         judicially, on the basis of the evidence and arguments before the
         tribunal.. The select committee had arrived at its view on the
         evidence before it, and not on the evidence that was before the
         tribunal.  Indirectly, in relying on the opinion of the select
         committee, the tribunal relied on evidence that was not before it
         and failed to make its decision only on the basis of the evidence
         and submissions before it."


         2.   Further, the caveat expressed by Professor French, does not
         undermine his expert conclusion or diminish it to the extent that
         it nullifies the 1% false positive rate.  As such it is asserted
         that the SSHD's evidence is sufficient to meet both the initial and
         subsequent burden required to demonstrate fraud and to find
         otherwise on this basis alone is to err in law.


         Permission to appeal on the above grounds is respectfully sought.


         An oral hearing is requested."

8. By a decision dated 8 January 2021, First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan
   refused permission to appeal in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  There is no substance in the grounds.  It is clear from
         the judge's decision that the judge accepted that the appellant had
         put forward an innocent explanation, which had not been displaced
         by the respondent.  It is not the case that the judge did not
         follow established case law.  In my view, the findings made by the
         judge were open to the judge on the facts and evidence available.


         4.   The grounds are nothing more than a disagreement with the
         judge's findings.  There is no arguable error of law."

9. Following a renewed application to this Tribunal on the same ground,
   permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on 22
   January 2021 in the following terms:

         "1.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge believed the Appellant's
         evidence that he took a TOEIC test and it is not an error of law
         per se to believe a witness but it is arguable that the Judge's
         findings were infected by an unlawful evaluation of the APPG
         report, see in particular paragraph 28(iv) and 20(xv) of the
         Decision and Reasons.  It may be that both parties will have to
         make very full submissions about the extent to which the matters
         set out in paragraph 28(iv) of the Decision and Reasons contributed
         to the Judge's decision.


         2.   I give permission on all grounds."

10. So it is that the matter comes before me to determine whether the
   Decision contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-
   make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do
   so.  The hearing was listed to be heard remotely.  Neither party objected
   to that course.  The hearing was attended by representatives for both
   parties and the Appellant himself. The hearing proceeded with no
   technical difficulties.


11. Following a concession made by Mr Walker that there is no error of law
   in the Decision, I confirmed my agreement with that concession, found
   there to be no error of law in the Decision and upheld the Decision with
   the result that the Appellant's appeal remains allowed.  I indicated that
   I would provide my reasons in writing which I now turn to do.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

12. Mr Walker conceded that the Respondent's ground of appeal did not
   disclose an error of law in the Decision.  That was on the basis that,
   although there was mention of the APPG report in the Decision, the Judge
   had determined the appeal on the basis that the Respondent's evidence
   nonetheless satisfied the initial evidential burden but went on to
   conclude that the Appellant had satisfied his evidential burden, in other
   words, that the Appellant's evidence that he sat the TOEIC test himself
   was credible.  Mr Walker accepted that the Judge had taken into account
   the relevant case-law when assessing the "generic evidence" and that her
   conclusion was based on credibility findings which were open to her.


13. In order to set my reasons in context, I set out the Judge's findings
   in full as follows:

         "27. As above, the Respondent has an evidential burden to first
         adduce sufficient evidence to raise an issue, as to the existence
         or non-existence of the fact in issue.  I find that in producing
         the generic witness statements of Peter Willington [sic] and
         Rebecca Collings, the witness statement of Gopen Sethukavalar, and
         the Look-up Tool extract specifically relating to the Appellant's
         test certificate, dated 21 August 2012, the Respondent has adduced
         sufficient evidence, raising an issue, as to whether the Appellant
         used a proxy test taker, and has discharged that evidential burden.


         28.  I find that the Appellant has raised an innocent explanation,
         an account which satisfies the minimum level of plausibility for
         the following reasons:


         i.   He provided a plausible account that was not challenged in
         cross-examination, detailing how, and why, he had chosen the TOEIC,
         as the test to take, and LCMT, as the centre at which to take the
         test, how he had travelled to LCMT, producing supporting evidence
         from a friend and what had happened at the test centre, producing
         supporting evidence in the form of the letter dated 16 August from
         LCMT, and the ETS certificate with the Appellant's photograph.


         ii.  Further, the Appellant produced unchallenged oral, and
         supporting documentary, evidence of his proficiency in the English
         Language, dating from his secondary education in Pakistan,
         including certificates at secondary and higher secondary education
         level, and at degree level, in Pakistan, and English language test
         certificates gained in Pakistan and, since 2004, in the UK.


         iii. The Appellant requested his voice recording from ETS and then
         made every reasonable attempt to engage with the Respondent and ETS
         (AB 24-28) and the Respondent failed to respond to the Appellant's
         enquiry (AB 29 and 24), as to how the Home Office was able to
         identify the recording as related to him, and how the recording had
         been received.


         iv.  On the evidence provided by the Respondent, and the expert
         evidence, as detailed at paragraph 20 above, the Appellant's test
         result could be deemed invalid even where there had been no proxy
         match, if the test provider was found to be one from which many
         other invalid certificates emanate (Peter Willington [sic] witness
         statement, dated 23 June 2014, paragraph 47), there was no evidence
         of the chain of custody of the voice file held by ETS, there were
         concerns with the lack of editing to remove extraneous noises,
         insufficient training and the lack of foreign accent familiarity
         and an absence of cross-checking facilities to identify in which
         voice tests were mis-ascribed to individuals and no evidence that
         the Respondent ever checked for errors or anomalies, and could know
         how many people have been wrongly identified as having obtained
         their certificate fraudulently.


         29.  I take into account the information detailed in the extract
         from the Look-up Tool, but, for the reasons I have given in
         paragraph 28 above, I find that the Respondent has not discharged
         the legal burden of proving deception on the part of the Appellant,
         by proving, on the balance of probabilities, that the explanation
         provided by the Appellant should be rejected.  For the reasons
         given above, I find that the Appellant did take the test, as
         claimed, and the decision to refuse the Appellant leave to remain
         is a breach of his right to private life under Article 8, as he
         meets the requirements for indefinite leave to remain on the ground
         of long residence."


         [my emphasis]

14. The sub-paragraph which I have emphasised above is one of those
   identified in the grant of permission to appeal as giving rise to a
   possible error of law.  That grant also refers to [20] of the Decision to
   which sub-paragraph [28(iv)] also cross-refers.  Paragraph [20]
   summarises the submissions made on behalf of the Appellant in the form of
   short points numbered (i) to (xvi).  The cross-reference to [20] at [28]
   of the Decision is not precisely identified.  However, in substance, it
   relates to [xi] to [xvi] as follows:

         "... xi. In his report, dated 20 April 2016, in respect of ETS
         voice recordings, Professor Peter French expressed concerns with
         the lack of editing to remove extraneous noises (3.2.4), the
         insufficient training (3.3.2) and the lack of foreign accent
         familiarity (3.3.4), which, along with the general concerns,
         suggested that the Respondent's evidence was unreliable.


         xii. In his submission, dated 30 December 2016, Professor Peter
         Sommer stated 'Looking at the records supplied by the ETS to the
         Home Office in relation to cases we concluded that there was an
         absence of cross-checking facilities to identify in which voice
         tests were mis-ascribed to individuals.  It seems reasonable to
         conclude that the 'ETS lists' are not a reliable indicator of
         whether or not a student in fact cheated.'


         There was insufficient evidence of any purportedly fraudulent
         behaviour.


         xiii.    The Guardian ran a series of articles in 2019.


         xiv. The Respondent's handling of the ETS TOEIC scandal had been
         criticized by the National Audit Office in its investigation into
         the responses to cheating in English Language tests report.  The
         report found that there was no evidence that the Respondent ever
         checked for errors or anomalies, the ETS findings that the majority
         of tests were suspicious, and there was no way that the Respondent
         could know how many people have been wrongly identified, as having
         obtained their certificate fraudulently.


         xv.  In the APPG Report on TOEIC, dated 18 July 2019, paragraphs 1
         and 4, the Respondent's decision-making process was criticized, as
         flawed, with a lack of independent critical analysis of the
         information received.  Further, there was criticism of the lack of
         metadata available from ETS to link voice recordings to tests,
         which was important in relation to the weight (if any) to be given
         to voice recordings.  In the report, the experts confirmed that
         Professor French's comments about the 'error rate' are only correct
         based on the assumption that the information provided by ETS and
         the individual institutions was reliable and it was found that the
         evidence was lacking sufficient reliability.


         xvi. Most recently the House of Commons Committee of Public
         Accounts stated, 'The Home Office's pace of response to the issue
         of cheating has been either full throttle or too slow, with no
         middle ground.  It has been quick to act on imperfect evidence, but
         slow in responding to indications that innocent people may have
         been caught up in its actions.'"

15. This Tribunal has recently had cause to consider the status and impact
   of the APPG as evidence in the case of DK and RK (Parliamentary
   privilege; evidence) [2021] UKUT 00061 (IAC) ("DK").  The headnote reads
   as follows:

         "(1) Although the Upper Tribunal is not bound by  formal  rules  of
         evidence, it cannot act in such a way as to  violate  Parliamentary
         privilege, whether  that  be  to  interfere  with  free  speech  in
         Parliament or by reference to the separation  of  powers  doctrine.
         The Tribunal cannot interfere with or criticise proceedings of  the
         legislature.


         (2) Courts and  tribunals  determine  cases  by  reference  to  the
         evidence before them and not by reference to the views  of  others,
         expressed in a non-judicial setting, on evidence which is  not  the
         same as that before the court or tribunal.   Indeed,  even  if  the
         evidence were the same, the court or tribunal must  reach  its  own
         views, applying the relevant burden and standard of proof."

16. The substance of the decision in DK now makes clear that a Judge should
   not have regard to the views of the APPG nor, because they are protected
   by Parliamentary privilege, to the reports of the National Audit Office
   and Public Accounts Committee (to which reports the Judge in this case
   also made reference).  The Tribunal in DK did however go on to accept
   that, subject to verification of the accuracy of the reporting of the
   opinions of the experts, the evidence of those experts as given to the
   APPG could be taken into account.  I accept that, since DK is a very
   recently reported decision, there is as yet no confirmation of the
   accuracy of what is reported to have been said by the experts to the
   APPG.


17. Nevertheless, I have formed the view that Mr Walker's concession in
   this case is rightly made for reasons which follow.

18. First, the Judge accepts at [27] of the Decision that the Respondent
   has discharged her initial evidential burden.  As such, the Judge does
   not reach any different view from that expressed by this Tribunal
   following consideration of the "generic evidence" in cases such as SM and
   Qadir (ETS - Evidence -Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) ("SM") that
   the evidence is, as recorded at [27], sufficient to discharge that
   evidential burden.

19. Second, as SM also makes clear and as the Judge directed herself at
   [19] of the Decision, the issue thereafter is whether an appellant has
   provided an innocent explanation.  The Judge carried out that assessment
   at [28] of the Decision.  The findings at [28(i)] to [28(iii)] are
   directly concerned with the Appellant's own credibility.  It was for
   those reasons that the Judge found that the Appellant had provided an
   innocent explanation.

20. Third, the relevance of what is said at  [28(iv)] is to consider why,
   if the Appellant was telling the truth, ETS had nonetheless decided that
   the Appellant's certificate should be categorised as invalid.  In this
   case, that also involved consideration why, if the Appellant was telling
   the truth, the voice recording said to emanate from his taking of the
   test was not of his voice.  It was in that context that the deficiencies
   identified by the expert evidence were considered.  However, the expert
   evidence and even the "generic evidence" of the Respondent's own
   witnesses accepts that there are some false positives and some evidential
   difficulties which may mean that, in some cases, a person accused of
   deception is innocent of it.  It is for that reason, as the Judge records
   at [26] of the decision, that it has been accepted by this Tribunal and
   the High Court that the "generic evidence" may not always be sufficient
   to discharge the legal burden of proof.

21. Further, the evidential deficiencies identified at [28(iv)] of the
   Decision when cross-referred back to [20] show that the evidence on which
   the Judge relied in that regard does not come from the APPG report but,
   for the most part, from evidence given by experts in 2016 in earlier test
   cases (see [20(xi)] and [20(xii)]).  I would accept that one of the
   reasons given (regarding the lack of checking by the Respondent relies on
   the report of what was said by the National Audit Office as recorded at
   [20(xiv)].  However, the majority of reasons at [28(iv)] rely on evidence
   to which the Judge was entitled to have regard, coupled with findings
   made in earlier cases about the substance of the expert evidence as noted
   at [26] of the Decision. It cannot sensibly be said that the one reason
   given which does rely on evidence to which the Judge should not have had
   regard makes any difference.

22. Finally, there is no merit to the assertion made at [2] of the grounds
   that the "generic" and expert evidence is sufficient to meet the legal
   burden where an "innocent explanation" advanced by an appellant is
   accepted as credible at least not in all cases.  As the former President
   of this Tribunal observed in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450
   (IAC), "[t]he question whether a person engaged in fraud in procuring a
   TOEIC English language proficiency qualification will invariably be
   intrinsically fact sensitive".  The Judge considered at [29] of the
   Decision whether, having accepted the Appellant's evidence, she could
   find the legal burden discharged.  It was open to her on the evidence as
   accepted and viewed as a whole, and for the reasons given, to reject the
   Respondent's case.  Paragraph [2] of the grounds is no more than a
   disagreement with the Judge's conclusion.

23. For those reasons, I am satisfied that there is no error of law in the
   Decision.  The Respondent now concedes this.  I therefore uphold the
   Decision.  The Appellant's appeal remains allowed.

CONCLUSION

24. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no error of law
   disclosed by the grounds.  Accordingly, I uphold the Decision with the
   result that the Appellant's appeal remains allowed.


DECISION
The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer promulgated on 2 December
2020 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  I
therefore uphold the Decision.  The Appellant's appeal remains allowed.




Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  25 March 2021

