
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03303/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2019                      |On 27 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Liluben [k]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Nyawanza, Just Legal Group


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
    India born on 8 June 1982.  She first arrived in the UK on 24 September
    2008,  with  entry  clearance  as  a  student  and  made  a  subsequent
    application for an extension of leave as a student, which  was  granted
    until 6 February 2012 and then an application for leave to remain as  a
    spouse on 21 April 2012, which was refused on 25  March  2013.   On  26
    January 2016, she applied for leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  her
    family life in the UK.  This application  was  refused  in  a  decision
    dated 8 February 2017.  The Claimant appealed against that decision and
    her appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Asjad  for
    hearing on 1 December 2017.

 2. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 22 December  2017,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal
    against that decision on the basis that the judge had materially  erred
    in law in her assessment of the Claimant's immigration history in light
    of the judge's finding that the Claimant  had  exercised  deception  in
    seeking to obtain leave using a falsely obtained ETS TOEIC certificate,
    those findings being set out at [6] through to [8].

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes in
    a decision dated 10 May 2018 on  the  basis  that  the  grounds  raised
    arguable  errors  and  that  the  approach  taken  to  the   issue   of
    proportionality was arguably flawed.

    Hearing

 4. In her submissions, Ms Aboni for the Secretary of State submitted  that
    the judge had erroneously allowed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds
    despite finding that the Claimant had fraudulently utilised  deception,
    thus the judge had failed to weigh up the  use  of  deception,  nor  to
    identify whether there were very  compelling  circumstances  justifying
    allowing the appeal with regard to Article 8  outside  the  Rules.   Ms
    Aboni submitted that the Claimant has the option of returning to  India
    in order to apply for entry clearance and  that  this  was  a  material
    error.

 5. In his submissions, Mr Nyanwanza asserted there was no  error  of  law.
    The judge had assessed the behaviour of the Claimant and was very  much
    aware of that conduct, that much  is  clear  from  [9]  and  [11].   He
    submitted it was unreasonable for the Claimant's British citizen  child
    to leave the UK in light of the Home Office guidance.

    Findings and Reasons

 6. I found there were material errors of law in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and announced my decision at the hearing.

 7. Whilst at [10] the judge took into account the Home Office guidance  in
    relation to family life as a partner or parent ten  year  routes,  this
    was the August 2015 guidance at 11.2.3. which is now out  of  date  and
    was in fact out of date at the time of the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 8. At [11] the Judge addressed the issue of  criminality  and  found  that
    there was no criminality in this case. I find it was incumbent  on  the
    Judge to balance the fact that she had  found  the  Claimant  had  used
    deception as part  of  the  proportionality  exercise  in  relation  to
    whether it was reasonable to expect her child to leave the UK,  whereas
    this exercise was not carried out.

 9. The parties were content for me to remake the decision.

10. I heard submissions from Ms Aboni briefly, who submitted in respect  of
    the recent decision in JG (Turkey) [2019] UKUT 72 that the Respondent's
    position was that their current guidance was applicable and  that  they
    were intending to seek permission to the Court of Appeal in respect  of
    JG.

11. In his submissions, Mr Nyanwanza submitted there had  been  a  material
    change in circumstances. The Claimant's child was now at nursery and is
    3 years of age, having been  born  on  24  March  2016.   He  submitted
    otherwise the circumstances were the same and  ultimately  it  will  be
    disproportionate to remove the Claimant without her British child.

12. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    Findings and Reasons

13. The relevant facts of  this  appeal  which  were  unchallenged  by  the
    Secretary of State or the Claimant's representatives, by way of a cross
    appeal, are that:

    (i)  she has no qualifications  in  English  and  is  unable  to  speak
         sufficient English during the hearing. She is an individual who had
         every reason to take a proxy test [7];

    (ii) the Immigration Rules are not met as the Claimant  does  not  meet
         the suitability requirements [8];

    (iii)    in respect of section 117B of the NIAA 2002, the Claimant does
         not meet the English language requirements and little weight can be
         given to the family life she has formed with a  qualifying  partner
         as this was established at a time when her  immigration  status  is
         precarious [9)

    (iv) the Claimant is the mother of a British child and  has  a  genuine
         and subsisting relationship with her British son [10];

    (v)  whilst the Claimant  has  exercised  deception,  by  submitting  a
         certificate taken by a proxy test taker, she has not been convicted
         of a criminal offence [11].

14. In JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey  [2019]  UKUT  00072
    (IAC) a Presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal held inter alia:

         "33. We have seen how, in KO (Nigeria), the Supreme Court had
         regard to the respondent's IDI in its examination of section
         117B(6). In his submissions, Mr Malik drew our attention to the
         latest relevant publication of the respondent; namely "Family
         Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b"...


         36.  There are a number of things to say about this IDI. First, it
         cannot override ordinary principles of statutory construction. If,
         applying those principles, a court or tribunal determines that a
         statutory provision falls to be interpreted in a particular way,
         the fact that the IDI may take a different view is irrelevant.


         37.  Second, the IDI does not cite KO (Nigeria) in support of the
         proposition that it is only where the child would be required to
         leave the United Kingdom that EX.1.(b) or section 117B(6) falls to
         be considered. The citation of KO (Nigeria) merely recognises that,
         in deciding what would be reasonable, one must have regard to the
         fact that one or both parents is liable to removal under
         immigration powers (see paragraph 27 above).


         38.  Third (and relatedly), a previous version of the IDI, pre-
         dating KO (Nigeria), contained statements to the effect that if the
         departure of a parent would not result in the child being required
         to leave the United Kingdom, the question of whether it was
         reasonable to expect the child to leave would not arise. This was
         noted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer in SR (subsisting parental
         relationship - s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT 00334 (IAC). At
         paragraph 50 of her decision, Judge Plimmer said that "This aspect
         of the 2018 IDI provides an untenable construction of the plain and
         ordinary meaning of EX.1. and section 117B(6)". At paragraph 51,
         she held that "Self-evidently, section 117B(6) is engaged whether
         the child will or will not in fact or practice leave the UK". For
         the reasons we have given, nothing in KO (Nigeria) affects the
         correctness of her conclusion.


         39.  We do not consider our construction of section 117B(6) can be
         affected by the respondent's submission that, in cases where - on
         his interpretation - the subsection does not have purchase (i.e.
         because the child would not in practice leave the United Kingdom),
         there would nevertheless need to be a full-blown proportionality
         assessment, compatibly with the other provisions of Part 5A of the
         2002 Act, with the result that a person with parental
         responsibility who could not invoke section 117B(6) may,
         nevertheless, succeed in a human rights appeal.


         40.  Such an assessment would, however, have to take account of the
         immigration history of the person subject to removal; so there
         could well be a very real difference between the outcome of that
         exercise, and one conducted under section 117B(6). But, the real
         point is that this submission does not begin to affect the plain
         meaning of subsection (6). If, as we have found, Parliament has
         decreed a particular outcome by enacting section 117B(6), then that
         is the end of the matter.


         41.  We accept that this interpretation may result in an
         underserving individual or family remaining in the United Kingdom.
         However, the fact that Parliament has mandated such an outcome
         merely means that, in such cases, Parliament has decided to be more
         generous than is strictly required by the Human Rights Act 1998. It
         can be regarded as a necessary consequence of the aim of Part 5A of
         imposing greater consistency in decision-making in this area by
         courts and tribunals. The fact that section 117B(6) has such an aim
         was expressly recognised by Elias LJ at paragraph 44 of MA
         (Pakistan) ...


         80.  Our assessment of the appellant is that she is both dishonest
         and unscrupulous, each to a high degree. She has flagrantly defied
         the law of the United Kingdom by overstaying her leave for a large
         number of years, without bothering to seek to regularise her
         status; by making entry clearance applications that she knew full
         well were predicated on an entirely false basis; and in gaining
         access to the United Kingdom ...


         96.  We therefore conclude that, on the facts of this case, it
         would not be reasonable to expect the appellant's children to leave
         the United Kingdom, in the event of her removal. This means the
         appellant's appeal succeeds. It does so because Parliament has
         stated, in terms, that the public interest does not require her
         removal, in these circumstances. It does so despite the fact that,
         absent section 117B(6), the appellant's removal would be
         proportionate in terms of Article 8 of the ECHR."


15. It is apparent from the guidance set out in JG that the Upper  Tribunal
    have,  on  two  occasions,  found  the  Secretary  of  State's  updated
    Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  on  Family   Migration   to   be
    inconsistent with the approach set out in KO (Nigeria) and incorrect in
    its interpretation of EX1(b) and section 117B (6)  of  the  NIAA  2002.
    Whilst it may be that the Secretary of State does seek to challenge the
    decision in JG to the Court of Appeal, currently it is good law.

16. Therefore, I determine the Appellant's appeal on the basis of the facts
    set out at [13] above, the guidance in JG and the best interests of the
    Appellant's British son.

17. Applying the test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27,  I  find  that  the
    Claimant has formed a family life with her husband and  British  child.
    Her removal to India would be an interference with the family life they
    share, but would be in accordance with the law, given that the Claimant
    is  an  overstayer.  The  issue  is  whether  her  removal   would   be
    proportionate.

18. Key to the consideration of proportionality  are  the  public  interest
    considerations set out at section 117B of the NIAA  2002.  The  Judge's
    preserved findings are that the Claimant does not speak English:  s117B
    (2) and formed her relationship with her husband at a time when she was
    an overstayer: s117B  (4).  In  addition,  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Claimant had utilised deception in order to obtain a  TOEIC  test  with
    ETA.

19. The specific issue that requires determination, however, is whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the Claimant's son to leave the UK: s117B
    (6) of the NIAA 2002. I find that JG (op  cit)  requires  a  hypothesis
    that he would leave. The Claimant's son is a British child  and  whilst
    he is now attending nursery, he is only 2 years old, shortly to turn  3
    (DOB 24.3.16). I find, for the reasons set out in JG and  KO  (Nigeria)
    that the issue has  to  be  determined  separately  from  his  mother's
    conduct and that it  would  be  contrary  to  his  best  interests  and
    unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Asjad contained a  material  error
of law. I re-make the decision, allowing the appeal. No anonymity  direction
is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I make a fee award of any fee  which  has  been
paid or may be payable (adjusted where full award  not  justified)  for  the
following reason.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
