
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/03502/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12th September 2017                    | On 12th October 2017            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                            MS MADUSHI WEERARATNE
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 25th of August 1990. She
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hawden-
    Beal sitting at Birmingham on 23rd November  2016  which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent  dated  25th  of
    January 2016. That decision was to refuse to grant the Appellant further
    leave to remain on the basis of her private life under  the  Immigration
    Rules and Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


 2.  The Appellant entered the United Kingdom  with  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor from 18th of February 2002 to 18th of August 2002. She was given
    further entry clearance as a visitor from 18th of March 2003 to 18th  of
    September 2003  and  thereafter  she  and  her  mother  overstayed.  The
    Appellant applied for leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  on
    10th of September 2010 which was refused on  23rd  of  October  2010.  A
    further application on 2nd of April 2013 was rejected on 29th  of  April
    2013. An application on 20th of June 2013 was refused by the  Respondent
    on 12th of August 2013. On 30th of January  2014  she  was  served  with
    notice of removal from the United Kingdom. On 21st of February 2014  she
    applied for leave to remain which was refused on 27th of February  2014.
    An appeal against this decision was unsuccessful in front  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Aujla. I refer to that decision in  more  detail
    below. On 14th of August 2015 the Appellant applied for leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom on the grounds of her private life indicating  she
    did not wish to return to Sri Lanka. It was refusal of that  application
    on 25th of January 2016 which has given rise to the present proceedings.

The Explanation for Refusal

 3. The Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant met the requirements
    for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  her  private  life  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) (v) of the Immigration Rules.  The  Appellant  was
    said to be not under the age of 25 years. This appears to  have  been  a
    mistake, the requirements of the paragraph have to be met at the date of
    application. The application was dated 14th of August 2015 11 days short
    of the Appellant's 25th birthday. Having said that, the  refusal  letter
    then went on in the next paragraph to accept that the Appellant was aged
    between 18 and 25. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant  had
    spent at least half of  her  life  living  continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom at the date of application. The Appellant had lived in Sri Lanka
    for 12 years 7 months and 6 days which was longer  than  the  amount  of
    time she had lived in United Kingdom at the date of application.


 4. The Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of the following sub-paragraph (vi) because the  Respondent
    did not find there were very significant obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    reintegration back into Sri Lanka. It was not accepted the Appellant had
    no ties to Sri Lanka. During the time spent in Sri Lanka the  Respondent
    considered that the Appellant would have been  exposed  to  and  have  a
    level under of understanding of the  cultural  norms  of  that  country.
    Whilst the Respondent  accepted  that  the  Appellant  might  have  some
    initial difficulty upon return to Sri  Lanka  there  was  no  reason  to
    believe she would not be up to establish contact  with  her  family  and
    resume family life with them in Sri Lanka. She was a healthy female aged
    25 and while the material quality of her life in Sri Lanka might not  be
    at the same level as it was in United Kingdom this did not give rise  to
    any right to remain here. The Respondent did not consider there were any
    exceptional circumstances to justify a grant outside the rules.

The Appellant's Case

 5. The Appellant argued that the Respondent should have included her  first
    entry into the United Kingdom in 2002 as relevant to  the  consideration
    of the time that she had spent in United Kingdom. She had not  lived  in
    Sri Lanka since she was 12 years old. There was no factual basis for the
    assumption that she could reintegrate into Sri Lanka. Given that she had
    spent half of her life in the United Kingdom her personal  circumstances
    were sufficiently  compelling  for  her  application  to  be  considered
    outside the Rules. The Appellant told the Judge that a job offer from  a
    company called Digital Vision was still open to her. She no longer lived
    with her mother but with a friend because she wanted to  be  independent
    and anyway her mother could no longer support her. As  at  the  date  of
    hearing at first instance the Appellant's mother who is  also  still  in
    United Kingdom was awaiting a decision on her claim. Her father's family
    did not want to know the Appellant because she and her father had  never
    really got on and she had had no contact with him since he was  deported
    back to Sri Lanka. Her father had remarried once he had returned to  Sri
    Lanka. Her maternal grandparents were dead but her paternal grandparents
    were still in Sri Lanka but she had not spoken to them for 10 years.

The Decision at First Instance

 6. At paragraph 18 the Judge noted the differences between the  application
    which was before her and the application which  had  been  before  Judge
    Aujla. These were: the passage of time; the Appellant had completed  her
    education  (she  had  obtained  a  first-class  degree  from   Middlesex
    University) and was living with friends; she had an offer of a  job  and
    this was her solo application not one made with  other  members  of  her
    family. The appeal was based on the Appellant's private life, the  Judge
    finding that Article 8 family life was not engaged.  The  Appellant  had
    established a private  life  in  this  country  and  her  removal  would
    interfere with that private life the issue (outside the Rules)  was  the
    proportionality of that decision.


 7. At paragraph 22 the Judge went into some detail as to the calculation of
    precisely how much time the Appellant had spent  in  this  country.  The
    Appellant had spent over 12 � years in Sri Lanka before March 2003  when
    she came to the United Kingdom and had not spent at least  half  of  her
    life here when she made the application. The subsection  was  no  longer
    available to the Appellant because she was now aged 26.


 8. The 2nd issue the Judge had  to  decide  was  whether  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's  integration  back  into  Sri
    Lankan society. Judge Aujla had noted that there was no maternal  family
    in Sri Lanka but there was still paternal family there albeit there  was
    no contact with them. The Appellant spoke Sinhalese and  understood  the
    language and circulated within the Sri Lankan community in this  country
    maintaining social and cultural connections with her background as a Sri
    Lankan national. The Appellant attended religious functions. The passage
    of time, approximately 13 months, since Judge Aujla's dismissal  of  the
    Appellant's appeal did not alter Judge  Hawden-Beal's  conclusions.  The
    Appellant still had family in Sri Lanka even though she had said she had
    no contact with her father since he left the  United  Kingdom  in  2010.
    This time she would be returned to Sri  Lanka  without  her  mother  and
    brother, as this was her solo appeal. There  was  no  evidence  of  very
    significant obstacles to the Appellant integrating back into Sri  Lankan
    society. The Appellant could not meet the rules.


 9. On the issue of proportionality outside the rules, the Judge  noted  the
    provisions of section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002. The Appellant had been educated here and would have had access
    to NHS treatment at some stage and therefore there had been  a  cost  to
    the public purse. None of the family had leave to remain in this country
    after September 2003 and were over stayers. That the Appellant had  been
    financially supported by her mother did not confer upon the Appellant  a
    positive right to remain. Pursuant to subsection (5)  of  section  117B,
    little weight could be placed upon a private  life  established  when  a
    person's immigration status was precarious. The Appellant's  status  had
    always been precarious because it had been dependent upon the  grant  of
    further leave to remain. The Judge placed little  weight  upon  it.  The
    Appellant was a fit and healthy young lady who would be up to  make  use
    of the educational qualifications obtained  in  United  Kingdom  to  re-
    establish a life in Sri Lanka. The interference caused  by  removal  was
    proportionate and the appeal was dismissed.

The Onward Appeal

10.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  arguing   that   the
    Appellant's representative (different Counsel to the  one  who  appeared
    before me) had not made a concession at the hearing that  the  Appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the rules. The Judge's reasoning  was
    flawed when she had said that the Appellant could  not  meet  the  Rules
    because the Appellant's application was made  on  the  wrong  form.  The
    Judge was wrong to dismiss the Appellant's case that she had spent  over
    half of her life in United Kingdom at the date  of  hearing.  There  was
    little or no public interest in seeking  the  Appellant's  removal.  The
    proportionality exercise had been infected by the  failure  to  separate
    the Appellant's current circumstances with those in her previous  appeal
    (before Judge Aujla) when she was younger and a dependent of her mother.
    The Appellant's education  had  been  achieved  in  her  more  important
    formative years and she would be returning to a  country  she  had  last
    lived in as a  12-year-old  minor.  She  had  excelled  in  her  studies
    obtaining a first-class degree.


11. The application for permission to  appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  O'Garro  on  18th  of  May  2017.  In
    refusing permission to appeal she wrote that the  Judge  had  thoroughly
    analysed the Appellant's Article 8 rights  both  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and under the Human Rights  Convention  taking  into  account  all
    relevant factors. The grounds disclosed no arguable error of law.


12.   The  Appellant  renewed  her  application  to   the   Upper   Tribunal
    reiterating the point that at the date  of  hearing  the  Appellant  had
    spent more than half of her life in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  Judge's
    approach had been unfair/unreasonable. There had been a failure to  take
    into account the length of the time the Appellant had  spent  in  United
    Kingdom and the strong roots she had put down in this country.


13. The renewed application for permission to  appeal  came  on  the  papers
    before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Holmes  on  4th  of  July  2017.  In
    granting permission to appeal he wrote that it  was  arguable  that  the
    Judge had considered the Appellant's ability  to  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules at the date of decision and not at the date of the hearing  before
    her. I pause to note here that Judge Holmes did not  indicate  why  that
    was an arguable error of law in the light of the clear  wording  of  the
    paragraph.
14. Judge Holmes added  that  Judge  Hawden-Beal  had  arguably  misdirected
    herself that there existed no material change  circumstances  since  the
    assessment of proportionality in the previous appeal before Judge Aujla.
    By the date of the hearing the Appellant had lived more than half of her
    life in United Kingdom albeit unlawfully for the majority of that  time.
    She first entered the United Kingdom at the age of 11th of February 2002
    which the Judge appeared to have overlooked arguably  taking  her  first
    entry as March 2003. Judge Holmes did not make it clear why that was  an
    arguable error of law given that the wording of the  paragraph  requires
    the applicant to have lived  continuously  in  United  Kingdom  for  the
    relevant period. Since the Appellant evidently return to  Sri  Lanka  at
    the end of her previous visit that continuous  period  would  have  been
    broken at that time.


15. Although the Appellant was 26 at the date of hearing Judge  Holmes  said
    she had arguably met the requirements of  the  subparagraph  before  she
    turned 25. It was her circumstances viewed as a whole that  should  have
    been the central focus. Although this was  a  private  life  appeal  the
    section did not require the Tribunal to give no weight  to  the  private
    life that she had established. The Judge appeared to have accepted  that
    the Appellant would be returning to a country where she  had  no  family
    support and which she had left as a young child. The Judge had failed to
    evaluate adequately the difficulties that the Appellant would face in so
    doing.


16. The Respondent replied to  the  grant  of  permission  saying  that  the
    grounds were no more than an attempt to reargue the case put before  the
    Judge at the First-tier. Weight was a matter for the Judge except  where
    prescribed by statute. The Judge  properly  assessed  the  evidence  and
    properly applied the law.

The Hearing Before Me

17. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before  me  to
    determine in the first place whether there was a material error  of  law
    in the determination such that it felt to be set aside  and  the  matter
    reheard. If there was not, then the decision  at  first  instance  would
    stand. For the Appellant reliance was placed on the  decision  of  Judge
    Holmes in granting permission. The previous decision of Judge  Aujla  in
    2014 had formed the starting point for the Judge in this case. There had
    been no real engagement with  the  change  of  circumstances  since  the
    appeal before Judge Aujla. Judge  Hawden-Beal  had  simply  adopted  the
    previous Judge's findings. There had been no proper  assessment  of  the
    impact on the Appellant upon return of being a single woman.  The  Judge
    said  the  Appellant  had  family  ties  but  had  not  looked  at  what
    connections the Appellant had. The Appellant said she  had  no  paternal
    family members she had no contact with the father or his family. To  say
    she had family members was not  enough.  When  she  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a child the Appellant's  status  could  not  be  said  to  be
    precarious. The Judge had failed to engage with the Appellant's  private
    life claim of 12 years and 6 months more than half of her life spent  in
    this country.


18. In reply for the Respondent it was argued that the Judge had  looked  at
    the issue of very significant obstacles. She  had  taken  Judge  Aujla's
    decision as a starting point but indicated the differences between  then
    and now. This was an independent single woman who would be returning  to
    her country of  origin.  There  was  no  evidence  of  very  significant
    obstacles the only evidence was in the Appellant's witness statement  in
    which she had said that she had no family in Sri Lanka and no life there
    to go back to. She had no house or any business interests. She  did  not
    know the culture or the way  of  life  there.  Although  she  spoke  the
    language it was not her first language. She had no friends in Sri  Lanka
    to help her survive and she would struggle to live there. That  was  the
    sum of what the Appellant had submitted.  Without  further  evidence  of
    significant obstacles, it could not be said that the Judge was wrong  in
    her approach.


19. The Article 8 assessment carried out by the Judge  was  sufficient.  The
    Judge acknowledged the Appellant was fit and healthy and could  use  her
    educational qualifications. If the Judge was wrong under the Immigration
    Rules, then it would follow that the assessment outside  the  rules  was
    also flawed but if it was accepted that the Judge  had  made  sufficient
    findings under the Rules the remainder of her determination could not be
    wrong. Finally, in conclusion counsel  reiterated  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to make any findings of fact. She appeared to have accepted  that
    the Appellant had no relationship with the paternal  family.  There  had
    been no evaluation  of  the  Appellant's  private  life  or  friends  or
    colleagues or her educational qualifications. There was  no  mention  of
    the extent of her integration.

Findings

20. The first issue the Judge had to decide was whether the Appellant  could
    meet the Immigration Rules. In  order  to  come  within  the  Rules  the
    Appellant's position had to be assessed at the date of application.  The
    position at the date of decision or the date of hearing was  irrelevant.
    The wording of the Rules was quite clear. As at the date of  application
    the Appellant could not show that she had lived more than  half  of  her
    life in this country. The previous visit to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor could not count for the reasons which I have  given  above.  The
    Appellant had to show that the time she had spent in  this  country  had
    been spent continuously not partly in this country  and  partly  in  Sri
    Lanka. I accept that if the word continuously had not been used  in  the
    paragraph the interpretation of Judge Holmes in granting  permission  to
    appeal would be correct but that is not the case.


21. The Appellant's continuous period of residence in this country was  from
    March 2003 until 14th of August 2015 a period of approximately 12  years
    and 5 months. At the date of application,  the  Appellant  was  11  days
    short of her 25th birthday and thus she narrowly missed  satisfying  the
    requirement of the Rule. There is no such thing  as  a  near  miss,  one
    either meet the Rules or one does not. In this case  the  Appellant  did
    not meet the Rules.


22. The alternative basis to succeed under the Immigration  Rules  was  that
    there would be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration
    into Sri Lanka. This was very much a matter of fact  for  the  Judge  to
    decide. The Judge took as her starting point the decision of Judge Aujla
    but accepted that time had moved on and  there  had  been  consequential
    changes. The argument  in  this  case  essentially  disagrees  with  the
    Judge's evaluation of those changes. The Appellant has done very well in
    her education and she has exercised a degree of independence living away
    from her mother. The Appellant's complaint is that if she goes  back  to
    Sri Lanka she will know no one there, will not have a job and will  have
    no support network.


23. There was no country background material or other  evidence  before  the
    Judge to indicate what  the  Appellant's  position  as  a  single  woman
    returning to Sri Lanka would be. The Appellant is of Sinhalese ethnicity
    and speaks that language as she herself accepts.  The  Appellant  has  a
    marked reluctance to return to Sri Lanka  as  she  makes  clear  in  her
    statement whose relevant passage I have quoted above. The Judge  was  of
    the view that the difficulties to which the Appellant  pointed  did  not
    represent very significant obstacles. The Appellant  was  vague  in  her
    evidence as to why she had no contact with her father  or  grandparents,
    the Judge's conclusion was that the Appellant had family in Sri Lanka. I
    interpret paragraph 25 of the determination as indicating that the Judge
    did not consider that the Appellant's claim that her  relationship  with
    her father and his family had broken  down  to  be  a  very  significant
    obstacle. That was a matter for the Judge taking a  holistic  assessment
    of all of the evidence.


24. Although Judge Holmes indicated that the Judge  had  arguably  erred  in
    not assessing what those difficulties were the Judge had precious little
    evidence before her of what those difficulties might be.  The  Appellant
    is a 26-year-old fit and healthy young woman,  highly  intelligent,  she
    speaks the language and has not in fact lost the cultural  ties  to  Sri
    Lanka  that  she  claims  to  have  lost,  see  paragraph  23   of   the
    determination. It was a matter for the Judge to decide  whether  in  the
    light of that evidence the Appellant would indeed face very  significant
    obstacles. Her decision that the Appellant would not face such obstacles
    was one open to the Judge on that evidence. The Judge gave sound reasons
    for her decision and I reject the argument that the Judge was  wrong  to
    conclude  that  the  Appellant  could  not  have  succeeded  under   the
    Immigration Rules.


25. That being the case matters moved on to consider whether  the  Appellant
    could succeed outside the rules. The Appellant's status as a child could
    not necessarily be held against her as being precarious since she  would
    not have been in control of her own actions. Having said  that  for  the
    seven years prior to the appeal the Appellant had been an adult and  had
    had no leave to be in this country. The Appellant's  private  life  that
    she had built up during that period such as her academic  qualifications
    had thus  been  established  at  a  time  when  the  Appellant's  status
    undoubtedly was precarious if not unlawful. There was no  error  of  law
    for the  Judge  to  say  in  her  determination  when  carrying  at  the
    proportionality exercise that  the  interference  with  the  Appellant's
    private life was proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  pursued  since
    little weight could attach to the Appellant's private life of  the  last
    seven years. The Appellant had had access to educational facilities at a
    time when she had no entitlement to them and it appears that she had had
    some form of medical treatment although that was not  specified  in  the
    determination and not raised as an argument before me.


26. To succeed outside  the  rules  the  Appellant  had  to  show  something
    compelling. The Judge did  not  find  that  to  be  the  case  and  that
    ultimately was a matter for her to decide upon.  The  onward  appeal  in
    this case is no more than an attempt to rehearse arguments  rejected  by
    the Judge at first instance for cogent reasons. The discretion  afforded
    to the Tribunal under the jurisprudence of Article 8 may  lead,  as  the
    Higher Courts have themselves acknowledged, to  differing  decisions  by
    two Judges on essentially the same  facts  without  either  Judge  being
    wrong in law. That I find to be the case here. The issue is not  whether
    another Judge might have decided the Appellant's  case  differently  but
    whether this Judge in deciding the case made a material error of law  on
    the way. I find that is not the case here. I do not find that there  was
    any material error of law in the Judge's determination and I dismiss the
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 22nd of September 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 22nd of September 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


