
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03759/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th May 2019                     |On 5th June 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                 Ganiat [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision and reasons of Judge P-J S White in the First-tier Tribunal.
     There was a hearing at Taylor House on 14th January this year and in a
    determination promulgated on 5th February, he dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal.

 2. The Appellant in this case is a Nigerian woman born  on  28th  December
    1990.  Although listed are the Appellant and  her  eldest  child  as  a
    second Appellant it is clear from a discussion that took place  at  the
    First-tier hearing that  in  fact  there  was  only  one  Decision  and
    therefore only the mother who had a live appeal.  The judge had  before
    him a human rights appeal.  The mother had arrived in the UK at a  date
    which cannot be certain, but we know that she was a minor at  the  time
    and she came with her younger brother.  She was given leave until 2014,
    again nobody is quite certain why, but it seems to be to  do  with  her
    relationship with her younger brother.

 3. In her time in  the  United  Kingdom  she  has  given  birth  to  three
    children, the eldest was born on 2nd March 2010, the next on  16th  May
    2011 and a son born in May 2015.  The eldest child has  therefore  been
    in the United Kingdom now for nine years, the middle one for eight  and
    the third for four years.  None of them have ever  spent  any  time  in
    Nigeria.  In the UK the Appellant has a brother and a sister,  both  of
    whom are now British nationals with families of their own.  There is  a
    close relationship between them.  There is no evidence  of  any  family
    other than some vague reference to extended family members in  Nigeria.
    The middle child has health issues in that she suffers from epilepsy.

 4. In the First-tier Tribunal the judge noted  that  although  there  were
    supporting letters from the brother  and  sister,  they  did  not  give
    evidence and the judge also noted that although it was  not  challenged
    that the middle child had  epilepsy,  there  was  no  medical  evidence
    before him indicating how serious it was or how frequent  the  seizures
    were.  The judge found the Appellant could not met the requirements  of
    either Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE  because  he  found  that  there
    would not be very significant obstacles to her integration  in  Nigeria
    because that carried a high threshold.  In considering the situation of
    the children the judge noted that the Appellant's relationship with the
    children's father had ended and  he  had  no  contact  with  them.   He
    decided their best interests were to remain in the UK, but  their  main
    interest was to remain with their mother and he found that it would not
    be unreasonable for the children to return with their mother,  who  has
    no leave in the UK, to Nigeria.

 5. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  basis  that  it  was  felt
    inadequate attention had been paid to the interests of  those  children
    and having read the determination I have no hesitation in finding  that
    that complaint is made  out  and  that  in  the  consideration  of  the
    children's interests and whether it was reasonable for them  to  return
    the judge made an error of law.  I therefore set  that  Decision  aside
    and I redecide it.

 6. I am aware of the case of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 indicating that a
    Decision on what is reasonable in relation to a child being expected to
    leave the UK, whilst being a child centred question, must be decided in
    the real world and if the child has a parent with a very  poor  history
    and no leave to be in the UK it ordinarily would not be unreasonable to
    expect that child to return to their home country.  I am also aware  of
    the case of MT and ET  [2018]  UKUT  00088  (IAC),  which  although  it
    predated KO still  contains  important  guidance.   In  that  case  the
    Appellant mother had an extremely poor immigration history and she  had
    also committed criminal offences.  She had one child who  had  been  in
    the UK for ten years and the President of the Upper Tribunal found that
    it would not be reasonable to expect that child to  return  to  Nigeria
    with her mother.

 7. In the present case the mother has been here since she  was  herself  a
    minor.  Therefore, she cannot be criticised for arriving and  remaining
    without leave.  She has had leave until 2014, so she has  been  without
    leave for a period of five years.  In that time her three children  had
    been born and they know nothing whatsoever about Nigeria.   The  middle
    child  has  health  difficulties  and  although  we  do  not  know  the
    seriousness of them it is accepted that she has epilepsy.  The evidence
    is that the close family members that the appellant has are in  the  UK
    and that they have a relationship.  There is no evidence that there are
    any family members in Nigeria to whom she could turn although there  is
    some reference to some extended family members.

 8. Given that the mother has been in the UK now since she  herself  was  a
    child, has no close family in Nigeria and is the mother of three  young
    children, I find that there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integrating into Nigeria.   How  would  she  be  able  to  support  and
    accommodate  herself  and  her  three  children  when   she   has   the
    responsibility of caring for them?  Furthermore, given the situation of
    these three children, the length of time that they have been here,  the
    relationships they have formed in the home, in the family  and  outside
    the family at school and given the middle child's health issues, I find
    it would not be reasonable to expect them to return to Nigeria.

Notice of Decision

 9. Looking at matters in the real world includes looking at all the  facts
    of the case, not simply the fact that mother has no leave and  for  all
    those reasons I allow the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed [pic]                            Date 3rd June 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

