
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/03192/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 December 2018                      |On 15 February 2019                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 britu lama
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Ahmed, Counsel instructed by 12 Bridge
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State's appeals against the  determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro promulgated on 6 June 2018 after a  hearing
    which took place on 16 April 2018 at Hatton Cross.  I shall refer to Mr
    Lama as "the appellant" as he was in the proceedings before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Nepal,  born  on  17  August  1980,  and
    applied for leave as a partner.  It was refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and the basis upon which the refusal was  made  was  that,  on  a
    previous  occasion,  on  20  April  2013,  he  had  submitted  a  TOEIC
    certificate from Educational Testing Service (normally referred  to  as
    "ETS") which had been declared to be invalid.   The  process  by  which
    that invalidity arose was that a test had been made using  software  in
    order to determine whether a proxy test-taker had been used.  That  was
    supported by two listeners who had also considered that a  proxy  test-
    taker had been used.  That is a fact which is often disputed  in  these
    ETS cases, but in this case, there was no dispute because the appellant
    himself had applied for the recording and  had  himself  declared  that
    that recording was not his own.  The evidence going to the weight to be
    attached to the ETS certificate is therefore rather different  than  in
    cases where the appellant denies  that  the  recording  was  accurately
    assessed as not being genuine.

 3. The appeal took its normal course.  There was a spreadsheet provided of
    source data, always accompanied by the decision letter in  such  cases.
    This recorded that the application was invalid.  The certificate number
    was provided.  It may be that the two certificates relate  one  to  the
    speaking score and another to the writing score, although I do not know
    that.  The appellant's name is properly recorded, so too  his  date  of
    birth, so too the test  centre  which  was  Premier  Language  Training
    Centre. The date of the test was not in dispute.   The  speaking  score
    was also recorded, but in  view  of  the  fact  that  it  was  not  the
    appellant's voice on that speaking score, it ceases to be material.

 4. The judge therefore had before her a case where the appellant  conceded
    that the recording was not his own and he had written to the ETS to ask
    for an explanation for what he claimed was a mistake.  No response  was
    received from ETS.  However, I suspect that no response could have been
    provided in that all ETS could have said was, in effect, that 'This  is
    our record of this appellant taking this test on this day and  this  is
    the recording that we have allocated to this event'.

 5.  The  judge  in  paragraph  24  of  the  determination  found  that  an
    impersonator had been used for the  test  that  was  taken  at  Premier
    Language Training Centre on 6 March 2013.  She described  the  evidence
    as compelling and she took that into account in assessing  the  primary
    evidential burden placed upon the  Secretary  of  State.   The  primary
    evidential burden is  normally  discharged  by  the  provision  of  the
    spreadsheet and the conventional witness statements of the Secretary of
    State's supporting witnesses and the evidence of Professor French.   In
    this  case,  however,  there  was  the  additional  evidence  that  the
    appellant conceded the test attributed to  him,  did  not  contain  his
    voice.

 6. The judge therefore considered  the  appellant's  explanation.   Before
    doing so, I pause to point out that the ETS spreadsheet did contain  an
    error.  The appellant's nationality was  recorded  as  being  from  the
    United Kingdom.  That was plainly wrong, but it does raise questions as
    to the care with which this certificate was printed out, if not whether
    the  voice  recording  was  correctly  attributed  to  the   appellant.
    Although we have not seen the certificate in  this  case,  one  assumes
    that it would  have  contained  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  is
    recorded as having a score as stated.  It therefore probably  does  not
    take matters much further.  That was the material that was relied  upon
    by the Secretary of State.

 7. Although a number of cases have been put before me,  I  think  probably
    the most important one is the case of Ahsan v The  Secretary  of  State
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2009.  That was a decision where Underhill LJ  provided
    the judgment to which Floyd and Irwin LJJ agreed.  In the course of the
    judgment, the Court of Appeal recorded the submissions that  were  made
    by Miss Giovannetti on behalf of the Secretary of State.  She said:-

         "Where the impugned test was taken at an established fraud  factory
         such as Elizabeth College, and also where the voice-file  does  not
         record the applicant's voice (or no attempt has been made to obtain
         it), the case that he or she cheated will be hard to resist".

    However the Court of Appeal went on to say:-

         "However, I am not prepared to accept  -  and  I  do  not  in  fact
         understand Ms Giovannetti to have been contending -  that  even  in
         such specially strong cases the observations in the  earlier  case-
         law to  the  effect  that  a  decision  whether  the  applicant  or
         appellant has cheated is fact-specific are no longer applicable  or
         that there is no prospect of  their  oral  evidence  affecting  the
         outcome".

 8. Consequently, although the judge treated the evidence of the  ETS  test
    centre as compelling, it was open to the judge not to treat it as being
    determinative.  Mr Ahmed on behalf of the appellant who  appeared  both
    before Judge O'Garro and before me referred to paragraph  156  and  the
    reference to the absence of a voice file  and  the  judge's  conclusion
    that although that might well be a weighty consideration,  he  was  not
    prepared to say that in all cases it would be decisive.  That is merely
    no more than an example of the extent to which these  cases  are  fact-
    sensitive.

 9. The judge  had  in  mind  therefore  what  she  considered  to  be  the
    compelling evidence that was provided by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    support of the evidential burden placed upon the  Secretary  of  State.
    She accepted that the evidential burden had been discharged.  She  also
    then went on to consider that  the  evidential  burden  passed  to  the
    appellant and that was a burden to raise an innocent explanation.   The
    effect of  raising  an  innocent  explanation  is  that  when  one  has
    considered both the evidence of the Secretary of State and the evidence
    of the appellant, there is then a balance to be struck as to whether or
    not the legal burden of proof has been discharged by the  Secretary  of
    State and that is the final stage in the  assessment  that  has  to  be
    conducted on the evidence.  The judge therefore looked at a  number  of
    factors in paragraph 25 which  might  be  of  assistance  in  assessing
    whether the Secretary of State had discharged the legal burden.

10. She then went on to deal with, in paragraph 26  of  her  determination,
    the evidence that the appellant had attended the testing centre on  the
    day in question and had taken the test.   The  appellant  had  provided
    evidence which showed he purchased a ticket  from  Tilbury  station  to
    Barking train station where the test centre was situated. Mr Ahmed said
    that this was in the form of a bank statement that had been provided by
    the appellant. It was not simply the ticket itself,  which  might  have
    been purchased by anybody.  The appellant also provided a  receipt  for
    food that he had purchased at a restaurant that he  had  used  on  that
    day.  Presumably that was evidence which established  his  presence  in
    the area of the test centre at the relevant time.

11. The judge, of course, had the benefit, which I do not have, of  hearing
    the appellant's evidence.  He gave a lot of detail.  He  said  that  he
    attended the test centre.  He provided details of the questions he  was
    asked during the speaking test and the judge, importantly,  found  that
    the appellant was a credible witness.  He gave a  full  and  consistent
    account during his evidence-in-chief and cross-examination.  The  judge
    described the manner in which he gave his evidence  and  found  it  was
    cogent  and  compelling.   Of  course,  none  of   these   matters   is
    determinative of the appellant's innocent explanation.  He  could  have
    gone to the test centre on the material day, met up with the proxy test-
    taker, paid him whatever a proxy test-taker requires for  payment,  and
    had then departed knowing that a test had been taken by somebody  else.
    That would account for his ability to provide evidence of his  presence
    in the area on that day and evidence that he had purchased  the  ticket
    on that day.  One  might  well  say  that,  had  this  been  an  entire
    fabrication on the appellant's part, he might have provided the  actual
    ticket rather than a printout from his bank statement.

12. The judge also took into account that he had produced  an  IELTS  score
    taken on 14 February which was less than a month  before  he  took  the
    subsequent test and that the  English  language  score  had  been  5.5,
    indicating a good understanding of English.  The judge was  also  well-
    aware that there are a number of reasons why people might use  a  proxy
    test-taker rather than relying upon their own skills, if only merely as
    a matter of nerves.  The judge considered the  general  proficiency  of
    the appellant, including on the day of the hearing,  and  took  all  of
    these matters into account.

13. The Secretary of State relies upon the appellant's own  admission  that
    the recording was not his as being effectively  determinative  so  that
    the judge was not properly entitled to disregard it in  coming  to  her
    conclusion.  That strikes me as being very close  to  saying  that  the
    detection  of  another  voice  being  used  was  determinative.    That
    presupposes that the voice recording attributed to  the  appellant  was
    properly linked to the test taken by the appellant.  The  Secretary  of
    State's case is not consistent with the case  law.   The  case  is  not
    essentially different from other cases where the  evidence  comes  from
    ETS that a proxy test-taker had been used and the appellant had  simply
    denied it.  In other words, the admission  does  not  take  the  matter
    substantially further than another case where the Tribunal comes to the
    conclusion that, notwithstanding the fact that the  primary  evidential
    burden has been discharged, a proxy test-taker was not used.

14. In the cases to which I have been referred, it is a  theme  which  runs
    through many of them that the evidence provided by the  appellants  was
    unsatisfactory when consideration was given  to  their  oral  evidence.
    That is plainly not the case in this particular appeal. In paragraph 27
    of the determination the judge makes an express finding that she  found
    the appellant to be a credible witness.  She was therefore between what
    might be described as 'a rock and a hard place'.  She had  on  the  one
    hand compelling evidence of the fact  that  the  test  result  did  not
    reveal the voice of the appellant.  On the other hand,  there  was  the
    credible evidence of the appellant about  what  he  did  on  that  day.
    Having balanced both of those competing pieces of  evidence  the  judge
    found that the Secretary of State had not discharged the  legal  burden
    placed upon him to establish that fraud had been used.  Whilst I  fully
    understand why the Secretary of State may have seen the significance of
    the appellant's concession that the recording was not his own voice, it
    does not overcome the issue as to whether or not there was an error  on
    the part of the ETS recording system, such that there was an error made
    on the part of the individual who attributed the  particular  recording
    to this particular appellant.  Although the judge used  the  expression
    "an impersonator", it  is  not  my  understanding  that  this  was  the
    evidence adduced by the appellant.   He  was  simply  saying  that  the
    recording was not his.  That was a matter which he was entitled  to  be
    heard upon, and having heard his evidence, the judge clearly found  his
    evidence credible.  In those circumstances I do not find that there was
    an error of law.  In saying this I readily concede  that  other  judges
    may have taken a different view of the evidence, but that was  not  the
    view that was taken by this judge  and  it  was  a  conclusion,  in  my
    judgement, which was properly open to her having heard the evidence  of
    the appellant.

DECISION

    I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and uphold the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse  his  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL





                                             Date 10th January 2019
