
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Numbers:
HU/03252/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On:                     9                     April                     2018
  On: 18 April 2018


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                            MR VICTOR NNAOMA DURU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr F Khan of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  on  9  February  1971.  He
   appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of   the
   respondent dated November 2016 to refuse to grant him leave to remain  in
   the United Kingdom under paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights. First Tier Tribunal Judge Devittie  dismissed
   the appellants' appeal in a decision dated 5 May 2017.


2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  JM  Holmes
   on 11 January 2018 stating that it is arguable that the Judge's  approach
   was arguably wrong  in  law  in  respect  of  her  understanding  of  the
   appellant's immigration history and it is arguable that  the  appeal  has
   not received the consideration that the appellant  and  his  family  were
   entitled to.


    First-tier Tribunal's findings


3. The Judge made the following findings in his decision  which  in  summary
   are the following.


I. The appellant claims to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  February
   2007 and on 20 October 2015 he applied for leave to  remain  claiming  he
   had established a family life  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  respondent
   refused the appellant's application and stated that the appellant met the
   suitability requirements under the immigration rules but did not meet the
   eligibility requirements because his partner was in  the  United  Kingdom
   unlawfully and in order to qualify for leave to remain, his partner  must
   either be a British citizen, a person settled in the United Kingdom or be
   in the United Kingdom with leave. As his partner  did  not  fulfil  these
   requirements,  the  appellant  in  turn  failed  to  qualify  under   the
   immigration rules. The respondent also considered that paragraph EX1  did
   not apply  to  the  appellant  because  there  would  be  no  significant
   obstacles to the appellant and his family integration into Nigeria.


II. The appellant's wife did not give evidence in  support  of  the  appeal.
   She did not  provide  written  evidence  either.  The  evidence  to  show
   cohabitation at the address of the family unit is  hardly  adequate.  The
   appellant has not provided any explanation for his wife's failure to give
   evidence. I can only summarise, from counsel submissions  on  the  point,
   that she wishes to have a second bite at the cherry  in  the  event  that
   this appeal fails. There are no details of her identity. On  these  alone
   along the appellant's Article 8 claim is bound to fail.


III. I proceeded however to consider the appeal  on  the  basis  that  there
   does exist family life between the appellant and his biological children.
   The appellant now asserts that he has four children and it  does  concern
   me that it was only at a  late  stage  in  this  appellant's  immigration
   history that the claim to have  children  in  the  United  Kingdom  first
   surfaced as a basis for seeking leave to remain. Be that as it  may,  the
   respondent does not challenge this  aspect  of  the  claim  and  I  shall
   therefore proceed on the basis that the appellant is the  father  of  the
   children born in the United Kingdom. I accept therefore  the  appellant's
   removal would interfere with his right to a private and family life.


IV. I must first consider the best interests of the appellant's children  as
   these are a primary consideration as set out in the case of ZH  Tanzania.
   The following factors  have  been  considered  in  that  assessment.  The
   children were born on 9 November 2011, 18 March 2013,  20  February  2016
   and 5 February 2017 respectively. They are aged 6, 4, 1 and 5months. They
   have not lived in the United Kingdom for seven years. They are in my view
   at an age when they can adapt with relative ease to life in Nigeria.  The
   process of their adapting to life in Nigeria will be greatly  facilitated
   by the fact that the appellant and his spouse are Nigerian nationals  who
   grew up in Nigeria and at least in the case of the appellant, arrived  in
   the United Kingdom when he was well into his adult life. He has  been  in
   the United Kingdom for about 10 years and he  would  not  have  lost  his
   cultural ties. The appellant attained a degree  in  economics  before  he
   arrived in the United Kingdom and he has furthered his education  in  the
   United Kingdom and prior to his arrival in the  United  Kingdom  he  held
   what he describes as a good job as the cartographer. The  appellant  does
   therefore have reasonable prospects of employment in Nigeria.


V. It is accepted that  his  two  older  children  suffer  from  speech  and
   language  difficulties  and  are  receiving  therapy.  It  has  not  been
   suggested that their condition could not be  treated  in  Nigeria  as  it
   clearly can. The children's interests will not be  compromised  by  their
   return to Nigeria with their parents.


VI. The appellant's claim that he faces  harm  from  persons  from  whom  he
   borrowed money in Nigeria is an afterthought that  he  has  contrived  to
   prolong his stay in  the  United  Kingdom.  There  is  not  any  credible
   evidence to support this claim and the letters that he provided from  his
   alleged creditors lacked a ring of truth and clearly addressed to him  at
   his instance and for the purpose of producing them in his appeal.


VII. The respondent's delay must be considered  in  the  balancing  exercise
   when considering proportionality. Two key points made  by  the  appellant
   are that the respondent's failure to accurately record his  name  in  his
   April 2009 application meant that his application was rejected. Secondly,
   he asserts that in the second  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
   student, the respondent declined to consider his application. Thirdly, he
   complains that after his arrest  in  2011,  having  been  encountered  by
   immigration officials, he was persuaded to withdraw his  application  for
   judicial review by the respondent on the bases that he would be granted a
   right of appeal in respect of his human rights claim. He  complains  that
   there was a delay of four years before the  respondent  gave  substantive
   consideration to his claim.


VIII. I accept that the delay of four years after his  arrest  in  2011  has
   not been satisfactorily explained by the respondent.  There  are  however
   countervailing considerations  that  do  not  weigh  in  the  appellant's
   favour. After the refusal of the first  application  in  April  2009,  on
   grounds  that  his  payment  was  invalid,  he  did  not  make  a  second
   application for leave as a student until several months later in  October
   2009. Furthermore, the refusal of his application in October 2009 was  on
   the ground that he had failed to provide the required  test  certificates
   which the appellant does not dispute. He  was  not  granted  a  right  of
   appeal because his application was well out of time.  I  also  take  into
   account that after the refusal of his application October 2009,  with  no
   right of appeal, there is no evidence to show that he took any  steps  to
   regularise his stay. He was content, it seems, to  let  matters  rest  as
   they were until his arrest in 2011, which prompted him into  action  that
   has culminated in the present proceedings.


IX. In conclusion having regard to all relevant considerations is  that  the
   consequences of the appellant's removal would not be sufficiently serious
   to outweigh the compelling  need  in  the  public  interest  to  maintain
   effective immigration control by securing the removal  of  the  appellant
   from the United Kingdom.


X. The Judge dismissed the appellants appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules
   and under Article 8.


    Grounds of appeal


4. The appellant in his grounds of  appeal  states  the  following  which  I
   summarise. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on a student  visa
   valid from April 2007 until April 2009. He  made  an  application  on  26
   March 2009 for leave to remain as a student, but this was refused on  the
   basis that the appellant failed to pay the required application  fee.  In
   fact, what transpired was that the Home Office when processing the credit
   card payment mistakenly spelt the appellant's surname incorrectly and  as
   a result the bank refused to authorise the payment. The  application  was
   invalidated, and the appellant sought to renew the application for  leave
   to remain no fewer than on five occasions  in  2009  all  of  which  were
   rejected for some reason or other. Some of the applications were  refused
   for non-submission of documents. The appellant's representatives wrote to
   the Home Office to resolve matters on 22 October 2009 and the Home Office
   delayed matters until 19 January 2011, when she served him with notice IS
   151A and detained him as a person liable to removal.


5. Thereafter there were judicial review proceedings  challenging  the  same
   which were withdrawn by consent on 12 July 2011 on the condition that the
   Home Office review the appellant's case and if refusal was maintained  to
   grant him an in country right of appeal. The appellant did not hear  from
   the Home Office for about six months after which the appellant  wrote  to
   the Home Office to ascertain if she  was  still  willing  to  honour  her
   promise but there was no response until 13 October 2014.

6. At paragraph 15 of the determination  it  is  incorrectly  recorded  that
   after the appellant's first application was rejected as being invalid  in
   2009 and there is no evidence that  took  any  steps  to  regularise  his
   immigration status. The Judge's premise is not only factually  incorrect,
   but this perception of the appellant's immigration history  has  unfairly
   and adversely  affected  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  The  appellant's
   immigration history demonstrates that the appellant, far  from  having  a
   laid-back approach to his case,  in  fact  was  diligent  and  instructed
   lawyers to assist him in resolving the same. The Judge ignored the impact
   of the delay by the Home Office  when  accepting  that  the  respondent's
   delay has not been satisfactorily explained. The appellant will  rely  on
   the case of Akaeke [2005] EWCA Civ 947 in support of the proposition that
   delay in dealing with the case can prevent the Home Office  from  relying
   on the full rigour of the law in deciding the case against  the  interest
   of the appellant who is affected by that delay.


7. In light of the above it is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   further erred in law in dismissing the appellant's case under Article  8.
   Erred in law in dismissing the appellant's case under article 8. A proper
   analysis based on the current jurisprudence in  particular  MF  (Nigeria)
   [2012] UKUT 393 and Izuazu (article 8 -  new  rules)  [2013]  UKUT  00045
   where the approach was endorsed by the Court of Appeal in the case of  MF
   Nigeria 2013 that should have yielded a different decision favourable  to
   the appellant.


8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  that  the
   appellant developed his private and family life at a time when  the  Home
   Office delayed in deciding his case. The appellant is a  person  of  good
   character and has not behaved  in  a  morally  or  socially  unacceptable
   manner whilst he has been in this country.


9. The best interests of the children  pursuant  to  s55  of  the  Boarder's
   Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 were given  insufficient  weight  in
   that two of the appellant's children suffer from speech  impediments  for
   which treatment and therapy in Nigeria comes at a financial  premium,  if
   at all and the appellant simply does not have the resources to afford the
   same.


10. The appellant himself suffers from acute diabetes and he would not  have
   the financial resources to meet the costs of the medication to  keep  the
   disease under control if he were returned  to  Nigeria.  The  family  are
   absolutely devoted to each other in the United Kingdom. It  is  the  only
   place that they can enjoy family  life  as  they  have  no  resources  in
   Nigeria and have no one to whom they can reasonably rely on for support.


    The hearing

11. I heard submissions from both parties at the hearing which I have  taken
   into account.

        Decision on error of law

12. In considering this appeal I have taken into  account  the  case  of R
    (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982, where Brooke LJ summarised  at  [9]
    the errors on points of law that will most frequently be encountered in
    practice:
    "9. ...
    (i) making perverse or irrational findings on a matter or matters  that
    were material to the outcome ("material matters");
    (ii) failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons  for  findings  on
    material matters;
    (iii) failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts of fact  or
    opinion on material matters;
    (iv) giving weight to immaterial matters;
    (v) making a material misdirection of law on any material matter;
    (vi) committing  or  permitting  a  procedural  or  other  irregularity
    capable of making a material difference to the outcome or the  fairness
    of the proceedings;
    (vii) making a mistake as to a material fact which could be established
    by objective and uncontentious evidence, where the appellant and/or his
    advisers were not responsible for the  mistake,  and  where  unfairness
    resulted from the fact that a mistake was made."


  13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in a careful decision considered all the
      evidence in the appeal and found that the appellant,  his  spouse  and
      four children could return to Nigeria and continue their  private  and
      family life in that country, as a family unit.


  14. The complaint against the First-tier Tribunal Judge is  that  he  fell
      into material error  when  he  was  inaccurate  when  considering  the
      appellant's immigration history. It was asserted that Judge fell  into
      material error when he stated in his decision  that  after  his  first
      application was refused on the basis that the fees were not paid which
      was due to the respondent's fault, the appellant "was content  to  let
      matters rest as there were until his arrest  in  2011.  The  appellant
      asserts that this is inaccurate because  "in  2009,  he  made  further
      applications for leave to remain no fewer than on  five  occasions  in
      2009 all of which were rejected for some reason or other. Some of  the
      applications were refused for non-submission of documents".


  15. It is clear from the grounds of appeal with state that the appellant's
      further applications were refused "for  some  reason  or  other"  this
      demonstrates  that  there  were  considered  by  the  respondent   and
      rejected. It is the case that one application was refused on the basis
      that the respondent made an error by misspelling the appellant's  name
      and his application fees was not honoured  by  the  bank.  There  were
      however other applications made  which  were  also  refused  for  non-
      submission  of  documents.  The  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   noted
      "Furthermore, the refusal of his application in October  2009  was  on
      the  ground  that  he  had  failed  to  provide  the   required   test
      certificates which the appellant does not dispute. He was not  granted
      a right of appeal because his application was well out of time".


  16. The Judge made an error by stating that the appellant was  content  to
      let matters rest when he had in fact made further  applications  which
      were all rejected for one reason or the other. I however can say  with
      confidence that despite the First-tier Tribunal Judge stating that the
      appellant content to let matters rest, the decision  would  inevitably
      have been the same on the facts of this appeal. I say this because the
      mistake was not material to the issue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge had to decide. The issue for decision was whether requiring  the
      appellant and his family's return to Nigeria would be in breach of the
      immigration rules or Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights.


  17. Therefore, even if there was an error  it  was  not  material  and  no
      unfairness resulted from the fact that a mistake was made on the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge when she formed the view that  the  appellant  had
      been lackadaisical in regularising his immigration status.


  18. The appellant further complains that the respondent's  delay  of  four
      years in deciding the  appellant's  application  from  2011  until  10
      February 2015 stops the respondent from relying on the full rigour  of
      the law in deciding the case against the interest of the appellant who
      has been affected by that delay.  The grounds of appeal however do not
      say how the interests of the appellant were affected  or  how  he  was
      prejudiced by this delay other than he had children in  this  country.
      The mere fact that there is a delay by  the  respondent  does  not  in
      itself mean that the proportionality assessment invariably will go  in
      favour of the appellant and that he should  get  the  benefit  of  the
      doubt. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  noted  that  respondent  accepts
      that there was a delay but has not been able to explain it. Therefore,
      the Judge did take into account the respondent's delay.



19. In the case of EB (Kosovo), JL (Sierra Leone) [2006] EWCA Civ.  1713  to
   clarify the law on the effect of delay  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on
   claims that rely on Article 8 to resist removal from the United  Kingdom.
   Buxton LJ summarised the law in relation to  delay  at  paragraph  24  as
   follows:


         "i)      Delay in dealing with an application may,  increasing  the
             time that the claimant spends in this  country,  increase  his
             ability to demonstrate family or  private  life  bringing  him
             within article 8(1).  That however is a question of fact,  and
             to be treated as such.


         ii)      The application to an article 8 case of immigration policy
             will usually suffice without more to meet the requirements  of
             article 8(2) [Razgar].  Cases where the demands of immigration
             policy are not conclusive will be truly exceptional [Huang].


         iii)     Where delay is relied on as  a  reason  for  not  applying
             immigration policy, a distinction must be made between persons
             who have some potential right under immigration policy  to  be
             in this country (for instance, under marriage  policy,  as  in
             Shala and Akaeke); and persons who have no such right.


         iv)      In the former case, where it is sought to apply burdensome
             procedural rules to the consideration of the applicant's case,
             it may be inequitable in extreme cases, of  national  disgrace
             or of the system having broken down [Akaeke], to enforce those
             procedural rules [Shala; Akaeke]


         v) Where the applicant has no potential rights  under  specifically
             immigration law, and therefore has to rely on his rights under
             article 8(1), delay in  dealing  with  a  previous  claim  for
             asylum will be a relevant factor under article  8(2),  but  it
             must have very substantial effects if it is to  influence  the
             outcome [Strbac at para. 25].


         vi)      The mere fact that delay has caused an applicant  who  now
             has no potential rights under  immigration  law  to  miss  the
             benefit of a hypothetical hearing  of  an  asylum  claim  that
             would have resulted in his obtaining ELR does  not  in  itself
             affect the determination  of  a  subsequent  article  8  claim
             [Strbac, at para. 32].


         vii)     And further, it is not clear  that  the  court  in  Strbac
             thought that the failure  to  obtain  ELR  on  asylum  grounds
             because of failure to make a timely  decision  could  ever  be
             relevant to a decision on the substance,  as  opposed  to  the
             procedure, of a subsequent article 8 claim.  Certainly,  there
             is no reason in logic why that fact alone  should  affect  the
             article 8 claim.  On this dilemma, see further para. 6 above.


         viii)    Arguments based on the breakdown of immigration control or
             of failure to apply the system properly are likely only to  be
             of relevance if the system  in  question  is  that  which  the
             Secretary  of  State  seeks  to  rely  on   in   the   present
             proceedings: for instance, where  a  procedural  rule  of  the
             system  is  sought  to  be  enforced  against  the   applicant
             [Akaeke].  The same arguments do not follow  where  appeal  is
             made in article 8 proceedings to earlier failures in operating
             the asylum system.


         ix)      Decisions on proportionality made by tribunals should not,
             in the absence of errors of principle, be interfered  with  by
             an appellate court [Akaeke].

20. Laws LJ then when on to make it clear that there  is  no  'rule  to  the
   effect that an applicant whose claim to enter or remain  (a)  is  decided
   after the expiry of a reasonable time and (b)  would  probably  have  met
   with success, or a greater chance of success,  if  it  had  been  decided
   within a reasonable time, should, if he has meantime established a family
   life here, be treated as if it had been so decided'.


  21. It was implicit in the decision that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      found the appellant has not established that his claim  for  leave  to
      remain would have succeeded or have had a greater chance of succeeding
      if it had been decided earlier. The  children  that  he  had  in  this
      country are not qualifying children and  are  Nigerian  citizens.  The
      delay if anything, allowed the appellant  to  have  children  in  this
      country had the respondent not delayed in deciding his application and
      removed him from this country. it cannot be said that four years delay
      is a national disgrace or of the system having broken down. The First-
      tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to find that the  respondent's  delay
      did not affect his proportionality assessment.

22. The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to find that all the appellant  and
   family can return to Nigeria and continue their family and  private  life
   in that country of which they are citizens. The First-tier Tribunal Judge
   found that the appellant worked in Nigeria before he came to this country
   and he can look after his children by finding employment.  It  was  found
   that the children's speech impediment can  be  managed  in  Nigeria.  The
   First-tier Tribunal Judge understood the evidence and found that the best
   interests  of  the  children  must  inform  her  decision.  There  is  no
   perversity in the findings made that the appellant  and  his  family  can
   return to Nigeria and can integrate. The appellants  appeal  is  no  more
   than a quarrel with the First--tier Tribunal Judge's findings  which  she
   was entitled to make on the evidence.


23. The upshot is that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  not
   affected by a material error and I find that the First-tier Tribunal  did
   conduct a proper assessment of all the  appellants'  and  his  children's
   rights pursuant to the Immigration Rules and Article 8.


24. I find that there is no material error of law in the decision of  First-
   tier Tribunal and  I  uphold  the  decision  dismissing  the  appellant's
   appeal.


Conclusions

25. I therefore find that the appellants appeal must fail  pursuant  to  the
   Immigration Rules and Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
   Rights.





DECISION

The appellant's appeal is dismissed

I make no anonymity orders
The appeal has been dismissed and there can be no fee order


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana                                               Dated 18th day  of
    April 2018







