
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03399/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 July 2019                      |On 19 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            Ayesha Sheik Hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Carroll ("the judge"), promulgated on 8 March  2019,  by
    which she dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 15 January 2018, which in turn had refused the  Appellant's
    human rights claim.  The human rights claim had essentially  been  made
    on the basis of claimed ten years' continuous lawful residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, acquired on the basis of a number of grants of  limited
    leave to remain.  The Appellant, who at the time of the claim  had  one
    child but at the date of the hearing before the  judge  had  two,  also
    relied on her family life in the United Kingdom.

 2. In refusing the human rights claim, the Respondent  asserted  that  the
    Appellant had spent a significant amount of time outside of the  United
    Kingdom, there being a total of 966 days away, including two periods of
    in excess of 180 days.  In light of this it  was  said  that  paragraph
    276B(i)(a) of the Immigration Rules was not satisfied.  The  claim  was
    then considered under Article 8 in its wider context.  It was said that
    this could not assist the Appellant.



The judge's decision

 3. The judge replicated the table of alleged absent days  which  had  been
    set out in the reasons for refusal letter.  She then went on to address
    certain periods relating to the longer periods of alleged absence  from
    the  United  Kingdom  and  whether  there  were   any   compelling   or
    compassionate circumstances relating to these  absences.   In  essence,
    the judge did not find  aspects  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  to  be
    credible.  She found that there had not been adequate explanations  for
    a number of the absences and that as a result  of  this  the  Appellant
    could not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276B(i)(a).  The  judge
    concluded that no  other  aspects  of  the  Rules  could  be  met.   In
    assessing Article  8  outside  the  context  of  the  Rules  the  judge
    acknowledged the existence of the Appellant's then  two  children,  but
    concluded that there were no exceptional or compelling circumstances in
    the case.



The Appellant's case

 4. The grounds of appeal essentially attack the judge's  consideration  of
    the evidence relating to the absences.   There  is  a  specific  ground
    relating to the assessment of the children's best interests but at  the
    hearing before me Mr Gajjar, in my view quite properly, did not seek to
    pursue this.

 5. Mr Gajjar relied on the grounds, in particular 1 to 6.  The  thrust  of
    his submissions was that the judge had failed to consider  and/or  make
    findings on and/or provide reasons in respect of  material  aspects  of
    the Appellant's evidence relating to the longest of the  absences  from
    the United Kingdom.  He submitted that in light  of  these  errors  the
    judge's conclusion that the  Appellant  had  been  out  of  the  United
    Kingdom for in excess of 540 days without there being any compelling or
    compassionate circumstances relating to these absences was  wrong,  and
    that the total number would have fallen below the figure of 540 days if
    she had properly addressed the  Appellant's  evidence.   Therefore,  he
    submitted that the errors alleged are material.



The Respondent's case

 6. Ms Cunha submitted that there are no errors.  The judge was of the view
    that the Appellant's evidence was inconsistent and  evasive.   Relevant
    aspects of that evidence had been specifically dealt  with  thereafter.
    Ms Cunha also submitted that even if there were errors and one  was  to
    discount the absences relating to those, the total number  of  absences
    from the United  Kingdom  would  remain  in  excess  of  540  days  and
    therefore the errors would not be material.



Decision on error of law

 7. I conclude that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

 8. The first issue relates to the issue of a miscarriage suffered  by  the
    Appellant in 2013.  There was  evidence  from  a  medical  professional
    before the judge which purported to confirm that a miscarriage  had  in
    fact occurred, that  the  Appellant  has  suffered  from  a  depressive
    episode as a result, and had  received  cognitive  behavioural  therapy
    whilst abroad for a period  of  time.   In  addressing  this  issue  at
    paragraph 27 of her  decision,  the  judge  finds  that  there  was  no
    explanation for the failure to supply  this  evidence  with  the  human
    rights claim, or indeed with the notice of appeal.  This criticism  may
    have been well-founded but what it does not do is address the substance
    of the evidence or make any findings of fact  in  respect  thereof,  or
    indeed to provide any reasons as to why the evidence  was  rejected  if
    that were the case.  In my view, this error is, when seen in  light  of
    other matters to which I will refer below, material because it goes  to
    an explanation for a relatively significant period of absence from  the
    United Kingdom.  Beyond that, the reason for that aspect of the absence
    would  potentially  be  capable  of  amounting  to  a   compelling   or
    compassionate circumstance.  In addition, if the period relating to the
    miscarriage itself and subsequent treatment for mental health  problems
    were taken into account, it would, as it were, knock off  a  relatively
    significant number of days from the total figure of absences.

 9. The next issue which the judge has not adequately addressed relates  to
    the Appellant's hospitalisation following a road  traffic  accident  in
    June 2013.  She was admitted to hospital and then  spent  a  period  of
    time recovering from this.  A medical professional only deemed her  fit
    to fly again in September  2013.   This  evidence  also  represented  a
    fairly significant period of time which was capable of amounting  to  a
    compelling or compassionate circumstance in the Appellant's case.

10. The judge states in paragraph 25 that it was "unclear" as to  what  the
    Appellant was doing in May 2013.  The difficulty with this statement is
    that it appears to  fail  to  address  evidence  that  was  before  her
    relating to delays in the Appellant's ability to change her  name.   It
    may be that if this evidence had been  addressed  it  would  have  been
    rejected: the point is that it was not dealt with.

11. Paragraph 24 relates to the Appellant's claim that a passport had  been
    taken away by her family members  and  this  had  caused  part  of  her
    inability to return to the United Kingdom.  The judge appears to reject
    this evidence on the basis that the  Appellant  was  "clearly  able  to
    travel to and attend her own wedding on 14 February 2012".

12. The Appellant's  evidence,  as  contained  in  her  witness  statement,
    asserted that her passport had been taken away and that  she  had  been
    effectively under house arrest by family members.  In  due  course  she
    had been able to escape and was thereafter able to marry her husband on
    the stated date.  On the Appellant's case it  was  not  a  question  of
    being freely able to travel, but  of  her  taking  positive  action  in
    difficult circumstances in order to achieve the  outcome.   It  is  not
    clear from paragraph 24 that the judge considered the specific evidence
    put forward or provided an adequate reason for rejecting this evidence.
     Ms Cunha submitted that a judge is entitled to reject  evidence  where
    it is inherently implausible.  That  may  in  principle  be  the  case.
    However, the judge herself  has  not  said  that  this  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's evidence was inherently implausible and on the face of  the
    witness statement I can see no basis upon which such a label  could  be
    attached to this particular aspect of the case.

13. At the outset of the judge's findings she stated that the evidence  was
    characterised  by  evasiveness  and   that   there   were   significant
    inconsistencies.  There is some merit in the grounds of challenge which
    suggest that this particular observation is unreasoned.  However,  even
    treating it as a preamble as to what follows, it is  the  substance  of
    the  findings  and  reasons  given  in  support  thereof  which  is  of
    importance.  A general observation at the outset cannot of itself  cure
    any deficiencies in what follows.

14.  At  the  hearing  itself,  and  with  the  best  efforts  of  the  two
    representatives, there was an attempt to recalculate the  total  number
    of absences from the United Kingdom on the basis that a number  of  the
    errors were made out.  This did not prove a straightforward task.   The
    errors that I have identified do remove from the equation  what  in  my
    view are a very significant number of the  absent  days,  at  least  in
    respect of whether appropriately compassionate circumstances existed in
    relation to them.  A further point is that the judge herself appears to
    have reduced the number of applicable days in respect  of  the  lengthy
    period out of the country in 2010/2011.   At  paragraph  21  the  judge
    indicates that the absence of a good  explanation  from  the  Appellant
    only started running  from  7  March  2011  and  not  from  the  figure
    initially given by the Respondent of 26 November 2010.  To that  extent
    the judge herself was reducing the total.

15. Bringing all of the above together, I  conclude  that  the  errors  are
    material because it is, at least on my view of the figures, more likely
    than not that the total number of unexplained absences from the  United
    Kingdom would be less than 540  and  that  there  would  be  no  single
    absence of more than six months.  To that extent, if the errors had not
    been committed the Appellant could (I need put it no higher)  have  met
    Rule 276B which in turn would have in effect  been  dipositive  of  the
    Article 8 claim (see for example TZ Pakistan [2018] EWCA Civ 1109).

16. It is therefore appropriate to set the judge's decision aside.



Disposal

17. In my view this is a case which needs to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal, having regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement.  As
    I trust is clear from what I have already said in  my  decision,  there
    are relatively complex matters relating to findings of fact on  various
    periods of absence from the United Kingdom.  There would also  need  to
    be further findings of fact in respect of the Appellant's two children.
     Although the current change in circumstances has played no part in the
    error of law decision, I do note that there  are  pending  applications
    for both the children in respect of registration as  British  citizens.
    This is an issue which may need to  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal subject to any possible  issue  of  it  amounting  to  a  "new
    matter".  That is something that the First-tier Tribunal will  need  to
    keep under review and receive information on from the parties.

18. No anonymity direction is made.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and I set  it
aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

   1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete  re-
      hearing with no preserved findings;

   2. The remitted hearing shall not be  conducted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Carroll.





Signed   [pic]             Date: 12 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


