
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03387/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 October 2017                       |On 7 November 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                              Mr bikash gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, instructed by Everest Law
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appears with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell promulgated on 18 January 2017, dismissing
    his appeal against refusal of entry clearance as  the  adult  dependent
    relative of his father who is an ex-Ghurka soldier.   The  decision  in
    question was made on 29 July 2015.

 2. The sponsor had been granted indefinite leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of his army service on 18th September 2006  having
    served fifteen years in the British Armed Forces.  At  the  same  time,
    the sponsor's wife (the appellant's mother) and siblings  were  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  It would appear that this  occurred  under
    the policy introduced  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  October  2004
    contained in the Diplomatic Service Procedures at chapter 29  paragraph
    14 (see Gurung v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8 at [4] and [5]).

 3. Although the appellant had applied on that occasion his application for
    entry clearance was refused.  Second it is unclear  whether  there  was
    any appeal against that decision or whether it was possible or not.

 4. The respondent concluded that the appellant did not fall within Annex K
    of the Immigration Rules the appellant  having  lived  apart  from  the
    sponsor for more than two years at the date of application as a  direct
    result of them migrating to the United Kingdom.  He was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant  aged  29  years  and  11  months  at  the  date  of
    application was unable to care for himself, concluding that he  was  in
    good health and having spent the majority of his life  in  Nepal  there
    were no factors preventing him from working there and no evidence  that
    his living conditions were anything but adequate and no obvious  reason
    why his father could not continue to  support  him  financially  if  he
    remained in Nepal.  He concluded that  the  appellant  was  not  wholly
    financially or emotionally dependent on the UK sponsor.

 5. The respondent concluded also, having had regard to Article  8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention and Gurung as well as Ghising [2013] UKUT 00567
    that  in  this  case  the  reasons  for  the   refusal   outweigh   the
    consideration of historical injustice as family life  continues  as  it
    may have done  without  interference  and  he  was  not  satisfied  the
    appellant has established family life with his parents over  and  above
    that between an adult child and parents and he did  not  consider  that
    the historical justice had been such as to prevent him from  leading  a
    normal life.  Thus it did not outweigh the  proportionality  assessment
    in Article 8.

 6. In his review, the Entry Clearance Manager noted the appellant had been
    refused a  UK  visa  application  for  settlement  and  submission  "or
    submission of false documents" and a copy of that refusal  is  provided
    but it was accepted that Article 8(1) was engaged.  The Entry Clearance
    Manager concluded that refusal was proportionate and appropriate.

 7. He concluded that the evidence of the appellant and the UK family being
    emotionally tied  was  extremely  limited  [21]  and  directed  himself
    whether, in line with Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civil  31,  whether
    there  were  factors  suggesting  the  existence  of  family  life  and
    dependency [23].

 8. The judge then recited the history noting that family life could  exist
    without dependence [28]; that the evidence was clear that the appellant
    would have applied for settlement whereas the appellant was  under  the
    age of 18 if he had been able to do so legally [29] and at [31] held

         "This is not one of the relatively  rare  cases  where  because  of
         peculiar circumstances in the family that  there  is  a  continuing
         family life beyond that of the normal emotional  ties  between  the
         appellant and sponsor."

 9. The judge noted at [32] that  he  did  not  know  the  reason  why  the
    application in 2006 had failed and whilst the argument that  there  was
    no historic injustice as a result of the past failure, it  was  cogent,
    the appellant clearly could not meet the requirement of the Immigration
    Rules.

10. The judge then considered Sections 117A and B of the 2002 Act  as  well
    as Article 8, applying the test set out  in  Razgar  [2004]  2  AC  368
    concluding at [35] that there was not an interference with  the  family
    life as the appellant's family life will continue as before  save  that
    the decision was clearly in accordance with the law and

         "The decision to refuse the appellant's entry clearance is  clearly
         in accordance with the law and does not engage Article 8  ECHR  and
         is proportionate to the legitimate aim to be achieved that  is  the
         maintenance of effective immigration control.  I therefore  dismiss
         the appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR."

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in that:-

      i) on the basis of Gurung he should have been granted settlement  with
         the rest of his family [5], the judge failing to take into  account
         that when the father was finally granted  settlement  his  son  was
         refused because he was 21 years old [7] it  not  being  established
         until 2013 that this was unlawful and he  had  not  been  separated
         from his family through his own fault;

     ii) on the judge's own finding financial dependency in  this  case  was
         one of necessity [10] and that the judge failed to  make  a  proper
         finding or assess the evidence of emotional dependence it being the
         evidence that the appellant speaks to  his  family  every  day  and
         phone records had been submitted to corroborate this [11] and  thus
         the finding that the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  the  policy  is
         unlawful;

    iii) that the appellant is financially and emotionally dependent on  the
         sponsor and thus Article 8(1) is engaged [15],  the  assessment  of
         dependency being flawed and, in light of the case law  and  failure
         for the respondent to highlight any effect as over  and  above  the
         public interest decision was not proportionate.

12. On 16 August 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth  granted
    permission.

13. Mr Balroop relied on the grounds submitting that the decision in Gurung
    was still relevant, in light despite the introduction of  Section  117A
    and 117B of the 2002 Act, relying on their  decision  in  Rai  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA Civil 320. He submitted  that  the  judge
    had failed properly to engage with the issue of historic injustice.

14. Mr Bramble submitted that the judge had adequately dealt with the issue
    of historic injustice and that there were in this case other factors to
    be taken into account to be assessed against that given the  prior  use
    of false documents.

15. There is no proper indication that the judge had engaged with the clear
    concession by the Entry Clearance Manager  that  Article  8(1)  of  the
    Human Rights Convention was on the  facts  of  this  case  engaged.   I
    consider that there is sufficient merit in  this  submission  that  the
    judge failed as set out in the grounds that the judge has not  properly
    addressed having found either why the financial dependency was  not  of
    necessity or properly dealt with the evidence  of  continued  emotional
    dependency; as is averred there is no reference  to  the  communication
    between the appellant and his family.  Merely stating that the evidence
    is  "extremely  limited"  is  not  a  sufficient  basis  for  assessing
    evidence.  That  said,  it  is  clear  that  he  took  account  of  the
    communication at [31].

16. Whilst the  judge  appears  at  [31]  to  conclude  that  there  is  no
    continuing family life in this case in the sense meant in Kugathas, and
    there is a finding that there is no interference [35],  it  is  unclear
    why if a judge concluded that there is no interference, that he went on
    to consider the following five  questions  in  Razgar  without  stating
    whether he was doing so in the alternative.  Further, whilst it may  be
    said that having reached that conclusion, if it were sustainable, would
    mean that the rest of the decision is immaterial, that is predicated on
    the assumption that that conclusion is sustainable.  I do not  consider
    the decision that there is no interference  is  sustainable  given  the
    concession by the Entry Clearance Manager and also a  failure  properly
    to reason whether or not there was a family life which was protected.

17. Further, the assessment of proportionality which the judge does  go  on
    to  consider,  thereby  and  in  not  stating  that  this  was  in  the
    alternative,  apparently  accepting  that  there  was  interference  of
    sufficient gravity failed properly to address  the  issue  of  historic
    injustice.  There is no clear finding at whether there was an  historic
    injustice in this case or not.  The judge appears to accept that  there
    was not at [32] but states only that the argument  "has  some  cogency"
    but did consider that it  was  not  to  be  taken  in  account  as  the
    appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    which is simply wrong.

18. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law in  that  the  judge
    has failed to make  proper  findings  on  material  facts  specifically
    whether  there  is  protected  family  life,  whether   there   is   an
    interference with that, whether there  was  in  this  case  a  historic
    injustice and whether having  taken  those  factors  into  account  the
    decision was proportionate.

19. Given the scale of the fact-finding  exercise  that  will  need  to  be
    undertaken I consider that the appropriate course  of  action  in  this
    case is for it to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  fresh
    findings of fact on all issues.

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
    on all issues.

 3. No anonymity order is made




Signed                                  Date:  6 November 2017

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

