
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04845/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 17 October 2017                    |On 27 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     bm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr De Mello, instructed by Ash Immigration Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, BM, is a female citizen of Pakistan who  was
    born in 2001.  She applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as
    the adopted child of a parent or parents present  and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The application was refused by a decision of the Entry
    Clearance Officer (ECO) dated 28 July 2015.  The appellant appealed  to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lagunju)  which,   in   a   decision
    promulgated on 3 March 2017, allowed the appeal on human rights grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR).  The ECO now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Both parties agreed before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  appellant
    could not satisfy the requirements as to a  foreign  adoption  provided
    for under HC 395 (as amended).  The ECO considered that  the  appellant
    had failed to show the requirements for a de facto adoption as provided
    for under paragraph 310-316C of the Immigration Rules.

 3. It is accepted by both parties that the sponsors had not lived with the
    appellant in the role of parents for a  period  of  at  least  eighteen
    months.  The ECO noted that the male sponsor (the sponsors are married)
    had been registered as the birth father  of  the  appellant  in  August
    2001.  The male sponsor now denies being  the  natural  father  of  the
    appellant.  Consequently, the ECO was uncertain as to the  "whereabouts
    of your biological parents".  In addition to refusing  entry  clearance
    under the Immigration Rules, the ECO  considered  that  there  were  no
    significant  circumstances  which  would  justify  a  grant  of   entry
    clearance outside the Rules (under Article 8 ECHR).

 4. In February 2016, the ECO's decision was reviewed by an Entry Clearance
    Manager (ECM).  The ECM upheld the ECO's decision.   As  regards  entry
    clearance outside the Rules, the ECM wrote as follows:

         I have considered the appellant's rights under Article 8  of  ECHR.
         Article 8 of the ECHR is a qualified right, and proportionate  with
         the need to maintain an effective immigration  and  border  control
         and decisions under the Immigration Rules are deemed to be complied
         with human rights legislation.  Given the concerns  raised  in  the
         refusal notice regarding the relationship [between the sponsors and
         the appellant] I am not satisfied that the appellant has  a  family
         life with the sponsor.  As this is the case, Article 8(1) does  not
         apply to the appellant.  However, if  the  appellant  does  have  a
         family life with the  sponsor,  I  am  satisfied  the  decision  is
         proportionate under Article 8(2).   I  note  that  no  satisfactory
         reason has been put forward as to why the  sponsor  in  the  UK  is
         unable to travel to Pakistan  to  be  with  the  appellant.   I  am
         therefore satisfied the  decision  is  justified  by  the  need  to
         maintain an effective immigration and border control.

 5. Judge Lagunju recorded the fact that the appellant  accepted  that  she
    could not satisfy the Immigration Rules  as  to  adoption.   The  judge
    noted that the female sponsor was  infertile  and  unable  to  conceive
    children.  The judge wrote, "the appellant and her husband were  unable
    to have children of their own.  They discovered that a  pregnant  woman
    in their home village in Pakistan wanted a family to give her child to,
    as she was unable to care for the child herself".  The  judge  observed
    [13] that a court in Islamabad had made an adoption order but he  noted
    also that this order was not recognised in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge also gave weight [14] to a document  purportedly  signed  by  the
    biological parents of the appellant "in which they appear  to  entirely
    abdicate responsibility for the appellant".  The  judge  recorded  that
    the sponsors had attempted to undertake an  inter-country  adoption  of
    the appellant [15].  The judge was "satisfied that  the  appellant  had
    shown that the sponsors have acted as the appellant's adoptive  parents
    for over sixteen years".  The judge also accepted there was "close bond
    and affection (sic)" between the appellant and the female sponsor.  The
    judge considered that the sponsors "play an important parental role  in
    [the appellant's] life".  At [24], the judge wrote:

         I consider it would be in the best interests of the appellant to be
         with her two parents after being apart  for  so  many  years  apart
         (sic).  Although they have done their best to maintain family  life
         through visits, I consider the  age  and  health  concerns  of  the
         sponsors and note that the  couple  are  unlikely  to  be  able  to
         maintain family life in this way before long.

 6. The judge recorded that the visits of the sponsors to the appellant  in
    Pakistan had "reduced significantly over the last few years".  Finally,
    "given the appellant has attained a certain age" the  judge  considered
    it would be of benefit to the sponsors in their "old age" to  have  the
    valuable support and assistance of the appellant.  At [25],  the  judge
    records that the male sponsor has ischaemic heart disease.

 7. In essence, there is one ground of appeal.  The ground correctly states
    that the appellant "cannot satisfy the Immigration  Rules  because  the
    adoption is not recognised  in  the  UK".   The  grounds  rely  on  the
    Adoption and Children Act 2002, Sections 83(4) and (5):

         (4) Regulations may require a person  intending  to  bring,  or  to
         cause another  to  bring,  a  child  into  the  United  Kingdom  in
         circumstances where this section applies-

         (a) to apply  to  an  adoption  agency  (including  a  Scottish  or
         Northern Irish adoption agency) in the  prescribed  manner  for  an
         assessment of his suitability to adopt the child, and

         (b) to give the agency any  information  it  may  require  for  the
         purpose of the assessment.

         (5) Regulations may require prescribed  conditions  to  be  met  in
         respect of a child brought into the United Kingdom in circumstances
         where this section applies.

 8. The grounds assert as follows:

         It is not in issue that the sponsors are habitually resident in the
         UK, have not undergone adoption recognised in the UK and  have  not
         complied with Section 83(4) and (5)  which  is  prescribed  in  the
         Immigration Rules.  On that basis, they are not able to  bring  the
         child into the UK, even where the FTTJ [First-tier Tribunal  Judge]
         found that family life exists, as the sponsors would be  committing
         a criminal offence.  This  is  an  order  to  properly  assess  and
         protect the interests of the child.  As such, it is  asserted  that
         the FTTJ has erred in law.

 9. The grounds of appeal, therefore, argue that the  judge  had  erred  by
    failing to take any or any proper regard of the fact that the  sponsors
    would commit a criminal offence by  bringing  the  appellant  into  the
    United Kingdom without having complied with the  requirements  of  sub-
    section (4) and  sub-section  (5)  of  Section  83  of  the  2002  Act.
    Sections 7-9 of the Act provide as follows:

         (7) If a person brings, or causes another to bring,  a  child  into
         the United Kingdom at any time in circumstances where this  section
         applies, he is guilty of an offence if-

         (a) he has not complied with any requirement imposed by  virtue  of
         subsection (4), or

         (b) any condition required to be met by virtue of subsection (5) is
         not met, before that time, or before any later time  which  may  be
         prescribed.

         (8) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable-

         (a) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not  exceeding
         six months, or a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum, or both,

         (b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment  for  a  term  not
         exceeding twelve months, or a fine, or both.

         (9) In this section, "prescribed" means prescribed  by  regulations
         and "regulations" means regulations made by the Secretary of State,
         after consultation with the Assembly.

10. I find the argument of the ECO to be problematic.  First,  the  grounds
    are predicated on the assumption that, having obtained  success  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, the sponsors would then actually seek to bring
    the appellant into the United Kingdom in such a way as  to  breach  the
    2002 Act.  Despite having won the appeal on human rights grounds, entry
    clearance enabling the appellant to come into the United Kingdom  would
    still need to be issued to the appellant by the ECO.  One might  expect
    the ECO to put into effect the First-tier Tribunal's decision in normal
    circumstances, but, if the ECO considered that by doing so  he  or  she
    would aid or abet an offence under the 2002 Act, then it  seems  likely
    that the ECO refrain from issuing entry clearance.  Moreover, as Mr  De
    Mello who acted for the appellant submitted, it was not for the  First-
    tier Tribunal to second guess the likely reaction  of  the  prosecuting
    authority in the United Kingdom if entry clearance were to  be  granted
    to the appellant following a successful appeal.

11. The grounds appear to suggest that the judge erred in law by failing to
    take into account the 2002 Act or, at the very least, that he failed to
    give weight to the possibility that a decision allowing the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds  would  lead  to  the  commission  of  a  criminal
    offence.  As I have shown above, any  link  of  causation  between  the
    judge's decision on what was an entirely  legitimate  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds and the commissioning of a criminal offence  was  by  no
    means as certain as the grounds submit.  First, there is no  reason  to
    assume that the ECO would risk aiding and abetting a  criminal  offence
    by granting entry clearance.  Secondly, there is no reason  to  suppose
    that  the  sponsors  would  knowingly  seek  to   commit   an   offence
    notwithstanding the appellant's success in the appeal.  Thirdly, it  is
    likely that any prosecuting  authority  would  take  into  account  the
    extent to which the welfare of the appellant  had  been  and  would  be
    safeguarded before making any decision to prosecute.  Finally, it is by
    no means certain that the question of a possible offence under the 2002
    Act was ever in fact raised before the judge.  If it had  been  raised,
    one would have expected him to have referred to it.

12. For the reasons I have given above, I find that the judge did  not  err
    in law for the reasons argued in the grounds of appeal.  However,  that
    is not the end of the matter.  Mr Bates, who  appeared  for  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, sought to widen the attack on the  judge's  decision
    by submitting that the judge had erred in his  approach  to  Article  8
    ECHR.  Mr De Mello, for the appellant, objected to  that  attempt.   He
    submitted that the ECO was allowed only to argue on the  basis  of  the
    grounds of appeal  for  which  permission  had  been  granted.   Having
    considered both submissions carefully, I found that I  should  consider
    the further arguments put by Mr Bates on behalf of the ECO.  I  reached
    that conclusion for two reasons: first, the grounds of appeal  are,  in
    effect, a challenge to the fact that the judge has allowed  the  appeal
    on human rights grounds at all.  Secondly, the point raised by Mr Bates
    is an entirely obvious one and was raised in terms by the  ECM  in  the
    review of the refusal which I have quoted above.  Mr Bates argued  that
    the judge should have found that there were no obstacles  (as  the  ECM
    had also concluded) to prevent the sponsors enjoying family  life  with
    the appellant in Pakistan.  An assessment of whether it was  reasonable
    for the sponsors to travel to Pakistan to continue  their  family  life
    with the appellant there was, in my opinion, absolutely fundamental  to
    the analysis on Article 8 grounds  given  the  factual  matrix  in  the
    appeal and the failure of the judge properly to  make  that  assessment
    constituted an error of law.  The judge was required  to  consider  the
    appeal on human rights grounds in a structured and thorough manner. The
    'family living abroad' argument had been raised by the  ECM  but,  more
    fundamentally, it was not possible for the judge to be in a position to
    conclude that Article 8 ECHR would be breached when he had  omitted  to
    consider the essential question of the family enjoying such family life
    as they have established in Pakistan. Indeed, on the  particular  facts
    of the case, family life had only ever  been  enjoyed  (other  than  by
    electronic means or correspondence) in Pakistan.

13. I have recorded above [5] the judge's consideration, such as it is,  of
    the possibility of family life continuing in Pakistan.   The  "age  and
    health concerns of the sponsors" are not  particularised  or  evidenced
    and the judge gives  no  reasons  for  finding  that  "the  couple  are
    unlikely to be able to maintain family life [by way of  visits]  before
    long".  A reference is made  to  the  male  sponsor's  ischaemic  heart
    disease but the judge makes no assessment as  to  whether  any  medical
    condition of either sponsor could or could not adequately be treated in
    Pakistan.  As for the point made by the judge regarding the  assistance
    which the appellant might give to the sponsors "in their old age",  the
    judge gives no reasons at all as to why such assistance  could  not  be
    provided by the appellant in Pakistan.  The judge has failed to  remind
    himself of the fact that appellants and sponsors  seeking  to  rely  on
    Article 8 ECHR may not choose in which jurisdiction they shall continue
    their family life.  This is an appeal on Article 8 grounds involving an
    appellant who lives abroad and  who  has  never  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is not clear at all to me why the appellant  needs  to  be
    admitted to the United Kingdom so that such family life  she  has  with
    the United Kingdom sponsors may be continued or developed.   There  was
    no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal which could have justified a
    conclusion that family life might only take place in the future in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge  has,  without  giving  any  or  any  proper
    reasons, simply rejected the proposition  that  family  life  may  take
    place in Pakistan.  That, in my opinion, was a  serious  error  in  his
    reasoning and one which requires me to set aside his decision.   Having
    set aside the decision, I have remade it.  On the basis of the evidence
    which was before the First-tier Tribunal (Mr De Mello did  not  suggest
    to me that there had been any developments in this case since the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing) and in the light of my findings and observations
    above, I have concluded that family life may reasonably take  place  in
    Pakistan.  That finding defeats the appeal of the  appellant  on  human
    rights grounds.  In consequence, the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the ECO dated 28 July 2015 is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 3 March 2017  is
    set aside.  The Upper Tribunal has remade  the  decision.   The  appeal
    against the decision of the ECO dated 28 July 2015 is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 22 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 22 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
