
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04938/2015
     HU/04940/2015
     HU/04942/2015
     HU/04944/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30 June 2017                            |On 11 July 2017                |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                  [chand a]
                                 [sheetal a]
                                    [e a]
                                    [a a]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECRTARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Davison
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Oliver, promulgated on 16 November 2016. Although the  appellants  were
    represented before the judge, the respondent appears not to have  been.
    The four appellants comprise a family  unit:  mother,  father  and  two
    children.  They arrived in November of 2006 with visit visas valid  for
    one month and they overstayed, save for the fourth  appellant  who  was
    born during the period in  which  the  family  was  overstaying.   They
    sought leave to remain alleging human rights and other grounds, all  of
    which were rejected by the Secretary of State. The appeal  came  before
    the judge and was dismissed.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davis  on
    11 May 2017. It is not felicitously worded and appears contradictory as
    to  whether  or  not  permission  to  appeal  was  in   fact   granted.
    Nonetheless, I took  the  view  that  grant  of  permission  should  be
    presumed as regular and I proceeded to deal with  this  matter  on  the
    basis that the appellants may advance each of their stated grounds.

3.   The substantive ground argued before me relates to the failure  of  the
    judge to direct his mind to key issues which needed  to  be  determined
    and to make relevant findings of fact in relation to those key  issues.
    Paragraphs 16, 17 and 19 of what is a  somewhat  cursory  determination
    read as follows:

    "16. It was  held  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (decisions  affecting
         children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 that the  starting  point
         must be that it is in the best interest  of  the  children  are  to
         remain with  their  parents  on  return  their  family  life  would
         continue intact.  I have also had  to  consider  that  the  younger
         child now age 4 was born here and has never lived  in  India.   The
         older child who has the stronger case under the Rules was age 2  on
         arrival and falls in the fourth category "seven years from age 4 is
         likely to be more significant to a child than the first seven years
         of life".


    17.  The children's case to remain therefore rests on the older child's
         length of residence in the United Kingdom and the lack of  ties  of
         both to India which will make it difficult to initiate  those  ties
         and properly to learn the local language.


    ...


    19.      I equally reject the assertion that the  children  would  have
         difficulty in speaking and  understanding  Hindu  on  their  return
         since they must have  picked  up  some  fluency  in  hearing  their
         parents talk and they are of an age when they will be able  quickly
         to adapt the older child is now studying Punjabi.  While there  may
         be some advantages to the children remaining in the United  Kingdom
         their best interests are served by going with their parents. I find
         there are no very  significant  difficulties  with  their  parents'
         return to India and it is the children's  best  interests  and  not
         shown not to be reasonable  for  them  to  go  with  their  parents
         [sic]."

4.   The deficiencies with this cursory fact-finding  are  self-evident,  as
    was conceded by Mr Deller on the Secretary of State's behalf.   Amongst
    other things the judge has wrongly categorised the status of the  older
    child.  What is more, considerations of children's best interests  have
    been conflated into a short statement which does not take into  account
    the remaining issues which needed to be  determined  and  on  which  no
    factual findings made by the judge. This error of law is a  substantial
    flaw which undermines the entire basis of the decision.

5.   In those circumstances I  have  no  hesitation  in  setting  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   The  proper  course,  where  the
    findings are so flawed, is for the matter to be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for there to be a rehearing de novo and I so  order.   No
    findings of fact will be preserved.

6.   I should add, in the presence of the principal appellant (who  has  the
    benefit of an interpreter) that it may  well  be  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal when looking at the matter afresh comes to  exactly  the  same
    conclusion but as a matter of justice the appellants  are  entitled  to
    have their case  properly  heard,  with  rigorous  fact-finding  and  a
    judicial discretion properly exercised.



Notice of Decision

An error of law having been found, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
is set aside and the matter is remitted to be heard afresh by a judge  other
than Judge Oliver. No findings of fact are preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     10 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC







