
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/04034/2019 (V)

                                                           HU/02980/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 January 2021                 |On 27 January 2021                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            BALWINDER KAUR THIND

                           HARJASKARAN SINGH THIND

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

For the respondents:   Mr cc, instructed by Law and Lawyers Solicitors

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


1. For the purpose of this decision and in order to avoid confusion, I  have
   referred below to the parties as they were  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   appeal hearing.

2. The appellants are wife and  husband,  Indian  nationals  with  dates  of
   birth given as 2.6.78 and 14.8.77, respectively.

3. The respondent Secretary of State has appealed  with  permission  to  the
   Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal
   promulgated 13.1.20 (Judge Traynor),  allowing  the  appellants'  appeals
   against the decisions of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  30.1.99  and
   18.2.19, to refuse their respective applications for leave to  remain  in
   the UK on private and family life human rights grounds.

4. The first appellant applied on 24.4.18 for indefinite leave to remain  on
   the basis of 10 years' continuous lawful residence, pursuant to paragraph
   276B of the Immigration Rules. This was refused  as  the  10-year  period
   relied on had been broken by an invalid application  in  April  2009,  so
   that by the time the application was resubmitted in August 2009 her leave
   had expired.   The  application  was  further  refused  under  paragraphs
   276B(ii) and 322(5) on the basis of  irreconcilable  discrepancy  between
   declaration of income for the purpose of obtaining further leave and  her
   declaration of income to HMRC.

5. The respondent's decision  of  18.2.19  refused  the  second  appellant's
   human rights application  made  on  3.6.16  for  leave  to  remain  under
   Appendix  FM  family  life  with  the  first  appellant.  The  respondent
   considered that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
   continuing in India and no exceptional  circumstances  which  would  have
   rendered the refusal a breach of article 8 ECHR because of  unjustifiably
   harsh consequences.

6. At [43] of the decision, Judge Traynor agreed with  the  respondent  that
   there had been a break in the  continuity  of  residence,  rejecting  the
   first appellant's argument that the refusal was unfair. However, he found
   that she had provided  a  plausible  and  credible  explanation  for  the
   discrepancy in income declarations sufficient to  defeat  the  burden  of
   proof on the respondent  to  establish  dishonesty  for  the  purpose  of
   paragraphs 322(5) and 276B(ii). The judge also concluded at [45]  of  the
   decision that by the date of the appeal hearing in  September  2019,  and
   measuring from her valid application in August 2009, the first  appellant
   now met the 10 years' continuous lawful  residence  requirement,  a  fact
   accepted at the hearing by  the  Presenting  Officer  (see  [33]  of  the
   decision). In consequence of these findings,  the  judge  concluded  that
   refusal of  the  long  residence  application  was  disproportionate  and
   breached  the  appellants'  rights  under  article  8  ECHR.  The  second
   appellant's appeal was entirely dependent on that of the first appellant.
   In the premises, the appeals of both appellants  were  allowed  on  human
   rights grounds.

7. The grounds of application for  permission  to  appeal  submit  that  the
   First-tier Tribunal failed  to  make  a  finding  on  the  refusal  under
   paragraph 322(5). It is argued  that  the  respondent  did  not  fail  to
   discharge the burden of proof and that the first appellant only sought to
   regularise her tax affairs because she had been alerted to a pending Home
   Office enquiry as to the discrepancy. Inaccurate records  were  submitted
   with the consent  of  the  first  appellant.  The  judge  had  found  the
   appellant untruthful when  claiming  she  was  unaware  of  the  rejected
   invalid application and failed to provide any plausible explanation as to
   why it was not resubmitted earlier.

8. The respondent also argues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  provided  no
   reasoning for the finding that the first appellant's  circumstances  were
   complex and not credible that she would  sign-off  annual  accounts  with
   such a significant discrepancy.  "The  Tribunal  has  failed  to  make  a
   finding on whether the appellant signed off on  the  figures  and  it  is
   submitted that the Tribunal's acceptance is simply not rational."  It  is
   further argued that the Tribunal's assessment  failed  to  give  adequate
   consideration  to  the  appellant's  responsibilities  as  identified  at
   headnotes 4 and 5 of Khan, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State
   (dishonesty, tax return, paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 384  (IAC),  which
   held that it is not sufficient for an appellant to blame  the  accountant
   given that the accountant would or should  have  asked  the  taxpayer  to
   confirm the accuracy of the tax return. "If the applicant does  not  take
   steps within a reasonable time to remedy the situation, the Secretary  of
   State  may  be  entitled  to  conclude  that  this  failure  justifies  a
   conclusion that there has been deceit or dishonesty." Khan also sets  out
   a number of matters to be considered when deciding whether the  applicant
   was dishonest or merely careless.

9. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 31.3.20, on the basis that it is arguable that in respect  of
   the first ground, the judge "skates over certain aspects of the  evidence
   which are less than favourable to the  appellant".  In  relation  to  the
   second ground, the judge granting permission considered it arguable  that
   the  judge  "has  not  explained  why  it  has  simply   been   accepted,
   particularly in the light of the finding of dishonesty, why  blind  faith
   in one's accountant is seemingly acceptable and permissible to  discharge
   a burden."

10. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  compliance   with
   directions issued on 14.7.20, the Upper Tribunal has  also  received  the
   respondent's written submissions dated 29.7.20 and the appellants' reply,
   dated 30.7.20. I have taken both sets of submissions into account.

11. In large part the grounds amount to a  disagreement  with  the  findings
   and conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal and are poorly drafted,  as  Mr
   McVeety fairly conceded when I put my concerns to him. For example, it is
   argued in the grounds that the first appellant only sought to  regularise
   her affairs because she had been alerted that the Home  Office  would  be
   making enquiries as the discrepancy in income  declarations  stating,  "I
   submit that this proves that she only did so because she  had  to."  This
   was an  argument  advanced  and  clearly  identified  at  the  First-tier
   Tribunal appeal hearing, which the judge carefully considered at [41]  of
   the decision. However, at [42] the judge found that  the  respondent  had
   not provided evidence to demonstrate that the belated  regularisation  of
   her tax affairs was done in contemplation  of  the  respondent's  pending
   enquiries as to the discrepancy. The judge accepted the argument  of  the
   appellant's representative that the respondent's argument  was  based  on
   mere suspicion and not made out on the evidence.

12. In oral submissions Mr McVeety pointed to the  appellant's  inconsistent
   explanations as recorded by  the  judge  at  [38]  of  the  decision  and
   asserted that at [42] of the decision the judge was in error  in  stating
   that the appellant "has always explained" the source of  the  discrepancy
   as being  in  consequence  of  expenses  being  accounted  for  over  two
   accounting periods. Whilst I agree it is not accurate that the  appellant
   "has always explained" the discrepancy in  this  way,  having  previously
   cited the distraction of health and financial problems, it is clear  that
   the judge gave careful consideration to all the  arguments  advanced  and
   reached findings open on the evidence.

13. The fact that the  first  appellant  had  been  found  not  truthful  in
   relation to events surrounding  the  payment  of  fees  for  her  Tier  1
   application was, obviously, relevant and taken into consideration by  the
   First-tier Tribunal. However, it does not necessarily follow that because
   she was dishonest about one aspect, she was also to be disbelieved  about
   the rectification of her tax affairs.

14. The judge was aware and took into account  the  guidance  in  Khan,  the
   headnote of which was set out in full at [39] of the decision. The  judge
   there confirmed that the competing arguments had been considered  in  the
   light of the guidance in Khan. At [41] the judge summarised the  position
   that the determination of the appeals "boil down to whether or not I find
   there is evidence which is both cogent  and  compelling  to  support  the
   respondent's  suspicion  that  the  first  appellant  has  acted   either
   deceitfully or dishonestly."

15. Applying Khan, the judge considered the competing arguments,  ultimately
   accepting at [43] of the decision  that  the  appellant  had  provided  a
   plausible and credible reason for the discrepancy. The  judge  considered
   that there was no reason why the first appellant would under-declare  her
   income when no other year disclosed such a discrepancy, stating  "I  find
   that this, of itself, is compelling evidence which supports the plausible
   explanation given that any discrepancy in regard to  the  subsequent  tax
   return arose as a consequence of expense payments covering two  financial
   accounting periods, " the explanation being that proffered by  the  first
   appellant's accountants, as set out at [42] of the decision.

16. The second ground, alleging a failure to provide adequate  reasoning  is
   a recasting of the first ground and adds little. The  arguments  in  this
   ground are nothing more than that, arguments which fail to  identify  any
   error of law rather than a mere disagreement with the decision.

17. Contrary to the written submissions which largely  mirror  the  grounds,
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not fail to make a  decision
   on the "relevance of  paragraph  322(5)".  It  is  this  paragraph  which
   exercised the judge's careful consideration  in  the  more  part  of  the
   impugned decision.

18.  I  agree  with  the  appellants'  reply  to  the  respondent's  written
   submissions, that they amount to a series of submissions,  all  of  which
   were put before the First-tier Tribunal appeal  hearing,  and  that  they
   fail to 'pinpoint' a material error of law. On a reading of the  decision
   as a whole, I am satisfied that the decision discloses no such  error  as
   claimed by the respondent. Whilst a different judge may  have  reached  a
   different conclusion on the evidence and  as  to  the  first  appellant's
   credibility, it cannot be said that the findings made were  not  open  to
   the judge on the  evidence  and  for  which  cogent  reasoning  has  been
   provided. The decision was neither perverse nor irrational.  All  of  the
   arguments now advanced by the respondent were  carefully  considered  and
   determined.

19. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

      The appeal of the respondent to the First-tier Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands, and the appeal of each
      appellant remains allowed on human rights grounds.

      I make no order for costs.

      I make no anonymity direction.




Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       13 January 2021

