
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04810/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 October 2020                    |On 8 October 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                    A j j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Record, Counsel (direct access)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  His date of birth  is  10  July
    1984.  He made an application for leave to remain based on  his  family
    life here.  This application was refused by the Secretary of  State  on
    18 September 2018.  The Appellant appealed.  His appeal  was  dismissed
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker in a decision dated 24
    October 2019 which was promulgated the same day, following a hearing at
    Taylor House on 29 August 2019.

 2. The judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction. There
    is no reason for me to interfere with this. I make  an  order  that  it
    continues.

 3. Permission was granted to the Appellant to appeal against the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker by  Tribunal Judge Kamara on 6 July
    2020.   Thus, the matter came before me to  decide  whether  the  judge
    erred.

The history

 4. The Appellant came to the UK on 4 September 2004, having  been  granted
    leave as a student until 31 October 2008.  He made an  application  for
    leave to remain as the spouse of a settled person  on  21  April  2008.
    This application was rejected  on  30  April  2008.   He  made  another
    application for leave to remain as the spouse of a settled person on  2
    May 2008.  This  application  was  granted  until  13  May  2010.   The
    Appellant made an application on human rights grounds on 17  May  2010.
    His application was rejected  on  27  May  2010.The  Appellant  made  a
    further application on 17 February 2015.  He was granted leave  outside
    of the Rules until 1 November 2017.  He made an  application  on  human
    rights grounds on 30 October 2017 based on his  relationship  with  his
    children. The application was refused by the Secretary of State  on  18
    September 2018. The Respondent  decided  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided evidence to support his claim  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his children.  The Respondent did not accept that the
    Appellant met E-LTRPT.2.4 or  EX1.1. of Appendix FM.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The Appellant's children are both British citizens.  His eldest  child,
    'JJ,' was born on 13 February 2011 and his second child, "KJ", was born
    on 5 June 2012.  Both children are qualifying children for the purposes
    of EX1.1 and s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  Their mother, "NW," is also British citizen.

 6. It was  the  Appellant's  case  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
    although he had a problematic relationship with NW, he  is  now  living
    with her and his children in the family home.   He was unable to submit
    documentary evidence (with his application) of  his  relationship  with
    his children because NW refused to provide it because of ill feeling on
    her part, at that time.  His children are aged 8 and 7.  He  cares  for
    them. He collects them from  school,  he  is  listed  as  an  emergency
    contact at their schools, he cooks for them, helps them  with  homework
    and plays with them.

 7. The Appellant and NW  gave  oral  evidence.  The  judge  made  findings
    starting at paragraphs 30 -53.  The judge accepted  that  the  children
    are the biological children of the Appellant.  They have never been  to
    Nigeria, they are both at school age and  doing  well  at  school.  The
    judge concluded that it would be unreasonable for the children to leave
    the UK.

 8. The judge said that the Appellant has not provided sufficient  evidence
    to show that he is taking an active role in the children's  upbringing.
    At paragraph 32 he said that the only document  that  he  has  provided
    which shows any connection between himself and the children is a letter
    from his GP dated 20 August 2019.  This states that the Appellant is  a
    registered patient at the practice  and  that  the  children  are  also
    registered there.  The judge said that there is  no  evidence  to  show
    when the Appellant became registered  at  the  practice  and  there  is
    nothing that shows that the Appellant has had  prior  involvement  with
    any health problems experienced by his children.

 9. The judge considered that there was no mention of the Appellant in JJ's
    school report.  There was nothing from the  school  to  show  that  the
    Appellant is named as an emergency contact or that he had ever attended
    parents' evenings or had any involvement in the children's education at
    all.  The judge considered nine photographs which  show  the  Appellant
    with his children. They were not dated and there was no evidence  about
    when and where they were taken. Some  were,  according  to  the  judge,
    "clearly taken on the same occasion".  The judge  concluded  that  they
    show the  Appellant  with  his  children  on  four  or  five  different
    occasions.

10. That was, according to the judge, the sum of documentary evidence  that
    connects the Appellant with his children.  The judge said there was  no
    independent evidence and no evidence from other family members.

11. The judge found at paragraph  34  "had  the  Appellant  genuinely  been
    taking an active  role  in  the  children's  upbringing  I  would  have
    expected to see evidence from, for example, their school  -  especially
    as in his witness statement the Appellant says  that  he  is  known  at
    their school ...".

12. The judge rejected the Appellant's evidence that he lives with  NW  and
    the children.  The judge set  out  the  clear  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence at paragraph 36 onwards.  The judge at paragraph 41  concluded
    that "given that the Appellant's case is that he has lived at the  same
    address as [NW] since 2011 the amount of documentary  evidence  he  has
    produced to show his address is surprisingly scant".

13. The judge at paragraph 42 said that there  was  no  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's employer relating to his address and there were no  council
    tax bills showing the Appellant to  be  living  with.   There  were  no
    utility bills or correspondence of any kind from any earlier  than  May
    2019.  The judge concluded in the final sentence at paragraph 42  "this
    is far less than I would expect to see if the Appellant  had  genuinely
    been living with [NW] for eight years as claimed."

14. The judge at paragraph 43 referred to the "numerous inconsistencies" in
    the evidence and the "extraordinary  paucity  of  documentary  evidence
    produced by the  Appellant.   The  judge  found  that  this  "seriously
    damaged" the Appellant's credibility.

15. The judge found that when considering the documents relied  on  by  the
    Appellant in order to establish a connection with his children and  the
    family's address, they postdate the decision of the Secretary of  State
    and the judge found that they  "could  have  been  obtained  simply  to
    support his case".  The judge considered the  documentary  evidence  in
    the light of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 00439.  The judge concluded  as
    follows:-

          "Balancing the evidence carefully in this case  I  find  that  the
         numerous weaknesses and  inconsistencies  that  I  have  identified
         render the Appellant's account incredible and outweigh the possible
         reliability of those documents which have been produced".

16. The judge found at paragraph 44 that the  Appellant  and  NW  were  not
    credible witnesses.  The judge was not satisfied that the Appellant  is
    actively involved in his children's upbringing.  At  paragraph  44  the
    judge said:-

          "I also do not accept that he provides care for  the  children  at
         home as claimed in his witness statement.  I  accept  that  he  may
         occasionally  take  them  to  the  park  to  play  football  or  to
         McDonalds, or for outings as shown in the photographs, but that  is
         all".

17. The judge concluded that the Appellant was not taking an active role in
    his children's upbringing and therefore  he  was  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of E-LTRPT.2.4.(b). He could therefore could not meet  the
    Immigration Rules.

18. The judge went on to consider Section 55 of the 2009 Act  and  assessed
    the children's best interests to  be  to  continue  living  with  their
    mother because the Appellant's involvement in their lives is limited to
    occasional visits.  The judge said at paragraph 46:

         "Whilst I accept that the Appellant's removal would have an  impact
         on his children, given the limited nature of his involvement, I  am
         not satisfied that his removal to Nigeria would cause either him or
         them any unjustifiably harsh consequences.   I  am,  not  satisfied
         that this appeal should  be  allowed  under  paragraph  GEN.3.2  of
         Appendix FM."

19. The judge went  to  consider  Article  8  outside  of  the  Rules  with
    attention to Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act.   He  identified  the
    remaining question which was whether there is a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship between the  Appellant  and  his  children.   The
    judge said at paragraph 48 that he was mindful of the decision in  SSHD
    and VC (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 1967 where it was held that to  have
    a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" the parent must have a
    "subsisting" role in personally providing  at  least  some  element  of
    direct parental care to the child.

20. The judge said as follows at paragraph 49:-

         "49. I accept that,  as  is  made  clear  by  the  decision  of  SR
             (subsisting parental relationship - S117B(6)  Pakistan  [2018]
             UKUT 0034, even if a parent has been unable to demonstrate for
             the purposes of the roles that they have been taking an active
             role in a child's upbringing, they still might have a  genuine
             and subsisting parental relationship with them.  However,  the
             case also makes it clear that in order for this  to  be  case,
             there must be an element of direct parental care of  the  kind
             referred to in VC (Sri Lanka).

         50.  In my  judgment  and  for  the  reasons  set  out  above,  the
             Appellant has failed to show the necessary degree of  parental
             care to establish that he has such a  genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship  with  his  children.   That  being  so,
             Section 117B(6) does not apply to him."

    The judge noted at paragraph 51 that it was  not  advanced  before  him
    that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with NW; however,  in
    any event he was not satisfied that there was such a relationship.  The
    Appellant's case was not advanced on private life grounds  and  in  any
    event the judge found  that  there  were  no  obstacles  to  return  to
    Nigeria.

The Grounds of Appeal

21. Ground 1 asserts that the judge made an  error  when  assessing  family
    life.  It is argued that there was enough evidence on  the  balance  of
    probabilities to show that the Appellant lived  with  his  partner  and
    children.  Given that the application was made in time and the children
    are settled and at school it was disproportionate and not in the public
    interest to require relocation.

22. Ground 2 asserts that the judge erred when considering the position  of
    the children because there was evidence from both the Appellant and  NW
    that the Appellant has contact with his  children  which  was  evidence
    that the judge accepted.  NW's evidence in her  witness  statement  was
    that the children loved their father and would suffer should he  return
    to Nigeria.  It is asserted  that  at  paragraph  44  where  the  judge
    accepted, amongst other things, that  the  Appellant  may  occasionally
    take the children to the park, it is not clear to the reader  what  the
    judge intended by the word occasionally.

23. The judge did not take into account the evidence when  considering  the
    best interests of the children.  There  was  evidence  of  contact  and
    evidence that the children have a bond with their father.  The  grounds
    assert that there was enough  evidence  that  the  Appellant  sees  his
    children even if the judge's decision that he does not live  with  them
    is sustainable.

24. Ms Record expanded in the grounds of appeal in oral submissions.

The Rule 24 Response

25. The First-tier Tribunal clearly recorded all the  documentary  evidence
    produced by the Appellant at paragraphs 41 and 42 of the  determination
    and notably the grounds do not state that there were further  documents
    that the judge did not consider. The judge clearly notes (a  point  the
    grounds fail to refer to) that all the documentary evidence  post-dated
    the Respondent's refusal letter. Additionally, the  Appellant,  despite
    allegedly living at the same address as his "partner" failed to receive
    letters sent from the Home Office to that address.

26. The FTTJ was entitled to hold  that  the  major  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence of the witnesses (paragraphs 38 & 39  of  the  determination),
    and the absence  of  any  documentary  evidence  to  show  cohabitation
    demonstrated that the Appellant was not in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the children or his "partner".

27. Mr  Melvin  made  oral  submissions  in  the  context  of  the  written
    submissions.

Error of Law

28. Ground 1 does not properly identify an arguable error of law.  It is an
    attempt to reargue the case. It lists several  disagreements  with  the
    decision of the judge.  The judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant  and  NW  were  not  credible.   The   judge   identifies   a
    considerable number of inconsistencies in  their  evidence  as  regards
    where the  Appellant  was  living  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  and
    throughout the eight- year period when the couple said that  they  were
    living together.  The judge was entitled to conclude that the Appellant
    was not living with NW and their  children.   There  was  a  dearth  of
    evidence as properly identified by the judge.  Whilst  there  may  have
    been a reason why evidence was not available to the Secretary of State,
    there was no reasonable explanation given to explain why  the  evidence
    was not forthcoming by the time of the appeal before Judge Walker.

29. The judge was entitled to conclude that the Appellant did not meet  the
    relationship requirements because he was unable to  establish  that  he
    was taking and intended to continue to  take  an  active  role  in  the
    children's upbringing.

30. The Upper Tribunal in SR (subsisting parental relationship -  S117B(6))
    (Pakistan) [2018] UKUT in respect of this requirement  of  E-LTRPT  2.4
    said as follows:

         "25. ... In order for a parent to meet the requirements of (b), all
             the particular facts will need to be considered in the  round,
             including inter alia: the age, and if appropriate  the  wishes
             and feelings of the child; the nature and extent of the direct
             and indirect contact between parent and child;  its  duration;
             whether the parent  has  'parental  responsibility'  and;  the
             nature and extent of the role played  in  decision-making  for
             the child and his/her upbringing."

31. Whilst there was contact between the Appellant and his  children  there
    was simply no evidence to support a conclusion that the  Appellant  was
    taking an "active role  in  the  child's  upbringing".   There  was  no
    evidence available to the First-tier Tribunal that  the  Appellant  was
    involved in any of the important decisions relating to  the  children's
    upbringing.    I am satisfied that the judge did not make an  error  of
    law as regards this aspect of the Immigration Rules.

32. As properly identified by the judge this test (taking and intending  to
    continue to take an active role in the children's upbringing) does  not
    need to be satisfied to meet the requirements of Section 117B(6) of the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002;   namely  that   the
    Appellant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child.  He found against the Appellant despite  there  being
    evidence of a relationship between  the  Appellant  and  his  children.
    There is an unequivocal finding by the judge at paragraph 44 that there
    is a relationship between the Appellant and  his  children.  While  the
    judge found that the evidence  established  that  contact  between  the
    Appellant and the children was  occasional  and  recently  established,
    there is no finding made by the judge that the Appellant has  cynically
    manipulated a relationship with his children after the decision  solely
    bolster his case. Mr Melvin accepted this much.   If  the  judge  found
    this to be the case, he should have made clear findings.

33. The judge found against the Appellant because he and NW  had  not  been
    honest about their relationship. While the evidence  before  the  judge
    did not establish that there had been a consistent relationship, at the
    date of the hearing  there  was  evidence  that  established  that  the
    Appellant saw his children - he took them to the park, to McDonalds and
    played football with them. This was supported by photographic evidence.
    This much was accepted by the judge. While the judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the Appellant and NW were not been credible  about  their
    relationship, he did not  make  clearly  reasoned  findings  about  his
    relationship with  the  children.  The  judge  said  that  contact  was
    occasional but  did  not  elaborate  further.  It  is  not  clear  what
    occasional means in this context.

34. The Appellant at paragraph  3  of  his  witness  statement  and  NW  at
    paragraphs 7 and 8 of her witness statement both  describe  a  fatherly
    relationship between the Appellant and his two young  sons.  The  judge
    did not explain why a biological father who  does  not  live  with  his
    children but has a relationship with them and  sees  them  occasionally
    does not have a genuine or subsisting relationship for the purposes  of
    s117B (6).  Without countervailing evidence it is difficult to see  how
    the judge came to the conclusion that it would be in the children' best
    interests to remain in the United Kingdom with their mother and  to  be
    separated from their father with whom they have a  relationship  albeit
    that contact was described as occasional.

35. The judge's decision in respect  of  the  children  is  flawed.  It  is
    inadequately reasoned.  I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  judge  to
    dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

36. There was no further evidence relied on by the Appellant that  was  not
    before the First-tier Tribunal. The parties agreed that I could  go  on
    and make the decision on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

37. It is possible to have a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with a child, in cases where contact has only recently resumed and when
    contact is on a limited basis and for that relationship not to  include
    the parent playing an active role in the child's  upbringing.   In  the
    Secretary of State v VC [2017] EWCA  Civ  1967  at  [42]  McFarlane  LJ
    accepted the submission that the requirement to establish whether  "the
    person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a  child"  albeit
    for another part of the Immigration Rules, namely 399(a), contains four
    elements;

         "(a) a relationship between the child and the foreign criminal;

         (b)  which is 'parental', rather than of some other kind;

         (c)  the relationship must be 'genuine'; and

         (d)  the relationship must be 'subsisting' (in the  sense  that  it
             exists or has a real existence)' and that simply to  establish
             biological parentage is insufficient - there must be a genuine
             existing parental relationship."

38. The Appellant has not submitted further evidence about the frequency of
    contact with his children; however, this  must  be  considered  in  the
    context that his evidence is that he lives with  them.   This  was  not
    accepted by the judge.   The  judge  described  contact  as  occasional
    without any explanation of what this means.

39. There is evidence which establishes that the relationship goes beyond a
    biological link. The judge's findings at paragraph 44 support this.  It
    is not a matter of the Appellant having any unpleasant  characteristics
    that would prevent him from having a healthy parental relationship.  In
    the light of the evidence of contact and the findings of the judge,   I
    am satisfied that the level of  contact  the  Appellant  has  with  his
    children is sufficient to establish that it is in their best  interests
    for their father to remain in the UK and to continue to see them. There
    are no countervailing circumstances that would suggest otherwise.   The
    children's  best  interests  are  a  primary   though   not   paramount
    consideration when assessing proportionality.

40. I conclude that the evidence of photographs and  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and NW establishes that the Appellant's relationship with his
    children is a genuine and subsisting parental relationship. While  they
    were not credible about their own relationship and  the  case  advanced
    before the First-tier Tribunal  was exaggerated, it is difficult to see
    (in the absence of a finding  that  the  Appellant  has  manipulated  a
    relationship with his children  to  bolster  his  case)  why  NW  would
    support  the  Appellant's  appeal  in  the  absence   of   a   parental
    relationship from which her children would benefit.

41. The First-tier Tribunal  focused  on  the  Appellant's  credibility  in
    respect of his relationship with  NW  and  where  he  was  living,  but
    neither of these issues is determinative of the issue in respect of his
    children.  It  may  have  been  a  recently  resumed   or   established
    relationship which would explain the lack  of  historic  evidence,  but
    nevertheless the evidence was sufficient to  establish  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his children.

42. I find that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his children. Considering all  the  circumstances,  I
    find that it would not be reasonable to expect the  children  to  leave
    the United Kingdom. The appeal is allowed under Article 8.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 5 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

