
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04633/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th December 2016                          |On 5th January 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                          mr Hashmatulloh Ibrahimi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton (Senior PO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on 10th
    May 1979.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the Respondent dated against him on the basis that his  presence  in
    the UK is conducive to the public good.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hawden-
    Beal and promulgated on 16th June 2016.

 3. At paragraphs 32 and 33 the judge  noted  the  Appellant's  immigration
    history, as one where he came to the UK in 2001,  claimed  asylum,  was
    granted exceptional leave to remain  until  2005,  following  which  he
    applied for ILR,  which  was  granted  in  2007,  even  though  he  had
    conditions going back to 2003 and then how it was that  the  Respondent
    attempted to deport the Appellant, but that in 2010 it  was  considered
    that it would breach his family life with his  then  wife.   The  judge
    observed that the Appellant had a new relationship, and in spite of his
    previous imprisonment, which put him at risk of an  early  deportation,
    he went on to commit two further offences,

         "The most recent of which was just below the so serious level so as
         to merit a custodial sentence.  He would have been well aware, from
         his previous experience, how the Respondent views such actions  and
         therefore cannot have been surprised when she did sign an order for
         his deportation" (paragraph 33).

 4. The Grounds of Appeal, inter  alia,  assert  that  the  judge  did  not
    consider whether or not it would be unduly harsh to expect  either  the
    Appellant's partner, or his  son  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    Appellant, and no proper consideration was given  to  the  impact  upon
    these persons of the loss of family life with the Appellant.  The judge
    also misunderstood the assessment of risk of  recidivism  given  in  an
    expert report.  The judge categorised it as moderate whereas the report
    is said to have placed it at low and it was arguable that  this  tended
    to escalate the level of risk which otherwise was set out in the expert
    report.

 5. On 10th October 2016, permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and on 1st November 2016, a Rule 24 response was  entered
    by the Respondent whereby it was asserted that the judge had considered
    the relationship, the immigration history, and  the  offending  of  the
    Appellant and was satisfied that it was in the public interest that the
    Appellant be deported back to Afghanistan.

 6. At the hearing before me on 9th December 2016, Mr  Pipe,  appearing  as
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, relied upon the detailed Grounds of
    Appeal and submitted that he  would  wish  to  lay  emphasis  on  three
    specific matters.  First, in the assessment of whether the impact  upon
    the wife and child of the Appellant would be unduly  harsh,  the  judge
    had failed to take into account how  his  separation  from  them  would
    affect them.  The judge had accepted  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the Appellant and his wife  and  child.
    At paragraph 24 she  had  stated  that  she  was  satisfied  that  "the
    Appellant does have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
    his son.  I find that he does live with his son, bathes and  feeds  him
    and plays a role in his life" (paragraph 24).

 7. Given that the Appellant was clearly heavily involved  in  his  child's
    welfare and upbringing it was incumbent upon the judge to consider  the
    impact of the Appellant's removal upon his child.   Indeed,  the  judge
    had observed that, "I find that it is unduly harsh  for  the  child  to
    live in Afghanistan" but that "it is clear that the  Appellant  is  not
    the only person who can care for his son" (paragraph 24).

 8. Furthermore, the case of Makhlouf [2016] UKSC had seen Lord Kerr  state
    (at paragraph 40) that missing out upon one's ethnic background  was  a
    relevant consideration  in  circumstances  where  the  child  has  dual
    British and Afghan heritage.  Lord Kerr had referred  to  "dual  ethnic
    background". The judge had found (at paragraph 25)  that  there  was  a
    general relationship with the Appellant's partner, and yet  had  failed
    to go on to  consider  the  impact  of  his  removal  on  his  partner.
    Moreover, the  Appellant's  previous  appeal  against  deportation  was
    allowed (see paragraph 29) and his conviction then had  only  been  for
    relatively minor traffic offences, and he had gone on to  commit  minor
    offences again.  Second, there was the expert report of Lisa Davies (at
    paragraph 31) and the Grounds of Appeal noted (at paragraph 8) how  the
    judge had misquoted this report by Lisa Davies  who  had  regarded  the
    Appellant's risk of reoffending as being low,  as  being  at  a  higher
    threshold of "moderate", but this is unsupported by the  expert  report
    (see paragraph 10.5 of  the  expert  report).   Third,  there  was  the
    question of the  "best  interests"  of  the  child  and  the  requisite
    assessment therein.  There is no separate assessment made  in  relation
    to the child at paragraph 24 and no proper assessment of the impact  of
    the removal on the child.

 9. For his part, Mr Norton submitted that Grounds  1  and  3  really  come
    together because they both refer to how it  is  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant to be removed in terms of  the  impact  of  that  removal  on
    partner and the child.  However, the judge had stated (at paragraph 34)
    that, "it is unduly harsh to expect his partner and son to relocate  to
    Afghanistan but not unduly harsh for them to remain in the  UK  without
    him", on the basis that none of the exceptions  mentioned  above  apply
    here, and the judge was entitled to come to  this  conclusion.   Whilst
    the Grounds of Appeal made reference to the  assistance  of  a  British
    child, it was clear that this did not prevent deportation taking  place
    of the Appellant.

10. This is because in deportation cases the  public  interest  element  is
    significantly greater in relation to  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control than it is in other removal cases.  As  far  as  Ground  2  was
    concerned, the expert report made  a  clear  finding  (at  page  45  of
    section B) that there is a moderate risk of future  offending  and  the
    judge had stated (at paragraph 31) that the expert, Lisa Davies,

         "Is of the opinion that the Appellant is a moderate risk of  future
         general (non-violent) offending which reduces to a low level if  he
         continues to abstain from alcohol.   He  is  also  a  low  risk  of
         violent reoffending, intimate partner violence and of serious  harm
         to the public".

11. The judge was entitled to come to  this  conclusion.   Indeed,  if  one
    looks at the earlier deportation order against the Appellant,  at  page
    13 onwards, but especially at paragraph 81, the  Tribunal  accepted  in
    2001 that the Appellant was at low risk.

12. Here, however, the judge was correct to say  that  following  his  more
    recent offences, the Appellant could no longer be seen as being at  low
    risk of reoffending,  but  that  his  risk  had  escalated  because  he
    continues to offend, albeit with community sentencing.   All  of  these
    conclusions were open to the judge.

13. In reply, Mr Pipe submitted that one must not lose sight  of  the  fact
    that Grounds 1 and 3 are pivotal in asserting that the material  lacuna
    in the judge's determination was the failure to assess  the  impact  of
    the removal on  the  child  and  the  partner.   First,  the  judge  at
    paragraph 24 did not deal with the impact on  the  child.   Second,  at
    paragraph 26 the judge did not deal with impact on the partner.  As far
    as risk is concerned, the expert does refer to there  being  "moderate"
    risk, but this is not an escalation of risk, and it was  wrong  of  the
    judge to construe it as such.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside  the  decision.   This  is  for  the
    following reasons.  First, the judge did not consider whether it  would
    be unduly harsh to expect either the Appellant's partner or his son  to
    remain in the United Kingdom without the Appellant.  There is  no  such
    assessment either at paragraph 24 or paragraph 26 of the determination.
     There appears to have  been  inadequate  consideration  given  to  the
    impact upon both the Appellant's partner and his son  of  the  loss  of
    family life to them were the Appellant  to  be  deported.   Second,  in
    terms of future risk, what this involves is an assessment of  the  risk
    of recidivism, and this is addressed in  the  expert  report,  and  the
    expert  assessed  this  as  being  at  "low"  level  but  the   judge's
    interpretation of this (at paragraphs 31 to 33) is that  the  Appellant
    presents a moderate risk of future general  offending  in  a  way  that
    suggests an escalation of the previous risk of reoffending.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision by  applying  paragraph  7.2  of  the
Practice Statement because this is a case where  this  matter  needs  to  be
returned to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge  other  than
Judge Hawden-Beal in that the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding
which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  remade  is
such that it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
The appeal is allowed to that extent.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 4th January 2017

