
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04471/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 October 2020                   |On 20 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               GHAZALA QAYYUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, instructed by MA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection  from
the parties. The form of remote hearing was Skype for business.  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. In addition to the  above-mentioned
parties, the sponsor was present, remotely.

The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 6  September  1987.  She  has
been given permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
her application for entry clearance.

The appellant applied on 17 August 2018 for entry  clearance  to  settle  in
the UK under Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  of  her
family life with  her  spouse  and  children.  The  respondent  refused  the
application on 30 January 2019 on the grounds that  the  appellant  did  not
meet the eligibility financial requirement of paragraphs  E-ECP.3.1  to  3.4
since her husband was unemployed and no evidence had been produced  to  show
that he was exempt from the financial requirement. Although it  was  claimed
that he was unable to work due to medical conditions, none of  the  benefits
he  received  were  ones  which  led  to  exemption   from   the   financial
requirement. The respondent did not consider there  to  be  any  exceptional
circumstances rendering the decision a breach of Article  8.  That  decision
was maintained on an entry clearance manager review.

The appellant appealed the refusal decision and  her  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence on 12  November  2019.  The  sponsor,
the appellant's husband, gave evidence before the judge.  On  the  basis  of
evidence produced by the sponsor at the hearing confirming that he  was  now
in receipt of a state benefit, Personal Independence Payment (PIP),  it  was
accepted  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  on  behalf   of   the
respondent, that the appellant was exempt from the financial requirement  in
E-ECP.3.1 of Appendix FM. However, the judge agreed  with  the  Home  Office
Presenting Officer that the appellant had failed  to  produce  any  evidence
showing that the family unit would be accommodated  and  maintained  without
recourse to public funds. He accorded no weight to  a  letter  offering  the
appellant a job in the UK and found that there was otherwise no evidence  of
the family being able to maintain itself without  public  funds.  The  judge
found no evidence of compelling circumstances outside the immigration  rules
and dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 5 December 2019.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  appellant  on
various grounds, namely that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  evidence
before him in regard to  adequate  accommodation  and  maintenance  and  had
instead taken account of immaterial considerations, and that the  judge  had
failed to give proper consideration to the best interests of the children.

Permission was refused in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  was  subsequently
granted in the Upper Tribunal on 6 June 2020, on all grounds.

At the hearing Mr Clarke conceded that the grounds were made out in  respect
of the judge's assessment of the best interests of the children and he  also
conceded that the judge had erred by failing to take account of  a  property
report relating to the sponsor's  accommodation  which  was  in  the  appeal
bundle before him. He did not, however, concede that  the  grounds  relating
to the judge's findings on the adequacy of  maintenance  under  the  finance
requirements of the immigration rules had been made out.

In light of Mr Clarke's concession, Mr Solomon only  addressed  the  judge's
findings on maintenance and submitted that he had failed properly to  engage
with the issue and had failed to consider  relevant  documents  before  him,
such as bank statements. He submitted further that the judge had  failed  to
give proper consideration to the job offer letter and had  given  inadequate
reasons for according it no weight, and that he  had  taken  account  of  an
irrelevant  matter,  namely  GEN.1.11A  of  Appendix  FM,  which   was   not
applicable. The  judge  ought  to  have  found  that  the  family  would  be
adequately maintained through the benefits received by the  sponsor  and  by
the income from the job offered to the appellant and that, in any event  the
best interests of the children were such that  the  application  could  have
succeeded on Article 8 grounds outside the rules.

Mr Clarke, in response, submitted that on the limited  evidence  before  him
and the limited arguments made on behalf of the  appellant,  the  judge  was
entitled to find that the appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  that  the
family would be adequately maintained and was  entitled  to  accord  limited
weight to the job offer letter. However, he invited  me  to  find  that  the
judge had otherwise materially erred in law such that his decision ought  to
be set aside and the decision re-made.  Mr  Clarke  accepted  that,  in  re-
making the decision, even if Judge Lawrence's findings on  maintenance  were
to be preserved, the Tribunal would still need to revisit  the  question  of
maintenance on the facts available at the date of the hearing.  Accordingly,
he accepted that the appeal needed to  be  heard  afresh  and  both  parties
agreed that a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal was the  most  appropriate
course.

In light of the concessions made by Mr Clarke, I agree that  Judge  Lawrence
made material errors of law in his decision to the extent that the  decision
has to be re-made de novo, with fresh  findings  of  fact.  I  consider  the
errors to be such that none of the judge's findings can be preserved.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard afresh before any judge aside from Judge NMK Lawrence.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 13 October 2020
