

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: HU/04385/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 December 2018                 |On 20 December 2018                |
|                                    |                                   |
|                                    |                                   |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL

                                   Between

                                 Master S H
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel (Direct access)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




      1.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 25 October 2018 against the  decision
           to dismiss the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR appeal made by  First-
           tier Tribunal Judge Khawar in a decision and reasons promulgated
           on 29 June 2018.  The Appellant is a national of  Bangladesh,  a
           minor who had sought entry clearance  to  join  his  father  and
           sponsor who had migrated to  the  United  Kingdom  and  was  now
           settled.


      2.    Judge Khawar heard the appeal  in  the  sponsor's  absence,  the
           sponsor having failed without good reason to attend.  The  judge
           went on  to  find  that  the  paternal  relationship  relied  on
           (questioned by the Entry Clearance Officer) was not conclusively
           proved by the DNA evidence or birth certificate produced.  There
           was no Article 8 ECHR disproportionality in such  circumstances.
           Hence the appeal was dismissed.


      3.    The late permission to appeal application was refused on all  of
           the procedural fairness grounds which had been advanced (alleged
           absence of notice of the hearing), but  time  was  extended  and
           permission was granted because it was considered  arguable  that
           the judge had made speculative comments on the DNA evidence when
           dismissing the appeal.


      4.    Mr Khan for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  submitted  and
           the grant of permission to appeal.  The  judge  had  speculated.
           In fact the Appellant had been born  prematurely.   The  sponsor
           had tried to reunite his family at the earliest opportunity, but
           the Appellant's mother had had to return to Bangladesh  to  take
           care of the Appellant.  If the sponsor had known of  the  appeal
           hearing he could have dealt with the issues which the judge  had
           raised.  The DNA  report  was  reputable,  from  Kings  College,
           London and there was no suggestion by  the  Secretary  of  State
           that it could not be relied upon.  Since the First-tier Tribunal
           hearing a further DNA report had been  obtained  from  Cellmark,
           slightly differently worded,  which  also  proved  the  paternal
           relationship.  It was a difficult situation for the  family  who
           should not have to make another entry clearance application with
           the delay  and  expense  which  would  inevitably  arise.   Post
           hearing DNA evidence should be admitted to enable justice to  be
           done: see Anderson v Spencer [2018] EWCA Civ 100, where this had
           been permitted. The appeal should be allowed  and  the  decision
           remade in the Appellant's favour.


      5.    Mr Lindsay for the Respondent informed the tribunal that he  was
           instructed that the appeal could not be conceded in the light of
           the fresh DNA evidence.  There was no material error of  law  in
           the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination   and   the   judge's
           observations had all been proper.  The Appellant had the  option
           of making a fresh entry clearance application and there  was  no
           pressing reason for any other approach.   The appeal  should  be
           dismissed.


      8.    The grant of permission to appeal was in the tribunal's  view  a
           somewhat generous one.   The procedural fairness issues had been
           carefully  considered  before  permission  to  appeal  on  those
           grounds was refused.  There had been no renewed  application  to
           the Upper Tribunal on procedural fairness grounds.   That  meant
           that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  been  right  to  proceed
           with the hearing in the Appellant's sponsor's absence.


      9.    In the tribunal's judgment the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
           guarded against speculation when considering  the  DNA  evidence
           which went to the questioned paternal relationship  issue.   The
           problem was that the  DNA  report,  although  from  a  reputable
           source, had left open a plausible alternative father, which  was
           highly relevant given the obvious problem with  the  birth  date
           and the period of the sponsor's declared presence in Bangladesh.
             The sponsor's absence  from  the  hearing  without  sufficient
           reason meant that the judge was left to do  the  best  he  could
           with the evidence before him.


      10.   The  latest  DNA  report  (also  from  a  reputable  source)  is
           significantly more positive than the original report.  That  for
           present purposes only serves to underline the sound basis of the
           First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  conclusions.   The  tribunal  has
           considered whether the latest  report  should  be  admitted  and
           treated as a reason  to  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
           decision in the interests of justice, with reference to Anderson
           v Spencer (above).   Apart  from  the  problem  that  the  Upper
           Tribunal  is  a  creature  of  statute  and  has   no   inherent
           jurisdiction (save arguably when exercising its judicial  review
           powers), the Appellant has the obvious  alternative  and  simple
           remedy of making a fresh entry clearance application  addressing
           all of the problems with the previous  application.   The  facts
           are far removed from those in Anderson v Spencer.


      11.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge produced a meticulous and balanced
           determination, which securely resolved the issues. Another  less
           careful judge might have taken a  broader  view.   The  tribunal
           accepts  the  submissions  made  by  Mr  Lindsay.   Any   future
           concession  is  matter  for  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and
           Secretary  of  State,  but  the  tribunal  encourages  a  prompt
           decision on any fresh entry clearance application which  may  be
           made.  The tribunal finds that there was no error of law and the
           onwards appeal must be dismissed.


      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


      There was no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.


      Signed                            Dated 12 December 2018




      Deputy         Upper          Tribunal          Judge          Manuell















































































































































































































































































































