
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04856/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2019                            |On 13 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                         ms Charmaine Camille Morris
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pacey (the judge), promulgated on 15 June 2018, by which
    she dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  refusal
    of her human rights claim.

 2. In essence the Appellant's claim had been based on the following.   She
    had had a very traumatic life in Jamaica.  Having left that country and
    come to the United Kingdom in December 1999,  she  established  herself
    here, albeit as an  overstayer,  and  lived  with  three  of  her  four
    children and, over the course of time, her six grandchildren.   On  the
    basis of her circumstances she relied on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
    Immigration Rules and on Article 8 in its wider context as regards  her
    private and family life in the United Kingdom.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge deals with the paragraph  276ADE  issue.   At  [24]-[30]  she
    accepts the fact of the Appellant's very difficult childhood, going  on
    to state that it was the Appellant's "choice"  to  cut  all  ties  with
    Jamaica after she had come to  this  country.   It  is  said  that  the
    Appellant had spent most of her life in Jamaica and had not severed all
    cultural links.

 4.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  could  rely  on  her  own
    resourcefulness in order to help re-establish herself back in  Jamaica.
    It was said that the Appellant had failed to provide evidence  to  show
    that she would not be able to find employment of one sort or another.

 5. Having rejected the arguments under the Rules, the  judge  goes  on  to
    look at the Appellant's circumstances in this  country.   Reference  is
    made to the best interests of the Appellant's  grandchildren,  and  the
    fact that there was a close relationship between them all.  It is noted
    that the Appellant was not the sole carer for any of the  grandchildren
    Although it was said to be  understandable  that  the  Appellant's  own
    children would want the grandchildren to be cared for by a grandmother,
    there would be no real disadvantage to those children if  they  had  to
    have professional childcare instead.   The  judge  concludes  that  the
    Appellant had not  stepped  into  the  shoes  of  the  parents  of  the
    grandchildren.

 6. Overall, the wider Article 8 claim is also rejected.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The general thrust of the grounds is as follows.  There are said to  be
    errors in respect of the paragraph 276ADE issue, namely that the  judge
    should not have taken account of any "choice" made by the Appellant  to
    sever ties with Jamaica, that relevant factors had not been taken  into
    account adequately or at all, and that the judge had  failed  to  carry
    out a proper assessment according to the relevant case law (that  being
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813).

 8. The second aspect of the grounds relates to a challenge  to  the  wider
    Article 8 issue.  Most significantly, it is said that the judge  failed
    to have any regard to the report of an independent  social  worker,  Ms
    Pearce, and that this constituted a material error of law in respect of
    an assessment of the grandchildren's best interests.

 9.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hodgkinson on 1 August 2018.



The hearing before me

10. At the outset of the hearing Mr Clarke fairly accepted that  the  judge
    had failed to deal with the independent social worker's report and that
    this  constituted  an  error  of  law  insofar  as  the  issue  of  the
    grandchildren was  concerned.   However,  he  opposed  the  Appellant's
    challenge in relation to paragraph 276ADE.

11. Mr Sellwood relied on those grounds relating to this particular  issue.
    He submitted that the judge had not in substance carried  out  a  broad
    evaluative judgment.  He emphasised that all of  the  relevant  factors
    set out in the grounds had been included in his skeleton argument  that
    was before the judge.  He  emphasised  the  fact  that  the  Respondent
    himself had acknowledged that there  were  employment  difficulties  in
    Jamaica.  Aspects of the independent social worker's report related  to
    the Appellant's own view of  having  to  return  to  Jamaica  and  this
    evidence had not been referred to.  No proper account had been taken of
    the Appellant's  actual  history  as  that  related  to  the  traumatic
    experiences of her childhood.

12. For his part Mr Clarke quoted from paragraph 14 of Kamara.   The  judge
    was entitled to have concluded as he did, particularly as the burden of
    showing very significant obstacles rested with the Appellant.   It  was
    difficult to see quite how her past experiences would be relevant to an
    assessment of her situation on return to Jamaica.  In  respect  of  any
    security issues in Jamaica, he noted that there was no protection claim
    here.  The fact that the Appellant had spent very  many  years  of  her
    life in Jamaica before coming to this country was clearly  relevant  as
    was her potential ability to find work.

13. In reply, Mr Sellwood submitted that the judge had in fact factored  in
    the Appellant's "choice" to sever  ties  with  Jamaica,  and  this  was
    wrong.  The issue of security of returnees in Jamaica went to the issue
    of whether the Appellant would be considered an insider or an outsider.
     The Appellant's subjective views of trying to re-establish herself  in
    Jamaica were clearly relevant and these had not been  adequately  dealt
    with by the judge.




Decision on error of law

14. In light of Mr Clarke's properly made concession, I find that the judge
    materially erred in failing to address the independent social  worker's
    report, particularly as  that  related  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant's grandchildren and their relationship  with  her.   On  this
    basis alone I would set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

15. However, it is important  for  me  also  to  deal  with  the  issue  of
    paragraph 276ADE as well.  I conclude  that  there  are  also  material
    errors in respect of this matter.

16. At the time of the hearing before  the  judge  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment in Kamara had been out for a considerable period of time.   It
    is perhaps unfortunate that no reference to the  Court's  guidance  was
    made by the judge,  despite  it  being  expressly  referred  to  in  Mr
    Sellwood's skeleton  argument.   Notwithstanding  this,  it  is  almost
    always more important to look at substance over form, and this  I  have
    done when assessing the body of the judge's decision.

17. In my view there is a strong possibility that the judge took account of
    and placed weight on the fact that the Appellant had made  a  conscious
    decision to sever all ties with Jamaica after she left that country  in
    1999.  I base this on what I consider to be  a  reasonable  reading  of
    [26].  This represents something more than a simple statement  of  bare
    fact: it appears to me as though this was an  aspect  (by  no  means  a
    determinative one) of the assessment being carried out by the judge.  I
    conclude  that  the  so-called  "choice"  made  by  the  Appellant  was
    irrelevant for the purposes of the assessment.

18. First, in the circumstances of the Appellant's  case,  it  is  entirely
    understandable that she would have  wanted  to  have  left  behind  any
    contacts with the country in which she suffered so much in the past.

19. Second, in any event, choice and/or motive does not come into play when
    carrying  out  a  broad  evaluative  assessment  of  the   individual's
    circumstances.  Rather, it is a question of  taking  into  account  and
    weighing up subjective and objective matters in the round.

20. Perhaps more importantly than the first point is my conclusion that the
    judge has failed to deal  adequately  with  the  Appellant's  traumatic
    experiences whilst in Jamaica when undertaking the  assessment  of  her
    circumstances on return.  I fully appreciate that she has accepted  the
    fact of those experiences ([26]). However, what was important  in  this
    case was for those circumstances to be  actually  weighed  up.   It  is
    clear that not only was there strong evidence from the Appellant  about
    her subjective fear and anxieties about returning, but that this  issue
    was also dealt with in the independent social worker's report, a source
    that has been overlooked by the judge both in respect of this issue and
    the best interests of the Appellant's grandchildren.

21. The country information relating to the potential security concerns  of
    returnees (of which the Appellant would  be  one)  was  in  my  view  a
    relevant factor and one that was not addressed by the judge.  It is  of
    course the case that there is no protection claim  here  and  there  is
    nothing to show that any and all  returnees  would  face  a  risk  from
    criminals.  Having said that, the reality  of  the  security  situation
    combined with the  Appellant's  subjective  fears  was  something  that
    needed to be weighed up when considering whether  the  Appellant  would
    consider herself or be considered by  others  as  an  "insider"  or  an
    "outsider".  This has not been done.

22. There are other factors that the judge has taken account of which would
    point against the existence of very significant  obstacles,  and  as  I
    indicated to the parties at the hearing, my view on the  error  of  law
    has been reached by a relatively narrow margin.  If  I  had  taken  the
    view that this aspect of the Appellant's case would be bound to fail in
    any event, I would not of course regard any errors as  being  material.
    However, there is enough in the evidence to show that what I regard  as
    being an erroneous approach by the judge had a genuine  impact  on  the
    outcome.

23. In light of the above I set the judge's decision aside  in  respect  of
    both issues in this appeal.



Disposal

24. There was a discussion with  the  representatives  as  to  what  should
    happen next.  Mr Sellwood was of the initial view that the matter could
    and should be retained in the Upper Tribunal for a resumed hearing.  Mr
    Clarke suggested that fairly significant factual findings would need to
    be made in light of written and quite possibly oral evidence, and  that
    remittal was appropriate.

25. Having considered this matter with care and with reference to paragraph
    7.2 of the Practice Statement, I have concluded that this appeal should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

26. It would appear to be the case that fairly significant findings of fact
    are indeed needed: there will have to be an assessment of oral evidence
    relating to both the main issues in the case; there  will  need  to  be
    findings on the independent social worker's report which until now  has
    been overlooked; there are other related  issues  which  require  clear
    findings.

27. On top of this is the fact that the Appellant and  all  of  her  family
    members live up in Birmingham.  It is important that the Appellant  has
    the opportunity of presenting her evidence on its best footing  and  in
    my view this would be best facilitated by sending the case back to  the
    First-tier in the home city rather than  requiring  everybody  to  come
    down to London (I have not forgotten that the Upper Tribunal also  sits
    in Birmingham,  but  in  light  of  the  factual  findings  issue  this
    possibility has not altered my view on the correct course  of  action.)



28. There is no good reason to disturb the judge's finding at  [26]  as  to
    the Appellant's childhood experiences, and I expressly preserve it.

29. I issue relevant directions to the First-tier Tribunal, below.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and I set  it
aside.



I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.



No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

   1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, for re-hearing  at
      the Birmingham centre;

   2. The appeal shall not be re-heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey;

   3. Judge Pacey's finding at [26] is preserved;

   4. The relevant issues in this appeal  are  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and
      Article 8 in its wider context,  including  the  family  ties  in  the
      United Kingdom.





Signed   [pic]             Date: 27 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
