






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
HU/04199/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |            Decision and Reasons         |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 9 May 2019                    |            On: 20 May 2019              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between
                          Mr Ilyas Muhammad Kashif
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, counsel instructed by Connaughts
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 20 February 1985.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Cohen, promulgated on 26 February  2019  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the decision of the respondent dated 24 January 2018  refusing
      his application for indefinite leave to remain pursuant  to  paragraph
      276B with reference to paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules,  on
      the grounds of his character and conduct.

   2. Judge Cohen found that the appellant was fully aware of the  incorrect
      declarations made to HMRC and the Home Office. That  was  damaging  to
      his credibility. He rejected his excuses that he was  not  in  a  good
      mental state at the  time  due  to  his  mother's  ill  health  as  he
      continued to work  in  both  employed  and  self  employed  capacities
      throughout that time [34].

   3. He stated that he failed to arrange for his previous accountant to  be
      available at court in  order  to  answer  detailed  questions  on  the
      methodology used in compiling the  earlier  figures  relied  upon  and
      submitted to the Home Office and HMRC and how the mistakes could  have
      occurred in two separate years.  Furthermore,  the  appellant  claimed
      that he had incurred �3,000 of legal costs in respect  of  his  appeal
      but did not seek compensation from Tax  Assist  in  respect  of  those
      costs [38].

   4. Although the appellant discovered the issues in his  tax  and  figures
      quoted to the Home Office in August 2016, he did not notify  the  Home
      Office of this until he completed the subsequent Home  Office  inquiry
      questionnaire in April 2017. If the appellant was acting in good faith
      he would have reported the matter to the Home Office at  the  earliest
      opportunity.  He found that his failure to do so further  damaging  to
      his credibility [39].

   5. In the circumstances, he concluded that the appellant  "has  committed
      undesirable conduct which is of serious gravity"  and  the  respondent
      correctly refused his application with reference to  paragraph  322(5)
      of the Rules [40].

   6. Mr Gajjar, who did not represent the appellant before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, relied on the grounds of appeal dated 11 March  2019,  which
      he prepared in support of the application for permission to appeal.

   7. He submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  material
      evidence: He  did  not  consider  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
      explained during the  hearing  that  he  had  questioned  whether  his
      accountant should attend and that he had been advised by his barrister
      that this was not necessary. Mr Gajjar produced an email from counsel,
      Ms Jones, who represented the appellant at the hearing. The  appellant
      had asked her whether Tax Assist Accountants should represent  him  at
      court. Counsel stated in reply that "Tax Assist have done such a  good
      letter, don't ask them."

   8. Mr Gajjar noted that the Judge had recorded at [22] that the appellant
      informed him that Tax Assist want to come but the  barrister  said  it
      was not necessary and it was all covered in their correspondence.  The
      same counsel who represented him at the hearing had stated that it was
      not necessary to have the accountants.

   9. There was nothing to suggest that Ms Jones disputed his  assertion  or
      withdrew from the case on the grounds of  professional  embarrassment.
      Nevertheless, the Judge proceeded to make a finding which plainly held
      against the appellant that his accountant did not attend and stated at
      [38] that he failed to arrange  for  his  previous  accountant  to  be
      available at court in order to answer detailed  questions.  The  Judge
      did not 'factor in' that the appellant was  acting  on  the  basis  of
      professional  legal  advice,  nor  did  he  provide  any  reasons  for
      rejecting the recorded evidence at [22].

  10. Mr Gajjar pointed out that the accountant had  in  fact  attended  the
      previous hearing which had been adjourned due to a lack of court time,
      where the appellant was represented by different counsel.

  11. Mr Gajjar further submitted that the finding at [39]  that  an  honest
      person would have told the secretary of state of the  amendment  prior
      to being asked in the questionnaire was irrational. If  the  appellant
      believed himself to be an honest person and  that  the  amendment  was
      nothing more than the result of a mistake, there would be no  need  to
      have brought this to the attention of the secretary of state.

  12. The finding that if the appellant was acting in good faith,  he  would
      report the matter to the Home Office at the earliest  opportunity  and
      that his failure to do so further damaged his  credibility,  was  also
      irrational. In the application form, the relevant question in  respect
      of open disclosure at E12 was "have you, or  any  dependants  who  are
      applying with you, ever engaged in any other  activities  which  might
      indicate that you  may  not  be  considered  to  be  persons  of  good
      character."

  13. That question is placed under a number of questions  relating  to  war
      crimes  and  terrorism.  In  any  event,  if  the  appellant  was  not
      dishonest, then there was no reason for him to have  ticked  "yes"  to
      that  question.  He  could  not  have  "pre-empted"  the  respondent's
      concerns.

  14. Mr Gajjar also submitted that the Judge erred in failing  to  consider
      the letters provided by the appellant's accountant. Having found  that
      the appellant had not called his  accountant  to  give  evidence,  the
      Judge failed to 'grapple' with the letter produced by the accountants,
      who accepted that they were fully responsible for the error,  and  who
      provided  a  detailed  account  of  the  error  being  discovered  and
      communicated,  and  the  fact  that  she  made  a  correction  to  the
      appellant's return by adding the wrong person's details. As such,  his
      returns were correctly filed to begin with and then amended, a further
      factor that was not properly considered.

  15. He relied on the decision in R (on the application of  Sanat)  v  SSHD
      (JR/6546/2016) in which it was noted that  a  letter  admitting  fault
      from an accountant can  be  an  exceedingly  powerful  factor  in  his
      favour. Yet, the Tribunal did not  grapple  with  the  letter  or  its
      contents.

  16. He submitted in ground 4 that the Judge further erred  in  failing  to
      consider the death of the appellant's father on 14  October  2013  and
      that he went to  Pakistan  for  two  months  during  this  period.  He
      remained in Pakistan for three months after his death and stated  that
      he was distracted during this time.

  17. He referred to the decision  of  Mr  Justice  Spencer  in  R  (on  the
      application of Dr Khan) v SSHD  (Dishonesty;  tax  returns;  paragraph
      322(5)) [2018] UKUT  384.  The  Court  emphasised  the  importance  of
      decision makers articulating a decision which  considers  the  factors
      pointing in both directions when setting out the reasons for accepting
      or rejecting matters put forward as part of an innocent explanation.

  18. Mr Gajjar submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen  rejected
      the appellant's "excuses" that he was not in a good  mental  state  at
      the time due to his mother's ill health as he  continued  to  work  in
      both employed and self- employed capacities throughout this time [34].
      However, the Judge's actual findings and reasons made no reference  to
      his father's death. This evidence was before the  First-tier  Tribunal
      and was recorded as part of the appellant's evidence at [18].

  19. Whilst his mother's illness at the time was a worry for the appellant,
      it was overshadowed by the  more  serious  incident  of  his  father's
      passing. His father passed away on 14 October 2013 when the  appellant
      was in Pakistan for two months after his death,  and  was  distracted.
      This would have been  around  the  time  of  the  submissions  of  the
      impugned 2012/2013 return.

  20. Nor was it correct, as found by the Judge, that the appellant was able
      to continue his self-employment during this time. He had confirmed  in
      his witness statement that he in fact took off time which included his
      father's death (paragraphs 27-28, AB 18). He stated  that  his  father
      passed away on 14 October 2013. He went to Pakistan the  same  evening
      for the funeral. His mother was in a state of shock and  had  a  heart
      attack. He was scared for his mother's health. He stayed with her  for
      nearly two months for her medical tests so that she would feel  better
      and be supported. He returned to the UK but for a few months could not
      concentrate on himself, his life and work because  of  the  depression
      and grief he had following his father's death. Those matters had a bad
      effect on his work, life and health.

  21. In ground 6, Mr  Gajjar  submitted  that  the  Judge  found  that  the
      appellant may have inflated his earnings in order to be granted  leave
      to remain under the Tier 1 scheme  without  properly  considering  the
      legal burden and the  evidence.  The  Judge  had  the  same  specified
      documents that had been before the respondent and led to the grant  of
      leave to remain. There was no mention of this evidence when the  Judge
      concluded that he had inflated his income.

  22. Moreover, Khan could not be treated as authority  that  a  significant
      difference in declarations was sufficient to allow the  respondent  to
      show that the appellant had been dishonest in his declaration  to  the
      secretary of state. It is understandable from a legal perspective that
      a significant difference between the  figure  evidenced  to  the  Home
      Office and the figure declared to HMRC could lead to a conclusion that
      HMRC  had  not  been  told  the  truth.  However,  HMRC  requires   no
      corroboration whereas the secretary of state does.

  23. Mr Gajjar submitted in ground 7 that the Judge also made an irrational
      finding that the appellant had a degree with an element of finance  in
      it. That is not the same as being an accountant and the  evidence  did
      not indicate that his education had any element of tax in it to enable
      him to grapple with a complex tax system.

  24. Finally, he submitted - ground 8 - that there has been  an  incomplete
      assessment under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  The  Judge
      failed to consider a material aspect of those rights, namely that  the
      appellant has an operative and successful  company  in  the  UK  which
      contributes to the economy and also employs British nationals.

  25. In that respect, he referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
      Onwuje v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 331 in support of  the  contention  that
      the business the appellant  has  developed  in  the  UK  has  arguably
      engaged his protected rights under Article 8. Having a business in the
      UK is capable of constituting  private  life  within  the  meaning  of
      Article 8 - at [26] of Onwuje.

  26. He submitted that the Judge's finding that the appellant's removal  is
      necessary to maintain effective immigration control and to protect the
      economy, is difficult to reconcile with the  successful  business  and
      the 'potential' of that being closed down if required to  leave,  with
      the adverse impact that it could have on the economy and British jobs.



  27. In reply, Mr Tarlow submitted that the Judge had  noted  at  [11]  the
      documents and letters from Tax Assist Accountants. He noted  that  the
      appellant claimed in his questionnaire that his  accountant  mixed  up
      two of their clients when submitting the tax returns for 2010/2011 and
      2012/2013. He referred to the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Balajigari and others v SSHD and another [2019] EWCA Civ 673.

  28. At [37] the Court of Appeal  did  not  accept  that  as  a  matter  of
      principle, dishonest conduct would only be sufficiently  reprehensible
      if it were criminal, although it was not easy to think of examples  of
      dishonest conduct that reached the necessary threshold which would not
      also be criminal. The point however  was  academic  as  the  dishonest
      submission of false earnings to HMRC or the Home Office  would  be  an
      offence.

  29. The Court of Appeal accepted as correct  in  principle  that  properly
      interpreted, paragraph 322(5) involves a two stage analysis. The first
      stage is to decide whether paragraph 322(5) applies at all - that  is,
      that it is 'undesirable' to grant leave in the light of the  specified
      matters. If it does, the second stage - since such undesirability is a
      presumptive matter rather than mandatory ground of  refusal  -  is  to
      decide as matter of discretion whether leave should be refused on  the
      basis of it.

  30. Mr Tarlow submitted that the Judge was entitled to make  the  findings
      that he made at [34]. He referred to the  appellant's  qualifications,
      namely that he had worked as  a  book  keeper  and  had  undertaken  a
      diploma and a degree including in finance. He also noted that  despite
      claiming that he was incensed, the appellant did not make a  complaint
      to the appropriate regulatory body or, as he claimed he wanted  to  at
      the time,  to  the  police.  The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant's
      accountant had nothing to gain by such actions. The appellant, on  the
      other hand, had a significant amount to gain. He gained in not  paying
      the tax owed to HMRC. Without declaring incorrect and enhanced figures
      to the Home Office, he would not have obtained leave under the Tier  1
      migrant scheme.

  31. His finding that the appellant was fully aware of the  declaration  to
      HMRC and the Home Office is sustainable. In the light of [37]  of  the
      decision in the Court of Appeal, that is sufficient to dispose of  the
      challenge.

  32. The  other  grounds  are  not  material  in  the  light  of  this.  In
      particular, it is for the appellant to decide what evidence he  wishes
      to produce to the Tribunal. That was a matter between him and counsel.
      There had been no  application  for  an  adjournment.  The  Judge  was
      accordingly entitled to reject the explanation by Tax  Assist  and  to
      maintain the position that the appellant was  responsible  for  filing
      tax returns.

  33. In reply, Mr Gajjar submitted that whilst  it  is  a  matter  for  the
      appellant to decide what evidence to produce, it was held against  him
      that he failed to arrange for his previous accountant to be  available
      at  court  in  order  to  answer  detailed  questions  [38].  Being  a
      bookkeeper and accountant does not amount to the same thing.

  34. The decision amounts to a serious finding against the appellant  which
      he will have to live with. There has been an incomplete determination.
      There has been an incorrect reading of the facts through no  fault  of
      the appellant's.

      Assessment

  35. It has not been disputed that an earlier hearing  of  the  appellant's
      appeal, set down on 10 September 2018  was  adjourned  to  22  January
      2019. In their letter to the Tribunal  dated  17  September  2018  his
      solicitors noted that the appellant and counsel had  attended.  It  is
      not disputed that  his  accountants,  Tax  Assist,  attended  to  give
      evidence. They had wanted to come this time as  well.   The  appellant
      had wanted them  to  attend.  However,  counsel  who  represented  the
      appellant at the resumed hearing stated in an email to  the  appellant
      prior to the hearing, that this would not be necessary  on  the  basis
      that their evidence was covered in their correspondence.

  36. There was no challenge to the appellant's assertion  in  this  respect
      which he confirmed during his evidence, namely, that  it  was  counsel
      who subsequently represented him at the hearing who informed him  that
      their presence would not be necessary. At  the  earlier  hearing,  the
      appellant had different counsel representing him.

  37. Notwithstanding this background, the Judge  found  at  [38]  that  the
      appellant failed to arrange for his  accountant  to  be  available  to
      answer detailed questions. In the circumstances I find that it was not
      correct to hold against the appellant that he failed  to  arrange  for
      his accountant to be available.

  38. The Judge also stated that the appellant had  not  complained  to  the
      police about his accountant. However, he had not alleged fraud on  the
      part of his accountants, albeit that he sought to blame them  for  the
      discrepancies referable to their mistake.

  39. Further, the finding that if the appellant was acting in  good  faith,
      he would report  the  matter  to  the  Home  Office  at  the  earliest
      opportunity did not have regard to the Home  Office  questionnaire  in
      the respondent's bundle, in which he was asked  whether  he  has  ever
      engaged in any other activities which might indicate that he  may  not
      be considered to be a person of good character. If the  appellant  was
      not knowingly dishonest at that time, there was no reason for  him  to
      accept that he had been dishonest.

  40. There was also no reason for him to  anticipate  an  adverse  decision
      when completing the Home Office inquiry questionnaire in April 2017.

  41. The Judge did not consider the appellant's correspondence as  well  as
      call logs with HMRC. Even though the accountants were  not  called  to
      give evidence, the Judge  should  nevertheless  have  dealt  with  the
      letters from the accountants produced at AB22, in which they took full
      responsibility for the error and provided  an  account  of  the  error
      being discovered and communicated as  well  as  a  correction  to  his
      returns which had been made by adding the wrong person's details.  His
      returns had accordingly been correctly filled in  to  begin  with  and
      were then amended. That was not properly taken into account.

  42. As stated by the court in Samant, a letter  admitting  fault  from  an
      accountant can be a powerful factor in the appellant's favour.

  43. Where there is no plausible explanation for a significant  discrepancy
      between the income claimed in a  previous  application  for  leave  to
      remain and the income declared to HMRC, the respondent is entitled  to
      draw the inference that he has been deceitful or  dishonest  and  that
      indefinite leave to remain should be refused within  paragraph  322(5)
      of the Rules.

  44. However, the appellant had produced evidence showing that despite that
      prima facie inference, he had not in  fact  been  dishonest  but  only
      careless. The Tribunal was therefore required to consider the  matters
      referred to in R (on the application  of  Khan),  supra.  In  deciding
      whether the appellant had been dishonest  or  merely  careless,  those
      matters referred to in headnote [v] needed to be considered. This  was
      a judicial review application and the court was required  to  consider
      the extent to which they are evidenced as opposed to merely asserted.

  45. In the appellant's case this was not a matter of mere assertion. There
      was evidence from the accountant explaining the error.

  46. In Balajigari the Court of Appeal  referred  to  the  decision  of  Mr
      Justice Spencer in Khan at [43] where he held that in approaching  the
      fact finding task in the light of the explanation as  to  whether  the
      respondent is satisfied that the applicant  has  been  dishonest,  the
      secretary of state should remind herself that, although  the  standard
      of proof is "balance of probability", a finding that a person has been
      deceitful and dishonest in  relation  to  his  tax  affairs  with  the
      consequence that he is denied settlement in this  country  is  a  very
      serious finding with serious consequences.

  47. The Court of Appeal agreed that the concept of standard  of  proof  is
      not appropriate in the present context. That is because what is  being
      asserted by the secretary of state is that an applicant  for  ILR  has
      been dishonest. That is a serious allegation carrying with it  serious
      consequences. Accordingly, the secretary of state  must  be  satisfied
      that dishonesty has occurred, the standard of proof being the  balance
      of probabilities, but bearing  in  mind  the  serious  nature  of  the
      allegation and the serious  consequences  which  follow  from  such  a
      finding of dishonesty.

  48. For the above reasons, I find that the Judge unfairly held against the
      appellant that his accountants failed to attend the  hearing  to  give
      evidence. He did  not  properly  consider  the  detailed  account  put
      forward by the accountants regarding their error. Nor did he  properly
      consider the  cumulative  effect  that  his  father's  death  and  his
      mother's subsequent illness for about two  months,  had  on  him.  His
      state of mind which included depression and grief affected his work as
      well as his health.

  49. I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. I accordingly set it aside.  The
      parties agreed that if an error is found, the case should be  remitted
      to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be  made.  I  agree
      that this is an appropriate case to remit.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, Taylor House, for a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      No anonymity direction made.










             Signed                             Date 17 May 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer





