
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04390/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th April 2019                   |On 7th August 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                Tazayian [S]
                       (anonymity NOT direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. K Wood, IAS Manchester
For the Respondent:    Mr. C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  She  arrived  in  the  UK  in
    October 2008 with entry clearance as a student.  Her son ("A") was born
    in the UK on 14th September 2009.  In October 2016, the appellant  made
    an application (FLR(FP)) for leave to remain in the UK on human  rights
    grounds. The application was refused for  the  reasons  set  out  in  a
    decision made by the respondent dated 29th January 2018.  That  refusal
    gave rise to a right of appeal and the appeal was heard  by  FtT  Judge
    Dearden on 5th December 2018. The appeal was dismissed for the  reasons
    set out in a decision promulgated on 2nd January 2019.


 2. The evidence received by the FtT Judge is set out at paragraphs [6]  to
    [14] of the decision.  The Judge's findings and conclusions are set out
    at paragraphs [25] to [30] of the decision.


The decision of FtT Judge Dearden


 3. At paragraph [27] of his decision,  the  FtT  sets  out  his  findings.
    Insofar as the appellant's son is concerned, the FtT Judge found:


      a. 'A' was born in the United Kingdom and has been here for  a  period
         in excess of seven years. He lives with his mother and accepts  the
         former neighbours, as his grandparents. [27(1)]


      b. 'A's father last had contact with 'A' when 'A' was just six  months
         old in 2010; [27(2)].  'A's father continues to be absent from  his
         life; [27(1)] and has no involvement in his life; [27(2)]


      c. 'A' has visited Pakistan on two occasions in 2010 and 2011, on each
         occasion for 12 weeks.  In view of  his  age,  'A'  would  have  no
         recollection at all, of those events in Pakistan; [27(3)]


      d. 'A' understands Urdu even if he chooses  not  to  speak  the  same;
         [27(4)]


      e. 'A' has been in the United Kingdom for nine years and  two  months,
         and has only spent two periods of time out of  the  UK,  which  are
         inconsequential.  The  seven  years  residence  in  the  UK  is  an
         important factor to be  taken  into  account,  and  the  FtT  Judge
         acknowledges  that  weighty  reasons  are   required   to   justify
         separating 'A' from a community in which he has grown up, and lived
         for most of his life; [27(10)]


      f. The conduct of 'A's parent is relevant because that  goes  to  'A's
         situation and the wider public interest, and  does  not  amount  to
         blaming the child even if he  might  be  prejudiced  as  a  result;
         [27(10)]


 4. Insofar as the appellant is concerned, the FtT Judge found:


      a. The appellant's claim that when she visited Pakistan  in  2010  and
         2011 to conduct field research she communicated  very  infrequently
         with her mother and older sister, is not credible; [27(5)]


      b. The appellant is a highly talented and intelligent  individual  who
         obtained a degree in Pakistan before obtaining further  degrees  in
         the United Kingdom, including a Doctorate; [27(6)]


      c. Notwithstanding  the  claim  by  the  appellant  that  she  owes  a
         University in Pakistan the equivalent of �70,000  (which  does  not
         appear to be  accepted),  the  appellant  may  be  able  to  secure
         employment in the  private  sector.  It  would  not  be  completely
         impossible for the appellant  to  gain  employment  in  the  public
         sector in Pakistan. The appellant could relocate to a  larger  city
         in Pakistan such as Karachi, in just the same way as she has  built
         her life in the United Kingdom; [27(6)]


      d. The appellant was not telling the truth as to how she has sustained
         herself in the UK, particularly since 2015; [27(7)]


      e. During the time that the appellant has been in the UK, she has used
         her time exceedingly usefully.  The  appellant  and  her  son  have
         contributed well to the fabric of society in  the  time  that  they
         have  been  here,  but  it  is  impossible  to  conclude  that  the
         contributions they have made, will result in an irreplaceable  loss
         to the community. [27(8)]


      f. There is a gap in the appellant's lawful  presence  in  the  United
         Kingdom between 12th August 2013 and 3rd February 2015.  Throughout
         her 11 year history in United Kingdom, the appellant's  immigration
         status has always been precarious and on at least one occasion,  it
         was illegal because she was in the UK without permission; [27(9)]


 5. Having considered the evidence, and made the findings that I  have  set
    out above, the FtT Judge concluded, at [27(10)] as follows:


         "I reflect that the boy has spent little or no time in Pakistan. In
         my view he does speak some Urdu and under sub section 1(4) it would
         be a culture shock to take him away from his school, his choir  and
         his friends and football in Liverpool. Whilst  nine  years  in  the
         United Kingdom is a significant period  the  boy  is  still  of  an
         adaptable age and is not at a critical period of his education.  In
         my conclusion he can  go  back  to  school  and  play  football  in
         Pakistan and make school friends as he (sic)  done  in  the  United
         Kingdom.


         I overall conclude that whilst seven years in  the  United  Kingdom
         particularly from the  age  of  four  is  significant,  it  is  not
         necessarily   a   trump   card   which   overwhelms    all    other
         considerations."


 6. The FtT Judge referred to the public interest considerations set out at
    s117B of the 2002 Act, at paragraph [11] of his  decision.   The  Judge
    notes that he  has  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  as  to  how  the
    appellant supports herself and her son, and notes  that  little  weight
    should be given to a private and family life which is formed at a  time
    when the person is in the  UK  unlawfully  or  when  their  immigration
    status is precarious.  The Judge notes that  "..Section  117B(6)  deals
    with what is reasonable in just the same manner as paragraph  276ADE.".
      The Judge concludes, at [29], as follows:


         "If I had been deciding this appeal under the rules  I  would  have
         found that this appellant did not satisfy any immigration rules and
         this in itself is  a  powerful  factor  in  considering  where  the
         Article 8 balance lies.  Whilst the  appellant  has  been  of  good
         behaviour whilst in  the  United  Kingdom  and  not  committed  any
         criminal offences the fact  is  that  the  British  government  are
         entitled to exercise a legitimate and orderly system of immigration
         control. The status of the appellant and of her son has always been
         precarious  or   illegal   and,   together   with   the   statutory
         considerations in section 117B, I am driven to the conclusion  that
         the balance comes down against the appellant and  her  son  and  in
         favour of the Secretary of State."


The appeal before me


 7. In the grounds of appeal, the appellant claims that the FtT Judge erred
    in his assessment of the best interests of the child and in taking into
    account the conduct of the appellant as relevant to  the  situation  of
    the child.  It is said that in reaching his  decision,  the  FtT  Judge
    failed to have regard to the  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria) -v- SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 that  supports  the  claim  that  the
    enquiry as to what is 'reasonable' is directed at the circumstances  of
    the child and the child cannot be punished for  the  conduct  of  their
    parent.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on  11th
    March 2018.  In granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge  Smith  noted
    that at paragraph [26]  of  the  decision,  the  FtT  Judge  refers  to
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM insofar as it relates to family life with
    a partner and not a parental relationship, where the issue  is  whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  She  noted
    that it is arguable that in assessing the reasonableness  of  expecting
    the child to leave, the FtT Judge has wrongly weighed in  the  balance,
    wider public interest considerations contrary to the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria).  The matter comes before me to  consider
    whether the decision of the FtT Judge involved the making of a material
    error of law, and  if  the  decision  is  set  aside,  to  re-make  the
    decision.


 9. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response dated 5th April 2017.   The
    respondent states in the Rule 24 response that the  appeal  is  opposed
    and that the FtT Judge made findings that were properly  open  to  him.
    The respondent claims that  the  grounds  amount  to  an  opportunistic
    attempt to challenge the decision based upon a  minor  mistake  in  the
    determination, but the minor error,  does  not  undermine  the  careful
    assessment of the appellant's Article 8 claim made by the Judge.


10. Mr Wood submits that the FtT Judge clearly misdirected  himself  as  to
    the relevant exception set out in EX.1 of Appendix FM.  He submits that
    there was no doubt that the appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with her son who is under the age of 18 years, is
    in the UK, and has lived in the UK continuously for at  least  7  years
    immediately preceding the date of the application.  He submits that the
    question for the Tribunal was whether, taking  into  account  the  best
    interests of the appellant's son as a primary consideration,  it  would
    be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  He submits  that  a
    similar consideration applies to the assessment of  the  claim  by  the
    appellant's son under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.




11. Mr Wood submits the Judge accepted, at [27(1)],  that  the  appellant's
    son was born in the UK and has been in the UK for a period in excess of
    7 years.  However, in considering whether it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK,  the  Judge  erred  in  a  number  of
    respects.  First, at paragraph [27(10)]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge
    acknowledged that 7 years residence in the UK is an important factor to
    be taken into account and that weighty reasons are required to  justify
    separating a child from the community in which he or she has  grown  up
    and lived for most of their life.   However,  in  that  paragraph,  the
    Judge then refers to the fact that from birth to the  age  of  four,  a
    child will be primarily focused on the care from parents  and  "..There
    is therefore a period of five years and two months, which is less  than
    seven years, which is going to have a greater impact on the  well-being
    of  the  child.".   Mr  Wood  submits  that  that  is   an   irrelevant
    consideration, and not capable of amounting to the strong  and  weighty
    reasons required to justify separating the appellant's son a child from
    the community in which he has grown up.  Second, the Judge  refers,  at
    paragraph [27(10)] to AM Pakistan [2017] EWCA Civ 180  and  appears  to
    proceed upon the premise that the wider public interest  considerations
    relating to immigration  control  could  be  taken  into  account  when
    deciding whether or not it is unduly harsh to send an applicant back to
    his or her country.  He submits the FtT Judge has erroneously conflated
    the question whether it would be unreasonable to expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK, with whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    appellant and her son to return to Pakistan.


12. In reply, Mr Bates accepts that at paragraph [26] of the decision,  the
    FtT Judge erroneously refers to test under the exceptions  set  out  in
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.  He  accepts  that  the  Judge  was  not
    required to assess whether there are insurmountable obstacles to family
    life continuing outside the United Kingdom, but  applying  the  correct
    test, was required to consider whether, taking into  account  the  best
    interests of  the  child  as  a  primary  consideration,  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK.   He  submits  that  a
    careful  reading  of  the  decision  establishes  that  the   erroneous
    reference to the incorrect exception at paragraph [26]  is  immaterial,
    because it is clear from the decision that the Judge did in  fact  have
    the correct test in mind. Mr Bates  submits  that  at  paragraph  [25],
    albeit by reference  to  the  private  life  requirements  set  out  in
    paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules,  the  Judge  properly  notes
    that he is to assess whether it would be reasonable for  someone  under
    the age of 18 years, who has lived continuously in the UK for at  least
    seven years, to leave the UK.  He submits that  a  careful  reading  of
    paragraph [27] of the decision establishes that the Judge was  in  fact
    addressing the correct test. The Judge accepts that 'A' is a qualifying
    child and that his period of residence in the UK  in  excess  of  seven
    years, is a relevant and weighty factor. He submits that when read as a
    whole, paragraph [27] of the decision demonstrates that the  Judge  had
    in mind the correct test, and made a number of relevant findings,  that
    lead to the conclusion that was  plainly  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
    evidence.


Discussion


13. It was uncontroversial that the appellant herself cannot succeed in  an
    application for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  under  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules, unless the appellant  can
    benefit from the exceptions to  certain  eligibility  requirements  for
    leave to remain as a parent, set out in section EX.1  of  Appendix  FM.
    The relevant exception here, is set out in section EX.1(a) and  applies
    if the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with a child who is under the age of 18 years, is in the UK, has  lived
    in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years  immediately  preceding
    the date of application, and taking into account their  best  interests
    as a primary consideration, it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK.  I accept, as was rightly conceded by Mr  Bates,
    that at  paragraph  [26]  the  Judge  erroneously  refers  to  what  is
    essentially the issue when a decision maker is considering whether  the
    appellant can  benefit  from  the  exceptions  to  certain  eligibility
    requirements for leave to remain as a partner.


14. I have carefully considered the decision of the FtT  Judge  and  in  my
    judgment, the error identified in paragraph [26] is  immaterial  as  to
    the outcome of the appeal.  It is plain when reading paragraphs [25] to
    [28] as a whole, that the FtT Judge was in fact addressing  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the  child,  as  someone  who  has  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least years, to leave the UK.


15. In KO (Nigeria) & Others -v- SSHD [2018] UKSC 53, Lord Carnwath, with
    whom Lord Kerr, Lord Wilson, Lord Reed and Lord Briggs agreed, referred
    to paragraphs 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules, and s117B(6) of
    the 2002 Act.  Having referred to the requirement that appears at
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules, he stated, at [7]:


         "It will be seen immediately that the substance of this provision,
         in particular the seven year criterion and the "reasonableness"
         tests, appears identical to that  of section 117B(6), taken with
         the definition of "qualifying child"

At paragraphs [17] to [19], Lord Carnwath stated:



         "17. As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated the substance
         of the rule without material change, but this time in the context
         of the right of the parent to remain. I would infer that it was
         intended to have the same effect. The question again is what is
         "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ said in MA (Pakistan) Upper
         Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705,
         [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there is nothing in the subsection to
         import a reference to the conduct of the parent. Section 117B sets
         out a number of factors relating to those seeking leave to enter or
         remain, but criminality is not one of them. Subsection 117B(6) is
         on its face free-standing, the only qualification being that the
         person relying on it is not liable to deportation. The list of
         relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above) seems
         to me wholly appropriate and sound in law, in the context of
         section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).


         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it seems
         to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider where the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of the parents may become indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a right to remain
         here, and having to leave. It is only if, even on that hypothesis,
         it would not be reasonable for the child to leave that the
         provision may give the parents a right to remain. The point was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245 :


             "22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK
             one has to address the question, 'Why would the child be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as this
             there can only be one answer: 'because the parents have no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the question in any
             other way strips away the context in which the assessment of
             reasonableness is being made ..."


         19.      He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar
         point in considering the "best interests" of children in the
         context of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
         Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) -v- Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:


             "58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis that the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has no
             right to remain, but the other parent does, that is the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. If
             neither parent has the right to remain, then that is the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect the
             child to follow the parent with no right to remain to the
             country of origin?"


         To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in the real world in which the children find
         themselves.


16. Therefore, although the conduct of a parent is not directly relevant to
    the public interest consideration, the record of the parent may become
    indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a right to
    remain here, and having to leave.  It is only if it would not be
    reasonable for a child to leave the UK that s117B(6) of the 2002 Act
    may give a parent a right to remain. Here, at paragraph [27(10)] of the
    decision, the FtT Judge was not blaming 'A' for the conduct of the
    appellant, but noted that the conduct of the appellant was relevant
    insofar as it went to 'A's own situation, and the wider public
    interest.  The record of the appellant had become indirectly material,
    because it leads to her ceasing to have a right to remain in the UK,
    and having to leave, unless she could establish that it would be
    unreasonable to expect her son to leave the UK.


17. In my judgement, the FtT Judge carefully considered whether it is
    reasonable to expect 'A' to leave the UK.  At paragraph [27(10)], the
    FtT Judge, having referred to the relevant authorities was addressing
    the proposition that a period of residence from birth to the age of
    four is likely to be less significant than long residence after the age
    of four.  The Judge noted that A had been in the UK for five year and
    two months since he had attained the age of four.  Although poorly set
    out, it is in my judgement apparent that the Judge had in mind the
    greater impact of the time that 'A' had been in the UK since the age of
    four, but that is not to say that the Judge proceeds upon the premise
    that A has only attained five years and two months residence in the UK.
     The Judge noted that the five years and two months spent in the UK
    after A had reached the age of four, was likely to have a greater
    impact on the well-being of A.  The Judge was in my judgment, entitled
    to take that into account as a relevant factor in his assessment of
    whether it would be reasonable to expect A to leave the UK.


18. It is also plain in my judgement that at paragraph [27(10)] of his
    decision, the Judge was not imposing a test of whether it is 'unduly
    harsh' to return the appellant and her son to Pakistan.  The reference
    to 'unduly harsh' in that paragraph is a reference to the decision of
    the Court of Appeal in AM (Pakistan) -v- SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 180.


19. The core issue in the present appeal was whether, taking  into  account
    the best interests of 'A' as  a  primary  consideration,  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect 'A' to leave the UK.  The Judge  concluded  that
    whilst the length of 'A's presence in the UK, particularly from the age
    of four is significant,  it  is  not  necessarily  a  trump  card  that
    outweighs all other considerations.  Having carefully consider  factors
    that weigh in favour of and against the appellant, the FtT Judge  found
    that it was reasonable to expect 'A' to leave the UK.


20. The only ground of appeal available  to  the  appellant  was  that  the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC
    11 confirms that the fact that the immigration  rules  cannot  be  met,
    does not absolve  decision  makers  from  carrying  out  an  assessment
    outside the rules under Article 8, where the ultimate issue is  whether
    a fair balance has  been  struck  between  the  individual  and  public
    interest, giving due weight to the provisions of the  Rules.   Although
    the appellant's ability to satisfy the Immigration Rules  was  not  the
    question to be determined by the FtT Judge, it was capable of  being  a
    weighty, though not determinative factor, when deciding whether refusal
    is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing  immigration
    control.  Whilst the appellant and her son  might  prefer  to  continue
    their life in the UK, that does not equate to a right to do so in  law.
    It was in my judgement open to the FtT Judge to conclude, as he did  at
    paragraph [29] of his decision, that in the end, the balance comes down
    against the appellant and her son, and in favor of the respondent.


21. It follows that in my judgement, the error identified at paragraph [26]
    of the decision of the FtT Judge was immaterial, and it was open to the
    Judge to dismiss the appeal for the reasons set out in his decision.


Notice of Decision


22. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of FtT  Dearden  promulgated  on
    2nd January 2019 shall stand.

Signed                                  Date          21st June 2019


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




FEE AWARD


As there is no right of appeal there can be no fee award


Signed                                  Date          21st June 2019

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
