
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04727/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 December 2018                       |On 28 January 2019                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                           mrs Ummugulsum Ozdemir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Dakin, Counsel, Kinas Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Bartlett promulgated on 21st May 2018  dismissing  her  appeal  on  the
    basis of her human rights.  The decision of Judge Bartlett was appealed
    against and permission was granted by Designated Judge  Shaerf  in  the
    following terms:

         "1.  The Appellant,  a  Turk,  appealed  against  the  Respondent's
             decision to refuse her further leave to remain on the basis of
             her private and  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Her
             husband who had indefinite leave dies  in  2010.   Their  four
             daughters are married and there is one son who  is  unmarried.
             All the children are British citizens except for one  who  has
             indefinite leave.

         2.   It is arguable the Judge has erred in law in her assessment of
             the Appellant's Article 8 claim in not adequately taking  into
             account  the  background  that  the  Appellant's  husband  was
             recognised as a Convention refugee and the matter referred  to
             in paragraph 18 of her  decision.   She  has  focused  on  the
             connection with Turkey of her son-in-law's family rather  than
             whether  there  are  very   significant   obstacles   to   the
             Appellant's re-integration into  life  in  Turkey,  given  her
             particular circumstances: see AK (Kosovo) v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
             Civ.2038 where the point is made in a deportation appeal and a
             fortiori will have application to a removal appeal."

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 reply by the Secretary of  State  but
    was given the indication that the appeal was resisted.

Error of Law

 3. At the close of the hearing I indicated I would  reserve  my  decision,
    which I shall now give.  I find that there is a material error  of  law
    in the decision, such that it should be set aside.  My  reason  for  so
    finding are as follows.

 4. In respect of the Grounds of Appeal as they are pleaded, it is fair  to
    note that  they  are  somewhat  confusing  and  what  may  be  politely
    described as sporadic at best.  In fairness Ms Daykin did not  seek  to
    rely upon them beyond embellishing on the point upon  which  permission
    had been given by Designated Judge Shaerf in terms  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's assessment of whether historic injustice had  been  suffered
    by the Appellant and  if  so  the  effect  that  would  have  upon  the
    proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR.

 5. For the sake of completeness Ms Daykin did not seek to  rely  upon  the
    decision of AK (Kosovo) [2018] EWCA Civ 2038 which she kindly  provided
    a copy of to the Upper Tribunal (as it is only available on Westlaw  at
    present).  Ms Daykin's position was that this decision was  of  general
    assistance in that it established that an assessment must  be  made  of
    all the factors at stake but that was a matter that was trite  and  did
    require any authority to establish this principle.

 6. In terms of the historic injustice as characterised by  Ms  Daykin  she
    directed my attention to the Appellant's bundle before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which arrived under cover of letter dated 25th April 2018  and
    which numbered some 152 pages.  Within  that  bundle  Ms  Daykin  first
    directed my attention to pages 28  to  33  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  contained   a   determination
    promulgated on 19th February 2003 from Adjudicator Harrison sitting  in
    the Immigration Appellate Authority.  That  decision  as  reflected  at
    paragraph 10 concerned the Appellant's claim that her family life would
    be disproportionately interfered with were she to be required to  leave
    the United Kingdom and seek entry clearance from Turkey.  In the course
    of reaching her findings Judge Harrison at  paragraph  20  first  noted
    that the Appellant's husband was a recognised refugee and then went  on
    to note at paragraph 23 as follows:

         "If, as I find it to be, the Respondent  has  given  his  assurance
         that entry clearance would be granted to the Appellant were she  to
         return to Turkey and apply there, the only remaining issue  for  me
         to  consider  is  whether  it  will  be  disproportionate  in   the
         circumstances to require her to do so."

 7. This finding was made in light of  the  Presenting  Officer's  position
    before the Immigration  Appellate  Authority  which  was  reflected  at
    paragraph 15 of the determination under the heading  Respondent's  case
    and which reads as follows:

         "Mrs Chapman assured me that if the Appellant  were  to  return  to
         Turkey to apply for entry clearance she would have  no  problem  in
         being granted it.  Her husband has refugee status, and  the  couple
         are now legally married.  If I were to decide that she  should  not
         return and claim entry clearance, a  great  deal  of  public  money
         would have been wasted.  This she said was a relevant consideration
         for  me   to   take   into   account   in   my   consideration   of
         proportionality."

 8.  Ultimately  Adjudicator  Harrison   decided   that   there   were   no
    exceptionally  compelling   circumstances   that   would   render   the
    Appellant's  return  to  Turkey  to  apply  for  entry   clearance   as
    disproportionate.  And that the judge further found that the Presenting
    Officer's submission was correct  that  the  Appellant  should  not  be
    entitled to "circumvent the Immigration  Rules".   In  that  light  the
    judge went on to find as follows at paragraph 27 of  the  determination
    which reads as follows:

         "I have recorded above my understanding  that  the  Respondent  has
         agreed that entry clearance will be issued when the Appellant makes
         her application.  Were  I  to  have  reason  to  think  that  entry
         clearance  would  not  be  granted,  I  would   have   very   grave
         reservations about dismissing this appeal."

 9. Thus as a  consequence  of  those  findings  made  by  the  Immigration
    Appellate Authority, the Respondent had given, as Ms Daykin puts  it  a
    clear unequivocal assurance  that  entry  clearance  would  be  granted
    without any conditions thereupon or any stipulations  as  to  the  time
    frame which the entry clearance application should be made.

10. I further note that there is also Ms Daykin's point that this  decision
    was promulgated in 2003 and  consequently  the  only  reason  that  the
    Respondent's decision was considered proportionate was that there  were
    no "exceptionally compelling circumstances" why  the  Appellant  should
    not return to Turkey to apply for entry clearance and not  be  entitled
    to circumvent the Immigration Rules.   That  bureaucracy  and  rhetoric
    has, of course, been disapproved by Lord Brown in the  House  of  Lords
    decision in Chikwamba where the concept of queue jumping was considered
    to be "Kafka-esque" and did  not  automatically  render  such  decision
    making proportionate.  I also note the use by the Immigration Appellate
    Authority of the parameter of "exceptionally compelling  circumstances"
    which is again quite different to the present approach that the  First-
    tier Tribunal now undertakes of applying a fair balance and gauging the
    proportionality of  an  appealed  decision.   The  importance  of  this
    position in light  of  Chikwamba  is  that  one  can  glean  from  this
    determination that the Respondent's reasoning  for  refusing  to  grant
    status to the Appellant in 2003 is now at least arguably  incorrect  in
    light of Chikwamba, and most important of all, the Respondent has  made
    an unequivocal assurance as also found by the Adjudicator,  that  entry
    clearance would be granted to the Appellant were she to  simply  return
    to Turkey and apply from there.

11. Turning to the First-tier Tribunal's assessment  of  these  matters  Mr
    Kotas prays in aid reliance upon paragraphs 36 to 38 of the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision where in his submission the  judge  has  considered
    the Appellant's immigration history including at  paragraph  37.5  that
    the Adjudicator made a direction based on a concession at  the  hearing
    by the Respondent and that  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  put  it  the
    Appellant had "an expectation" following the decision in 2003 that  she
    will receive entry clearance.

12. In my view there is a disparity between an unequivocal assurance  given
    to the Appellant as opposed to a mere expectation.  The assurance given
    by the Respondent was recorded in writing by the  Adjudicator  in  2003
    and was  also  independently  the  subject  of  a  finding  that  entry
    clearance should be granted were she simply to return  and  apply  from
    Turkey.  As a consequence the fact of the six month delay in making the
    application on return to Turkey is neither here nor  there  given  that
    the assurance made by the Respondent was 'unequivocal' and  importantly
    no expiration date, reasonable or otherwise, was given in  relation  to
    the assurance that entry clearance would be granted.  It is regrettable
    that the Appellant did not submit the application for six months  after
    her return to Turkey, but an application was made nonetheless.   It  is
    further regrettable that a bombing  occurred  at  the  consulate  which
    further delayed  the  application  however  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    assessment was  made  on  the  understanding  that  there  was  a  mere
    'expectation', as opposed to an 'unequivocal assurance', and that there
    was a change in the  circumstances  that  could  affect  the  assurance
    given, were matters that did not demonstrate an accurate  balancing  of
    the historic injustice suffered by the Appellant in this matter.

13. As noted by the judge at paragraphs 27 to 28 previously,  at  paragraph
    18 the Respondent ought to have considered whether  the  terms  of  the
    Adjudicator's decision in 2003 and what happened or did not happen as a
    result could amount to an unrepaired historical wrong in the context of
    Ghising  [2013]  UKUT  567  and  a  basis  upon  which  the  claim  the
    Appellant's appeal might succeed under Article 8.  Thus, without  fully
    and fairly weighing the historical wrong suffered by  the  Appellant  I
    find that the proportionality assessment that has been carried  out  by
    the First-tier Tribunal takes the historic wrong at an  incorrect  face
    value of an expectation, rather than an unequivocal assurance, made  by
    a Presenting Officer and pays insufficient heed to the fact  that  this
    assurance was also the subject of a finding of fact by the  Immigration
    Appellate Authority in 2003, and importantly, it was only due  to  this
    assurance that the Adjudicator was prepared to accept that the decision
    was proportionate in 2003 to the much higher threshold identified under
    the re-entry policy that is no longer proportionate post-Chikwamba.

14. Mr Kotas further prayed in aid the fact that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had found that there was no family life, however even if that were  so,
    the Appellant could still rely upon the fact of the historic  injustice
    as affecting the weight to be given  to  the  public  interest  in  the
    proportionality assessment when answering the fourth and  fifth  Razgar
    questions under Article 8 ECHR and it is  not  inconceivable  that  the
    Appellant's appeal could succeed on the basis of her private life, even
    if the First-tier Tribunal were to find that there was no  family  life
    in existence.

15. Given my findings in relation to the proportionality assessment  I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in  its  entirety  given
    that the remainder of the decision is  interspersed  with  errors  such
    that the totality of the decision is infected by error.

16. In light of the above findings I set aside the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in its entirety.

Notice of Decision

17. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  in  its  entirety
    and this matter is  to  be  remitted  to  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted bench.

Directions

19. The appeal is to be remitted to IAC Taylor House.

20. A Turkish interpreter is required.

21. Several witnesses are anticipated to be called as occurred at the  last
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  Consequently the time estimate
    for this appeal is three hours.

22. No special directions have been sought and  none  are  required  in  my
    view.

23. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 14 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini



