
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04564/2019



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                |                                |
|On 22 August 2019                     |On 03 September 2019            |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL



                                   Between

                                 VAN LOI HA

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Sarwar of counsel for Binas Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Plumptre,  promulgated
    on 26 April 2019 which  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondents decision dated 27 February 2019 to refuse  a  human  rights
    claim and to uphold an  order  of  deportation  under  s  5(1)  of  the
    Immigration  Act  1971  following  a  decision  that  deportation   was
    conducive to public good after he was convicted of 5 counts  of  sexual
    assault.

The Judge's Decision

 3. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Plumptre  ("the  Judge")  allowed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found that it would  be  unduly  harsh
    for both the Appellants partner and his children if he were deported.

 4. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge  gave  no  reasons
    for why it would be unduly harsh for the children or partner to  remain
    in the UK without the Appellant.

 5. On 15 July 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt gave permission to appeal.

 6. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Tan  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that

    (a)    He relied on the grounds of appeal.

    (b)    There was a lack of reasoning in relation to  the  issue  of  it
         being unduly harsh on  his  partner  and  children  to  deport  the
         Appellant.

    (c)    He also argued that in respect of  the  Appellants  relationship
         with  his  partner  the  provisions  of   paragraph   399(b)   were
         conjunctive and the issue of it being unduly harsh was not relevant
         if the relationship was formed at a time when the Appellants status
         was either illegal or precarious. The Appellant in this case  never
         had settled status and if that was accepted then the provisions  of
         s 399(b) were not engaged.

 7. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Sarwar submitted that :

      a) At first blush no reasons were given for the conclusions  drawn  by
         the Judge but context was everything and the reasons could be  read
         into the decision by refence to other background material.

      b) The Judge set this decision in the context of a  previous  decision
         of Judge  Saffer  where  he  found  that  the  Appellants  partners
         circumstances were unique as she had been the victim of trafficking
         at a young age and removing her from the  support  of  her  partner
         would make her ill and it was not in the child's best interests for
         this to happen.

      c)  In respect of the reasons given while  the  Judge  does  not  give
         'chapter and verse' and the findings are not replete  with  reasons
         but she states 'given the circumstances of her  early  and  teenage
         years' it would be unduly harsh for his partner  if  the  Appellant
         were removed.

 8. In reply Mr Tan on behalf of the Appellant submitted

      a) In relation to factors not covered by the statutory  framework  the
         Judge would have had to identify those factors and  no  exceptional
         circumstances applied.

      b) Judge Saffer was applying a different test in a historical scenario
         6 years ago.

      c) None of the issues raised by Mr Sarwar are in the Judge's  decision
         but have to be 'read into' it.

      d) The Appellant  did  not  have  settled  status  and  therefore  the
         provisions of s 399 (b) did not apply relying on  Terrelonge  (para
         399(b) [2015] UKUT 00653 (IAC)

The Law

 9. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by the
    Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

         "The duty to give reasons requires that  reasons  must  be  proper,
         intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this court
         in Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964]  2  QB  467.   The  only
         dispute in the present case relates to the last of those  elements,
         that is the adequacy of the  reasons  given  by  the  FtT  for  its
         decision allowing the  appellant's  appeal.   It  is  important  to
         appreciate that adequacy in this context is precisely that, no more
         and no less.  It is not a counsel of perfection.  Still less should
         it provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment  of
         the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on
         their merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in part,
         to enable the losing party to know why she has lost.  It is also to
         enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the  reasons  for
         the decision are so that they can be examined in case some error of
         approach has been committed."

Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made a number of material errors of law.

11. In relation to the Appellants relationship with his children the  Judge
    repeats on a number of occasions that it would be unduly harsh for them
    if the Appellant were removed but no where in  the  findings  does  she
    give a reason for this conclusion nor is there any engagement with  the
    meaning of the phrase and what factors in this case meet that  test.  I
    do not accept that a decision in an asylum case made 6  years  ago  and
    applying  entirely  different  legal  tests  could  be  read  as  being
    determinative of the issue or that a requirement to read reasons into a
    decision by reference to background material that did not form part  of
    the findings meets the requirement of clarity .

12. In relation to the relationship with the Appellants partner  the  Judge
    was wrong in law at paragraph 31: the  Appellants  status  was  at  all
    times precarious as he did not have settled status. Terrelonge  is  the
    most recent decision confirming how  the  courts  must  interprete  the
    provisions of 399 (b) (i). Given that the Appellant does not  meet  the
    requirement of settled status he cannot benefit from 399(b) in relation
    to his relationship with his partner and no further assessment  of  the
    unduly harsh provisions in relation to his partner under  this  section
    was required.

13. These errors I consider to be material since had the Tribunal conducted
    this exercise the outcome could have been different. That in my view is
    the correct test to apply.

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Statement
    of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First
    Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted because
    there are no clear findings as to core issues in  this  case.  In  this
    case none of the findings of fact are to stand and the matter will be a
    complete re hearing.

16. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.



    Signed
    Date 24.8.2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
