
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04451/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 22 January 2019                            |On 6 February 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Akinbolu, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of reference I refer to the parties, henceforth, as they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal. The Secretary of State pursues this  appeal
    before me but I nonetheless refer to him as the respondent, as  he  was
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka,  born  on  [~]  1989.   On  25
    January 2018 the respondent refused his application of 20 June 2016 for
    indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  long  residence.   The
    appellant appealed that decision in the First-tier Tribunal. His appeal
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith ("the FTTJ")  in  a
    decision promulgated on 10 October 2018.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal and this was granted in  the
    following terms by the Upper Tribunal:

         "it is arguable that in the light of the finding at  [56]  to  [58]
         that First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith erred  in  concluding  that
         paragraph 322(5) was not engaged.

         All grounds are arguable.

         It is noted that the judge does not appear to have directed himself
         [sic] as to the correct test for assessing dishonesty - see Ivey  v
         Genting Casinos [2017] UKSC 67 at [62]."

 4. Hence the matter came before me.

Background

 5. The appellant first entered the UK on 12 February 2006, with  leave  to
    do so as a student.  That leave was extended variously  until  31  July
    2011. Leave was then extended further as a  Tier  1  (General)  migrant
    until June 2013 and again until June 2016. The  appellant  made  an  in
    time application for indefinite leave to remain.

 6. On 28 June 2018 the respondent refused the application.  The respondent
    noted the appellant had declared earnings above  the  minimum  for  the
    award of points, when seeking leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (General)
    migrant in June 2013.  When dealing with his application for indefinite
    leave to remain, the respondent had written to the appellant on 11  May
    2017 asking him to complete a tax questionnaire and provide evidence of
    self-employment.  The  evidence  of  self-employment  provided  by  the
    appellant referred to lower earnings than those declared in support  of
    his Tier 1 application.  The respondent considered the latter  to  have
    been inflated.  The respondent decided the appellant had either  failed
    to declare to HMRC the correct figures for his self-employment  in  the
    2012/13 and 2013/14 tax years or there was  serious  doubt  as  to  the
    accuracy and genuineness of the information presented to UKVI  as  part
    of his application.  He decided the appellant fulfilled the criteria in
    paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules because  it  was  undesirable
    for him to remain in the United Kingdom in the light of  his  character
    and conduct. For similar reasons,  the  application  was  also  refused
    pursuant to paragraphs 276B(ii)(c) and (iii) and S-LTR.1.6, namely  the
    suitability requirements.

Submissions

 7. Ms Cunha's submissions and the grounds of appeal,  which  she  adopted,
    can be summarised as follows.  The FTTJ had found the appellant had not
    told the truth, that he  had  exploited  his  situation  for  financial
    benefit to minimise his tax  liability  [55]  and  that  he  sanctioned
    questionable practices [56] and "scapegoated"  another  person  without
    making an effort to trace him  [57].   Thus  the  FTTJ  had  found  the
    appellant to be dishonest and his behaviour was  sufficient  to  engage
    Paragraph 322(5). The tribunal's reliance on the  failure  of  HMRC  to
    prosecute was wrong; it was of no relevance because HMRC had  different
    concerns to the respondent.

 8. It was submitted,  furthermore,  that  the  FTTJ  had  not  made  clear
    findings on the appellant's income for 2012/13 and 2013/14. It was  not
    clear if he met  the  requirements  of  the  Rules,  namely  10  years'
    continuous residence.  Ms Cunha particularly  emphasised  in  her  oral
    submissions that the FTTJ had applied the wrong standard of proof:  the
    FTTJ had applied a higher burden as demonstrated by  her  reference  at
    [59] to the type of behaviour envisaged by paragraph  322(5)  as  being
    "very serious".  She submitted that this infected  the  whole  decision
    and rendered it unsustainable.  She submitted the FTTJ's reasoning  was
    inconsistent given her adverse findings on the appellant's credibility.

 9.  Ms  Akinbolu  adopted  the  Rule  24  response.  She   submitted   the
    respondent's appeal was no more than a  disagreement  with  the  FTTJ's
    decision:  the  FTTJ  had  referred  to  and  applied  the  appropriate
    authority (R (Khan) v SSHD (Dishonesty, tax return,  paragraph  322(5))
    [2018] UKUT 384 (IAC)).  Ms Akinbolu noted the respondent suggested the
    findings of the FTTJ were sufficient to show dishonesty.  She  referred
    to [74] of Ivey and said the FTTJ had had in  mind  the  principles  in
    Khan, which, in turn, had been followed in Dadzie v  SSHD  [2018]  CSOH
    128, and that while the FTTJ did not accept the appellant's  explnation
    for his actions, she did accept the appellant had not  asked  about  or
    questioned the tax rebate.  Ms Akinbolu submitted  that  the  FTTJ  had
    found this, whilst undesirable, was not deceptive.   It  was  submitted
    that the FTTJ was entitled to take into  account,  in  the  round,  the
    failure of HMRC to take adverse action and the fact of the  appellant's
    declaration and repayment of unpaid tax. It was submitted that the view
    of the body charged with monitoring tax payments, which was relevant to
    the assessment of the  public  interest  in  punishing  the  individual
    concerned, was a relevant matter.

10. Ms Akinbolu submitted that the key question for the  FTTJ  was  whether
    the exclusion of the appellant  was  undesirable.   The  FTTJ  had  not
    applied a higher standard of proof than was required:  the  authorities
    called for anxious scrutiny.   The  FTTJ  had  considered  whether  the
    appellant's behaviour justified his exclusion.  It was  submitted  that
    the FTTJ made it clear in her determination that she did not  consider,
    notwithstanding her adverse findings, that  the  evidence  overall  was
    sufficient for a finding that paragraph 322(5) was engaged,  given  the
    seriousness of the outcome for the appellant. She  found  the  evidence
    was not sufficiently strong for  a  finding  of  dishonesty  [58].   Ms
    Akinbolu asserted this was a careful and balanced  decision  where  all
    relevant factors had been considered. It was a matter of the weight  to
    be given to the evidence.

Discussion

11. The respondent states in the reasons for refusal that the appellant had
    "either failed to declare the correct figures for [his] self-employment
    in the 2012/2013 and 2013/2014 tax years to HMRC, or there  is  serious
    doubt as to the accuracy and genuineness of the  information  presented
    to UKVI as part of said application."  Thus the use  of  deception  was
    the essential issue before the FTTJ, namely whether the  appellant  had
    deceived either HMRC or the respondent  or  both.  This  was  the  only
    reason for  refusal  pursuant  to  paragraph  322(5).  The  refusal  by
    reference to other paragraphs in the Immigration Rules  hinged  on  the
    respondent's conclusions pursuant to 322(5).

12. The respondent's principal submission, before me,  is  that  the  FTTJ,
    having agreed with the respondent that the appellant had been dishonest
    in his dealings with HMRC, made an inconsistent finding that there  was
    insufficient evidence for paragraph 322(5) to be engaged.  However, the
    FTTJ did not make a finding of dishonesty.

13. The FTTJ says this with regard to the appellant's completion of his tax
    returns:

         "55.     The appellant might not have known exactly what he  earned
         in 2012/13, but he provided invoices to his customers and will have
         had a reasonable idea of his income. I do not believe  his  written
         evidence that he "did not really pay much attention at the time" to
         how he [sic] much he earned, simply giving his bank  statements  to
         his accountants at the time, who calculated the figures.  There  is
         no evidence from that firm, but it  is  difficult  to  imagine  any
         reputable firm not asking a client  to  check  the  figures  before
         signing off the tax return.

         56.      I therefore find the appellant knew what his earnings were
         for the tax year 2012/13. In his oral evidence, he  said  that  his
         previous accountants had prepared the tax return  for  2012/13  but
         because there was "confusion" he approached Bilal.   When  I  asked
         him what he meant by "confusion" he said that some friends  of  his
         told him he was paying too much tax and recommended that he  saw  a
         consultant.  I reject this evidence that there was any  "confusion"
         finding that believed he had found a way to reduce  his  tax  bill,
         giving little or no thought to the methods by which that  would  be
         achieved and whether the outcome was accurate.  He appears to  have
         been unconcerned about Bilal's somewhat relaxed working  practices,
         for example the absence of any written  advice,  information  about
         costs etc., which any reputation professional would  have  provided
         to his client.  Such omissions should have been a warning sign.

         57.      The appellant saw his tax bill  reduced  considerably  for
         the year 2012/13, even though it was a good year as far as work was
         concerned.   There  was  a  considerable  discrepancy  between  the
         figures he declared in his application for Tier  1  leave  and  the
         figures disclosed to HMRC.  I reject the impression  the  appellant
         has tried to give that he was so poor at figures that  he  did  not
         realise what had happened. No doubt he was  pleased  to  receive  a
         rebate, but it appears he did not question Bilal about how  it  was
         calculated or the reason why,  according  to  Bilal,  he  had  been
         paying too much tax in previous years. It is convenient for him  to
         say that Bilal has disappeared. He has not, however, made any  real
         effort to trace him or to report him, with the help of his  current
         advisors, to any of the professional bodies, given the trouble  and
         additional expense Bilal's advice and actions have caused him.

         58.      I have difficulty accepting the appellant was so na�ve  as
         he claims. There is no evidence available from  Bilal  and  limited
         evidence from the appellant's current accountants. ...  I  consider
         he wilfully closed his  eyes  to  Bilal's  methods  and  failed  to
         question the reasons for  the  significant  reduction  in  his  tax
         liability."

14. Thus the FTTJ  made  various  adverse  findings  of  relevance  to  the
    appellant's state of mind, inter alia: he "knew what his earnings  were
    for the tax year 2012/13"; he "believed he had found a  way  to  reduce
    his tax bill, giving little or no thought to the methods by which  that
    would be achieved and whether the outcome was accurate" and he "saw his
    tax bill reduced considerably for the year 2012/13, even though it  was
    a good year as far as work was concerned".

15. Furthermore, the FTTJ specifically rejects the appellant's  explanation
    for the inaccurate tax declarations and does so at  some  length.   The
    FTTJ's findings are that the appellant "wilfully  closed  his  eyes  to
    Bilal's methods and failed to question the reasons for the  significant
    reduction in his tax  liability".   It  could  be  inferred  from  this
    sentence that the FTTJ considered the appellant knew  Bilal  would  act
    inappropriately in his dealings with HMRC on the appellant's behalf.

16. It is highly relevant that the discrepancies arose, not from error, but
    from the actions of the appellant's agent, Bilal.  As is stated in  the
    headnote to Khan at (iv):

         "(iv)    For an Applicant simply to blame his or her accountant for
             an "error" in relation to the historical tax return  will  not
             be the end of the matter, given that the  accountant  will  or
             should have asked the tax payer to confirm that the return was
             accurate and to have signed the tax  return.  Furthermore  the
             Applicant will have known of his or her earnings and will have
             expected to pay tax thereon.  If the Applicant does  not  take
             steps within a reasonable time to remedy  the  situation,  the
             Secretary of State may  be  entitled  to  conclude  that  this
             failure justifies a conclusion that there has been  deceit  or
             dishonesty.


17. The FTTJ noted at [24] the appellant acknowledged the  declarations  to
    HMRC for the tax years 2012/13 and 2013/14  must  have  been  "untrue".
    This is not a case where the appellant claims the  discrepancies  arose
    from negligence or errors either by himself or Bilal.  The  appellant's
    evidence, cited at [24] is that he "honestly did not  know  that  Bilal
    must have declared an untrue amount of  income  from  self-employment".
    Thus he blames Bilal for having filed a false  declaration  with  HMRC.
    The FTTJ's finding that the appellant  "wilfully  closed  his  eyes  to
    Bilal's methods and failed to question the reasons for the  significant
    reduction in his tax liability"  requires  a  specific  finding  as  to
    whether or not the appellant knew Bilal  would  make  and/or  did  make
    false declarations on his behalf.

18. Notwithstanding the existence of false declarations  to  HMRC  and  the
    FTTJ's rejection of his explanation, the  FTTJ  has  stopped  short  of
    making findings as to the appellant's knowledge or  belief  as  regards
    the content of his declarations to HMRC, as  is  required  by  Ivey  at
    [74]:

         "... When dishonesty is in question the fact-finding tribunal must
         first ascertain (subjectively) the actual state of the individual's
         knowledge or belief as to the facts.


         The reasonableness or otherwise of his belief is a matter of
         evidence (often in practice determinative) going to whether he held
         the belief, but it is not an additional requirement that his belief
         must be reasonable; the question is whether it is genuinely held.
         When once his actual state of mind as to knowledge or belief as to
         facts is established, the question whether his conduct was honest
         or dishonest is to be determined by the fact-finder by applying the
         (objective) standards of ordinary decent people. There is no
         requirement that the defendant must appreciate that what he has
         done is, by those standards, dishonest."


19.  The  FTTJ  states  at  [59]  that  "the  appellant's   behaviour   was
    undesirable, but I do not find it was of such a degree  that  it  meets
    the type of undesirable conduct envisaged in paragraph  322(5)".    The
    FTTJ states earlier in that  paragraph  that  "the  type  of  behaviour
    envisaged in that paragraph is, therefore, very serious, presenting not
    only a threat to the general public but also the nation".   This  is  a
    mis-statement of the  terms  of  paragraph  322(5)  which  provides  as
    follows:

         "the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in
         the  United  Kingdom  in  the  light  of  his  conduct   (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C)),  character
         or associations or the fact that he represents a threat to national
         security."

    The respondent's reasons for refusal focus (as Ms Akinbolu accepts)  on
    the undesirability of the appellant being permitted to remain in the UK
    in the light of his conduct and character.  Dishonesty is  the  central
    issue in this case, not a threat to  the  general  public  or  national
    security, as is stated by the FTTJ.

20. Irrespective of the absence of findings as to the appellant's state  of
    mind, given the existence of false tax returns and the FTTJ's rejection
    of the appellant's explanations for those returns, it is not clear  why
    the FTTJ did not consider the evidence to be "sufficiently strong"  for
    the engagement of paragraph 322(5).  She has given  inadequate  reasons
    for deciding this paragraph was not engaged, contrary to  MK  (duty  to
    give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC).

21. I would not criticise the FTTJ for having regard to the failure of HMRC
    to  prosecute  the  appellant  if  she  had  taken  into  account   the
    circumstances of that failure: namely the fact  the  appellant  amended
    declarations   following    the    respondent's    identification    of
    discrepancies. These were not therefore "voluntary" amendments  in  the
    true sense of the word, albeit HMRC might have  perceived  them  to  be
    such.  It  is  not  clear  whether  the  FTTJ  took  into  account  the
    circumstances known to  HMRC  at  the  time  of  its  decision  not  to
    prosecute.

22. For all these reasons, I find that the FTTJ's  reasoning  is  defective
    and inadequate such as to amount to an error  of  law.   The  error  is
    material to the outcome, being related to  the  central  issue  in  the
    appeal,  namely  the  appellant's  conduct  and   character   and   the
    undesirability of permitting him to  remain  in  the  UK,  pursuant  to
    paragraph 322(5). The decision is  not  sustainable  and  must  be  set
    aside.

23. I invited submissions from the parties' representatives  on  whether  I
    should remake the decision. Ms Akinbolu pointed out that the  FTTJ  had
    not made  findings  on  other  aspects  of  the  human  rights  appeal,
    particularly with regard to the appellant's family  life.  There  were,
    she said, insufficient findings for the decision to be  remade  by  me.
    Ms Cunha agreed, as do I. The matter must be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Decision

24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved material
    errors on points of law.  The decision is set  aside.   The  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,  pursuant
    to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and Enforcement Act  2007
    and Practice  Statement  7.2(v),  before  any  judge  aside  from  FTTJ
    Griffith.

25. Given the nature of the respondent's case, namely  that  the  appellant
    had acted dishonestly, I make an anonymity direction.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 4 February 2019



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Dated: 4 February 2019

                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. Any further documentary and/or witness evidence relied upon  by  either
    party is to be filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party
    by no later than 28 days before the date of the hearing  in  the  First
    Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appeal is listed at Taylor House with a time estimate of two  hours
    to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................

 3. An interpreter in Tamil is required.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Dated: 4 February 2019

