
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04679/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30 May 2017                        |On 01 Jun 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                MR BUJAR ALIU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, counsel instructed by Fisher &
Myftari Solicitors
For the Respondent:    M I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Buckwell, promulgated on 31 October  2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 10 April 2017.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. During 1999, the appellant entered the United  Kingdom  under  a  false
    identity and unsuccessfully claimed asylum. The appellant  remained  in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully until November 2007 when he  returned  to
    Albania to seek entry clearance as the spouse of a  person  settled  in
    the United Kingdom. That application was refused and his appeal against
    that decision was unsuccessful on 29 May 2009.  On  8  June  2009,  the
    appellant married his partner in Albania  and  thereafter  entered  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully. On 22 May  2012,  he  made  an  unsuccessful
    human rights application and on 3 August 2015 a further application was
    made on the same basis. It is the refusal of that claim,  on  6  August
    2015, which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The  decision  of  6  August  2015  informed  the  appellant  that  the
    respondent considered there to be no insurmountable obstacles to family
    life with his wife being enjoyed in Albania, there  were  no  dependent
    children, no very significant obstacles to him integrating  in  Albania
    and absence of exceptional circumstances. The appellant was afforded  a
    right of appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  his  human  rights
    application, solely on the ground the decision in question breaches his
    rights under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, both the  appellant  and
    his wife gave evidence. The judge concluded that  the  appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules relating  to  family
    and private life and there  was  no  gap  between  the  Rules  and  the
    circumstances of the appellant. The  appeal  was  dismissed  under  and
    outside the Immigration Rules.

The grounds of appeal

 6. There were three grounds of appeal. Firstly, it  was  argued  that  the
    judge erred in failing to take into account  that  the  appeal  was  on
    human rights grounds; Article 8 was not considered directly and he  did
    not apply section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002. Secondly, that the judge erred in failing  to  make  any  factual
    findings about whether there would be financial support for the  wife's
    daughter in the Philippines or funds for travel to the  Philippines  if
    the wife moved to Albania or the objective evidence  of  discrimination
    which "strongly" suggested that she would not be able to work owing  to
    her gender and race. Thirdly, it was contended that the  judge,  having
    found the marriage to be genuine and subsisting, failed to consider the
    relevance of the repeated refusals of entry clearance on the basis that
    the relationship was not genuine.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis on the basis sought.

 8. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 25  April  2017  opposed
    the appeal, arguing that the judge engaged with Article 8  outside  the
    Rules, finding that there were no compelling circumstances.

The hearing

 9. Mr  Plowright  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  and  the  grant  of
    permission. Starting with the first ground, he accepted that the  judge
    did in fact refer to section 117B of the 2002 Act at [37] and  [44]  of
    the decision.  Turning to the second ground, he  contended  that  there
    were issues that the judge did not adequately  address  which  included
    the support provided by the appellant's wife to her  relatives  in  the
    Philippines as well as her concerns that  she  would  be  discriminated
    against in Albania. Mr Plowright referred to an  expert  opinion  which
    supported the wife's fears but accepted that this had not  been  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Furthermore, Mr  Plowright  argued  that  the
    judge had a report from Home office on "ethnic issues"  in  Albania  as
    well as the United States State Department report on Albania  but  that
    there had been no reference to that objective evidence in the decision.
    Finally, he argued that the judge did  not  adequately  carry  out  the
    proportionality exercise

10. In reply, Mr Jarvis urged me not to take the expert report into account
    as this was not before the judge. He submitted that the  judge  engaged
    with the evidence and submissions presented and was aware what was said
    regarding discrimination and the ability of  the  appellant's  wife  to
    support her mother and daughter in  the  Philippines.  Furthermore,  he
    argued that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  before  the  judge  to
    establish that there was such a high level  of  discrimination  against
    women or people of Filipino ethnicity to the extent that  it  prevented
    family life from continuing in Albania.    In  relation  to  the  third
    ground, Mr Jarvis relied on Agyarko and Ikuga, R (on  the  applications
    of) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  UKSC  11,
    accepting that a person might not meet Ex.2 of Appendix FM but yet meet
    the criteria outside the Rules, however in this case, he contended that
    section  117B  was  not  going  to  benefit  the  appellant  given  his
    immigration history  and  the  precariousness  of  his  stay  when  the
    relationship was established.

11. In closing, Mr Plowright described the First-tier Tribunal decision  as
    brief and argued that it did not address  the  issues,  other  than  in
    generalised terms

12. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the judge made no  material
    error of law and that his decision was upheld.

Decision on error of law

13.  As conceded by Mr Plowright, there is no merit in  the  first  ground,
    given that the judge recorded the  respondent's  reference  to  section
    117B during submissions, set out the relevant provisions under the part
    of the decision dealing with the law and was clearly aware of the those
    provisions. There was no  need  for  the  judge  to  make  any  further
    reference to them, given  that  there  was  nothing  which  could  have
    assisted  the  appellant  in  view  of  his  complete   disregard   for
    immigration laws.

14. The arguments as to the judge's treatment of the circumstances  of  the
    appellant's wife amount to  little  more  than  disagreement  with  his
    findings. The judge listed all the documentation before  him  including
    the Home Office Country Information  and  Guidance  Report  on  Albania
    relating to ethnic minority groups as well as the US  State  Department
    Report at [13] of his decision. Furthermore, he set out, verbatim,  the
    oral evidence and submissions between [14] and [40]. At  [45],  at  the
    start of his findings and reasons, the judge specifically recorded that
    he took into account all the evidence  submitted,  including  the  oral
    evidence, submissions and a skeleton argument.

15. Contrary to what was argued in the grounds, the judge  clearly  engaged
    at [46] with  the  occasions  when  the  appellant  made  lawful  entry
    clearance applications to return to the United Kingdom and he  proceeds
    to find that the relationship is genuine and subsisting. At  [48],  the
    judge confirms that he has looked at the evidence in the round,  noting
    that both the appellant and his wife have proved capable of  relocating
    by the fact that they did so when they, separately, moved to the United
    Kingdom.

16. The burden was on the appellant to demonstrate that he would be  unable
    to support himself his wife or her family and  the  judge  demonstrated
    that he understood the focus of the human rights  claim.  At  [49]  the
    judge accepts that for family life to  continue  the  appellant's  wife
    would  need  to  relocate  to  Albania  but  gives  sound  reasons  for
    concluding that the reasons provided on their behalf did not amount  to
    insurmountable obstacles entitling the appellant to be granted leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  Those reasons include the fact that  the
    appellant had property in Albania, was fluent  in  Albanian  and  could
    assist his wife with the language, had close relatives in Albania, that
    the appellant could find work to support  his  wife  and  that  he  had
    recently lived in that country. Those findings were more than adequate.
     Mr Plowright did not argue that the  background  evidence  before  the
    judge in relation to discrimination demonstrated that family life could
    not take place in Albania. Clearly, those instructing him have  decided
    that further evidence was required and instructed  an  expert  in  this
    regard. That report was not before the judge and I have not  considered
    it.

Conclusions


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.




Signed                                  Date: 19 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
