
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04648/2018
     HU/09688/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 May 2019                                 |On 15 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      mr Moazzam Umar (first Claimant)
                     mrs Maryam Iqbal (second Claimant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                       Respondents/Claimants

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H.Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents/Claimants:  Mr Kumar, Sultan Lloyd solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The second Claimant's appeal  is  dependent  upon  that  of  the  first
    Claimant.  The first Claimant is a national of Pakistan born on 1 April
    1975.  The second Claimant is his wife, who was born  on  12  September
    1984.  They have a child, NT, born on 25 November 2013.

 2. On 28 June 2016 the Claimants applied for ILR in the UK on the basis of
    ten years' lawful residence, the first Claimant having resided  in  the
    UK lawfully since 25 July 2006.   The  second  Claimant  arrived  on  8
    October 2015 as a dependant of  her  spouse  and  was  given  leave  to
    remain.

 3. The first Claimant's application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  was
    refused in a decision dated 29 January  2018  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent asserted that there were discrepancies in  relation  to  the
    income declared to the Home Office and the Appellant's payment  of  tax
    to HMRC. The second Claimant's application was refused on 9 April 2018,
    essentially because that of the first Claimant had also been refused.

 4. They appealed and the appeals  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Boylan-Kemp MBE for hearing on 9 October 2018.  In a  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 14 November 2018, the judge found  that  she
    did not accept  the  first  Claimant's  account  and  overall  was  not
    satisfied that his explanation as to the discrepancies in  the  payment
    of tax were  reasonable.   However  she  went  on  to  find  that  this
    behaviour was not sufficiently serious so as to engage paragraph 322(5)
    of the Immigration Rules and that the  Immigration  Rules  requirements
    were met which extinguished the public interest  in  removal  and  thus
    removal of the Claimants was proportionate.   The  judge  proceeded  to
    allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

 5. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in time on the basis that the judge had  erred  materially  in
    law in finding that paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules  was  not
    applicable.  It was submitted this was clearly contrary to the decision
    in R (On the application of Khan) v Secretary of State (Dishonesty, tax
    return, paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 00384 (IAC) at headnote (i) which
    provides:
         "(i) Where there has been  a  significant  difference  between  the
             income claimed in a previous application for leave  to  remain
             and the income declared to HMRC, the  Secretary  of  State  is
             entitled to draw an inference  that  the  Applicant  has  been
             deceitful or dishonest and therefore he should be refused  ILR
             within paragraph 322(5) of the  Immigration  Rules.   Such  an
             inference could  be  expected  where  there  is  no  plausible
             explanation for the discrepancy."
    It was asserted that as the first  Claimant  had  been  found  to  have
    deliberately misrepresented his income to HMRC to avoid the correct tax
    liability, that the judge should have concluded that the actions of the
    first Claimant fall under paragraph 322(5) of the Rules  and  dismissed
    the first Claimant's appeal.

 6. As the second Claimant's appeal has been allowed on the  basis  of  the
    first Claimant satisfying the Immigration Rules, this  has  a  material
    effect on both appeals.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted in a decision dated 20  December  2018
    by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Woodcraft on  the  basis
    that the judge had arguably failed to give  sufficient  weight  in  the
    proportionality exercise to the public interest, given the  seriousness
    of what  was  found  to  be  a  deliberate  concealment  of  the  first
    Claimant's income for tax purposes.  The grounds refer  to  the  recent
    Upper Tribunal decision in Khan [2018] UKUT 384 which advocates a step-
    by-step approach in cases such as this.  Arguably  this  has  not  been
    applied by the judge.  Of note is a  judicial  review  decision  of  Mr
    Justice Collins sitting in the Upper Tribunal in  the  case  of  Samant
    JR/6546/2016 regarding the weight or lack of it to be afforded  to  the
    absence of the prosecution by HMRC for tax evasion.

 8. The Claimants' solicitors served a skeleton argument on 29  April  2018
    in which they sought to defend the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and also sought to rely on the findings  made  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673.

     Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me the Respondents, to whom I shall refer as  the
    Claimants, were represented by Mr Kumar  who  sought  to  rely  on  his
    skeleton argument.  Ms Aboni made submissions based on the  grounds  of
    appeal.  She submitted the judge had erred in  finding  that  paragraph
    322(5) of the Rules did not apply because the Claimants' behaviour  did
    not involve criminality.  The judge found the first Claimant was  aware
    of the need to declare his income to HMRC and found he would have  been
    aware that he was not correctly  declaring  his  income  and  had  used
    dishonesty when making declarations to HMRC.

10. Ms Aboni submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  follow
    the approach set out in the case of Khan (op. cit.) which was cited and
    relied upon in the grounds of appeal and  found  that,  even  when  the
    discrepancies were brought to his attention in the refusal letter,  the
    first Claimant waited a number of months before contacting  HMRC.   She
    submitted that  the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  paragraph  322(5)
    requires criminality and failed to consider the public interest and the
    seriousness of the deliberate concealment of income in order  to  avoid
    paying tax.  Ms Aboni submitted that the Claimant's  skeleton  argument
    relies on the judgment in Balajigari  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  673,  but  she
    sought to distinguish that on the basis that it was not relevant to the
    extant case.  This is because whilst the Respondent did not,  prior  to
    making a decision, put the issue of dishonesty to  the  first  Claimant
    and seek an explanation, this was fully considered  by  the  judge  who
    heard evidence from him and made  a  clear  finding  that  he  did  act
    dishonestly.  Ms Aboni sought to rely on [222] and [223] of  Balajigari
    where the Court of Appeal held that defects do not necessarily lead  to
    a decision being quashed unless the Tribunal are satisfied  that  these
    are material.  She submitted it would not have made any  difference  if
    the points had been put to the  first  Claimant  by  the  Secretary  of
    State. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered his  explanation,  made
    findings on it and the outcome would not have been any different.

11. In his submissions, Mr Kumar sought to rely on  the  skeleton  argument
    especially at  [6] with reference to the judgment in  Balajigari  where
    it provides that it would in principle be possible  for  applicants  in
    the Claimants' position to challenge the refusal  of  settlement  under
    paragraph 322(5) on the basis that it interfered with their  Article  8
    rights.  If such an interference were found the relevant Tribunal would
    decide for itself whether the  applicant  has  acted  dishonestly.   Mr
    Kumar submitted that  the  decision  and  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge should stand.

     Findings and Reasons

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in reaching her findings took account  of
    the fact that the first Claimant failed to declare his income  to  HMRC
    for tax years 2010 to 2011, 2011 to 2012, 2012 to 2013,  2013  to  2014
    and 2014 to 2015 and therefore misrepresented his income for either the
    purposes of reducing his tax liability or for the purpose of  obtaining
    leave to remain or both: [11] refers.

13. The judge then made the following findings:

         "17. The  difficulty  I  have  is  that  for  whatever  reason  the
             Appellant  clearly  did  not  declare  his  earnings  for  the
             identified periods of pay for the resulting tax that he  owed.
             His explanation  for  this  is  that  he  had  two  successive
             incompetent  accountants  and  that  he  was  unaware  of  his
             obligations  and  responsibilities.   I  do  not   find   this
             explanation to be a plausible one especially in light  of  the
             lack of a professional complaint being  made  by  him  against
             either or both accountants.  The evidence before me is that he
             was a successful businessman and  therefore  I  find  that  he
             would have had at least a degree of  understanding  about  the
             basic financial liabilities and responsibilities that  running
             a business entails including his need to  declare  his  income
             and pay his taxes especially as  his  current  business  is  a
             contact centre so likely to be in  receipt  of  some  form  of
             government funding which would involve stringent requirements.

         18.  I  also  find  that  the  fact  that  he  had  paid  some  tax
             (approximately �3,000) for one of  the  relevant  years  is  a
             strong indicator that he would have an awareness  of  what  he
             should have been paying on his income during the relevant  tax
             years ...

         20.  I note that the letter from HMRC indicates that the  Appellant
             has contacted them to declare  his  income  for  the  relevant
             years and that once he has written  again  with  the  relevant
             details HMRC will then try to make appropriate  amendments  to
             his tax records.  I find that  this  does  show  a  degree  of
             attempting to make amends on the  Appellant's  part.   However
             the Appellant was notified  of  the  problem  in  the  refusal
             letter dated 29 January 2018 and therefore a number of  months
             have passed before he has even contacted HMRC to start to make
             enquiries as to what he  owes  which  I  find  undermines  the
             credibility of his account when viewed in light of the  timing
             of this appeal hearing.  Further the letter from  HMRC  simply
             sets out that the Appellant has made initial contact  and  not
             that he has paid any monies owed or successfully remedied  the
             situation."

    And at [21] the judge found:

         "21. ... Overall I am not satisfied as to the reasonableness of his
             explanation for the resulting situation."

14. However the judge went on to find at [22] and [23] as follows:

         "22. However even if the Appellant had either  carelessly  or  more
             likely deliberately concealed his income  in  order  to  evade
             paying his  tax  liabilities,  then  I  still  find  that  the
             subsequent reliance on paragraph 322(5) by the  Respondent  is
             not consistent with the Respondent's own policy on the matter.
              Although behaviour which engages paragraph  322(5)  does  not
             require a criminal conviction it does require the behaviour to
             be  sufficiently  serious.   War  crimes  and  terrorism   are
             examples of where it would be in the public interest to refuse
             an application.

         23.  Therefore with this in mind I find that I am in agreement with
             Mr Kumar that the use of  paragraph  322(5)  in  circumstances
             such as the Appellant's is inappropriate as his behaviour does
             not involve criminality,  it  is  not  a  threat  to  national
             security and is not a war  crime  or  involve  a  travel  ban.
             Overall  although  the  Appellant's  actions  were  less  than
             acceptable I find that they were not so morally  reprehensible
             that it could be reasonably argued that his  behaviour  called
             into question his right to remain in the  UK  under  paragraph
             322(5).    His   conduct   whilst   misguided    leading    to
             misrepresentation of his income is not such to fall in my view
             within the category of applicant referred to in the  guidance.
             Consequently this means that I find  the  refusal  further  to
             paragraph 276B(ii) of the Immigration Rules is not made out."

15. I find that the judge materially erred in that, having found  that  she
    did not accept that the first  Claimant  had  acted  honestly  nor  his
    explanation for the discrepancies between the amount of income  claimed
    to the Home Office and that provided to HMRC  in  respect  of  his  tax
    liability, I find it was not properly open to her  to  find  that  this
    conduct did not fall within  the  remit  of  paragraph  322(5)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. It is clear from the  jurisprudence,  in  particular
    the case of Khan (op. cit.) which dealt with this specific issue,  that
    the Secretary of State is entitled to refuse ILR on that basis.

16. However this was a human rights appeal.  The judge went on to make  the
    following findings at [26] and [27]:

         "26. In coming to the balancing exercise I  need  to  consider  the
             competing arguments  and  look  at  whether  the  decision  is
             proportionate.  The pros in this case for  the  Appellant  are
             that the Immigration Rules requirements  are  met  which  must
             extinguish any public interest in his removal.  There  are  no
             apparent cons.  Therefore  I  find  that  the  decision  is  a
             disproportionate interference with his private  life  and  his
             appeal is allowed.

         27.  This then leads on to the position of the second Appellant and
             their child.  I was not addressed by  this  matter  by  either
             representative."

17. The judge went on to also allow the appeal of the second  Claimant  and
    their dependent child.

18. I find the judge further erred in this  assessment  for  the  following
    reasons.   Firstly,  it  is  apparent  that  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules are not met.  The Respondent in the refusal  decision
    at page 5 refused the application on the basis that the first  Claimant
    was not able to meet the suitability requirements of the Rules  due  to
    the allegation of dishonesty, thus the  application  was  refused  with
    reference to S-LTR 1.6:

         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
         not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR   1.3   to   1.5)   character,
         associations or other reasons make it undesirable to allow them  to
         remain in the UK."

         "Your application falls for refusal under S-LTR  1.6  due  to  your
         character and conduct in respect of the discrepancies  between  the
         income claimed to UKVI and HMRC."

19. It is apparent, therefore, that the judge made no finding  specifically
    in respect of the suitability requirements but rather proceeded on  the
    basis that, despite her finding that  the  Appellant  had  deliberately
    concealed his income in order to evade his tax liability,  his  removal
    would nevertheless be disproportionate. I find that the judge's finding
    that the requirements of the Immigration Rules  were  met  was  clearly
    erroneous. That must then  undermine  any  proportionality  assessment.
    Similarly in respect of the second Claimant whose appeal is  predicated
    upon that of her husband.

20. I have taken into account the recent judgment of the Court of Appeal in
    Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673 in respect of which judgment was  handed
    down on 16 April 2019. However, I accept Ms Aboni's submission that the
    cases  are  largely  distinguishable  on  the  basis  that   Balajigari
    concerned judicial review applications on public  law  grounds.   There
    had been no opportunity for the applicants in those cases to have given
    oral evidence or have that evidence assessed prior  to  the  Respondent
    reaching an adverse decision in each case that they had claimed falsely
    inflated earnings to the Secretary of State  and  those  earnings  were
    inconsistent with that declared on their tax returns for  the  relevant
    period.

21. I set out the salient parts of the court's  conclusion  as  follows  at
    [221]:

         "221.    ... the approach  taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
                deciding to refuse the applications for leave to  remain  in
                each of these cases on paragraph 322 (5) grounds - which  we
                take to have been  his  general  approach  in  all  earnings
                discrepancy  cases  -  was  legally  flawed   (except,   for
                particular reasons, in Albert).  This is principally because
                he proceeded directly from finding  that  the  discrepancies
                occurred  to  a  decision  that  they  were  the  result  of
                dishonesty, without  giving  applicants  an  opportunity  to
                proffer an innocent explanation.  But nor  does  he  address
                the further questions of whether the dishonesty in  question
                renders the presence of the applicant in the UK  undesirable
                or whether  there  are  other  factors  which  outweigh  the
                presumption in favour of removal,  or  give  applicants  the
                opportunity  to  raise  any  matters   relevant   to   those
                questions: such cases will no doubt be exceptional, but  the
                step  cannot  simply  be  ignored.   The   availability   of
                administrative review is not an answer,  not  least  because
                the applicant is not normally allowed  to  produce  evidence
                that was not produced before the  original  decision.   That
                unlawfulness can be avoided for the future by the  Secretary
                of State adopting a 'minded  to'  procedure,  which  informs
                applicants of his concerns and gives them the opportunity to
                show cause why ILR should not  be  refused  by  offering  an
                innocent explanation of the discrepancies (which  will  need
                to be particularised and  documented  so  far  as  possible)
                and/or  drawing  attention  to  matters  relevant   to   the
                undesirability or discretion issues.  ...

         222. Secondly, those defects need not lead to  a  paragraph  322(5)
                refusal being quashed if the UT is satisfied that  they  are
                immaterial - that is, that the result would  have  been  the
                same even if the applicants had been given an opportunity to
                explain the discrepancies; and it is principally in order to
                consider that question that we have remitted  three  of  the
                cases.  There may be an issue, which we have not  been  able
                to resolve on this appeal, as to the precise calibration  of
                the  test  of  immateriality;  but  it  may  be  of  limited
                importance in practice."

22. The first Claimant in this case did have the opportunity, as  I  stated
    earlier, to provide an innocent  explanation  to  the  judge  but  that
    explanation was rejected for reasons which are  unimpeachable.  I  find
    that the proportionality assessment needs to be  reconsidered  for  the
    reasons set out above and bearing in mind that no submissions were made
    by either party in respect of the position of the Claimant's  wife  and
    child.

     Decision

23. I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boylan-Kemp.  I set that decision aside and  make  the  following
    directions:

23.1.    The appeal is remitted for a hearing de novo before the First  tier
Tribunal in   Birmingham. The judge's findings in  respect  of    the  first
Claimant at [17] to [21] are    preserved.


23.2.    The remit of the appeal is confined to the proportionality of
removal of the Claimants   only.

23.3.    An Urdu speaking interpreter will be required.

23.4.    The hearing should be listed for one and a half hours.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 13 May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
