
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04531/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th March 2019                             |On 5th April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 zargara [t]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Row, promulgated on 7th  August  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham  on  31st  July  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and was born on 13th December
    1998, and is a female.  She applied for entry clearance to  the  UK  as
    the child of a [MT], a British citizen.  This application  was  refused
    by the Entry Clearance Officer on the basis that she had been separated
    from her family for over three years  by  choice  and  was  leading  an
    independent life.  The Entry Clearance Officer's decision is dated 21st
    January 2016.  A review conducted thereafter  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager is dated 19th September 2016.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she was 17 years old at the time  of  the
    application.  She was a minor.  She had  been  living  with  six  other
    siblings of hers in Afghanistan at the time.  It had been decided  that
    she would remain behind in  Pakistan  to  live  with  her  grandmother,
    whilst her mother and her remaining six siblings  came  to  the  UK  in
    2012, which they did  after  they  had  all  been  living  in  Pakistan
    together.  The grandmother was also in Pakistan and that is  where  the
    Appellant also lived with her.  The reason why the Appellant  was  left
    with the grandmother in Pakistan was that the grandmother was ill.  The
    Appellant stayed to look after her.  It was always anticipated that the
    Appellant would join the rest of the family in due course  in  the  UK.
    When the grandmother then died on 5th January  2014  in  Pakistan,  the
    Appellant went to live with the sponsoring father's eldest brother  and
    then the younger brother, and their families.  These family members had
    all moved about eight months ago back  to  Afghanistan  from  Pakistan.
    They were now living in the same property in Jalalabad.  The  Appellant
    has never worked, is uneducated, and is not married.

The Judge's Decision

 4. The judge began with the observation that the application  fell  to  be
    determined in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 298(iii) of
    HC 395.  It was necessary to determine whether the Appellant  was,  not
    leading an independent life, was  unmarried,  and  had  not  formed  an
    independent family unit.  The judge was not satisfied that any of  this
    was true.  There was a death certificate produced, to confirm that  the
    grandmother had died, but the judge was not persuaded that this was so,
    because it had been issued more than eighteen months after the  alleged
    death (paragraph 14).  The death certificate  also  recorded  that  the
    informant was a man called Amir Mohawaiya Abdullah, who  was  described
    as the sister of the deceased, but this could not be  correct,  because
    at the hearing the sponsoring father described Mr Abdullah as the  head
    of the community (paragraph 15).  There was also a difficulty with  the
    Afghan birth certificate and the Afghan ID card for the Appellant.  The
    sponsoring father had said that his daughter, the Appellant,  had  gone
    to Jalalabad  to  obtain  this  document.   The  document  records  the
    Appellant as being a housewife and her marital status as being married.
     The sponsoring father at the hearing said that  this  was  a  mistake.
    The judge unsurprisingly concluded that this seemed to be  odd  because
    if it was true the document ought not to have been allowed to be issued
    in that form, and no effort had been made to  correct  it  since  then.
    Indeed, the Appellant had not been described  as  a  dependant  in  her
    mother's application, when she and the rest of the children came to the
    UK in 2012.  The judge concluded that the Appellant was indeed  married
    and this is the reason why there is no evidence of financial dependency
    on the Sponsor either (paragraph 18).  The appeal was  dismissed  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 5. The judge then went on to consider  the  position  under  free-standing
    Article 8 jurisprudence.   He began with the observation that

         "There is really nothing to consider outside of the Rules.  If  the
         Appellant was able to show that she was still a  family  member  of
         the Sponsor and had not formed an independent family life she would
         succeed under paragraph 298.  The burden  of  proof  falls  on  the
         Appellant ..." (paragraph 20).

 6. The appeal was also dismissed under Article 8.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that there was no reference at all  by
    the judge to the oral evidence given by the  sponsoring  father,  whose
    evidence had been so roundly criticised, and  found  to  be  untenable.
    The grounds also state that the conclusion that Article 8 was not  even
    engaged was arguably unsustainable.

 8. On 1st March 2018, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    the judge ought to have referred to the oral  evidence  before  it  was
    criticised.  It was also significant that the Appellant was a minor  at
    the date  of  the  application,  a  young  Afghani  woman  with  little
    autonomy, and in these circumstances the conclusion that separating the
    Appellant permanently from her parents and the rest  of  the  siblings,
    did not engage Article 8, was one that was not open  to  the  judge  to
    make on the evidence.  Family life between parents and  minor  children
    is generally regarded as automatic (see paragraph 3  of  the  grant  of
    permission).

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 4th  March  2019,  Mr  Pipe  made  the  two
    following submissions.  First, that the judge  had  applied  the  wrong
    Rule,  namely  paragraph  298(iii)  in  considering  the  appeal   (see
    paragraph 13 and paragraph 20), but that this was not a material error,
    given that even if Rule 371 had been considered, as it  ought  to  have
    been because this was an in-country appeal, the question still remained
    the same, which was whether the Appellant was living  an  "independent"
    life.  In this respect, the judge had concluded that the Appellant  had
    formed her own independent family unit, in that she had  been  married,
    and had been described as a housewife in the  document  that  had  been
    disclosed by the Appellant herself.  Even so, submitted Mr Pipe,  given
    that the sponsoring father, who gave evidence in court, had strenuously
    denied that this was the case, his  evidence  needed  to  be  recorded,
    before it could be rejected.  There was no trace of his evidence  being
    recorded at all.  Second, there was the question of whether the  appeal
    succeeded outside the Immigration Rules, under free-standing Article  8
    ECHR jurisprudence, and here the judge had wrongly stated that,  "There
    is really nothing to consider outside of  the  Rules"  (paragraph  20).
    However, given that evidence was  given  before  the  Tribunal  by  the
    sponsoring father that the Appellant was a minor daughter, who formed a
    group of seven siblings of the sponsoring father, it was  difficult  to
    see how Article 8 was not even engaged, given that they  had  all  been
    living together up until 2012, before the rest of the siblings came  to
    the UK.

10. For her part, Mrs Aboni relied upon her Rule 24 response.   She  stated
    that the judge gave reasons to say why  the  Appellant  was  living  an
    independent life now.  There were documents produced and they were  the
    Appellant's documents.  The mother and the siblings made an application
    to come to the UK in 2012 in which the Appellant was not even described
    as a dependant.  The judge was entitled to come to the conclusions that
    he did.  There was no error of law.

11. In  his  reply,  Mr  Pipe  submitted  that  if  the  judge  was  making
    credibility findings, he could only do so upon the basis  of  assessing
    the oral evidence, and that in turn could only be done if  he  had  set
    out the evidence in the first place.  The Sponsor's  evidence  had  not
    been set out.  Yet, he had doggedly maintained that the  Appellant  had
    been living with her mother in Pakistan, together with the rest of  the
    siblings, up until 2012, when the rest of them left to come to the  UK.
    The conclusion, "I do not find  that  Article  8  ECHR  is  engaged  in
    respect of family or private life" (paragraph 20), could not  therefore
    be sustained.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First,  this  is  a  case  where
    there is diametrically  opposed  evidence  before  the  Tribunal.   The
    Appellant's sponsoring father maintained that the Appellant  has  never
    worked,  is  uneducated,  and  not  married,  and  does  not  live   an
    independent life.  He has given account of how and  why  the  Appellant
    was left behind in Pakistan when the rest of the family came to the  UK
    to join the sponsoring father in 2012.  She had  been  left  behind  to
    look after her elderly grandmother, who died  in  2014,  whereupon  the
    Appellant moved to go and live  with  her  uncles  and  their  families
    before relocating back to Afghanistan again, and where  she  is  living
    now in Jalalabad.  The documentation, however, tells a different story,
    in that  it  confirms  that  the  Appellant  is  married,  lives  as  a
    housewife, and is not dependent upon the sponsoring father.   In  these
    circumstances, it was incumbent upon the judge to set out the  evidence
    of the sponsoring father before reaching a decision on the  credibility
    of the evidence as a whole.

13. Second, as far as Article 8 is concerned the Appellant  had  lived  all
    her life with her mother and her siblings up until  2012.   She  was  a
    minor.  She was a minor even at  the  time  of  the  application.   The
    threshold for the engagement  of  Article  8  is  low.   This  is  well
    established.  The conclusion that Article 8 was  not  even  engaged  in
    respect of family life  is,  therefore,  in  these  circumstances,  not
    correct.  In terms of the second  of  the  Razgar  steps  also,  it  is
    difficult to see how family life is not interfered with in the decision
    by the Secretary of State.  Ultimately, the question that remains to be
    determined is that of proportionality.  That question  could  not  have
    been properly decided if the initial decision was that  Article  8  was
    not even engaged.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I
    remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than  Judge  Row,
    pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Directions.

15. No anonymity direction is made.

16. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date :3 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss
