
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03259/2018
                                                               HU/04818/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 May 2019                       |On 10 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                       ABDUS Syed Mohammad Monir AHMED
                                SABINA BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Badar of Counsel instructed by Connaught Law
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bulpitt promulgated on 19 March  2019  in  which  the  respective
    appeals of the Appellants were dismissed on human rights grounds.

2.   Both Appellants are citizens  of  Bangladesh.   They  are  husband  and
    wife.  The First Appellant was born on 7  September  1979;  the  Second
    Appellant was born on 14 September 1979.  The couple have a son born on
    18  August  2012  who  is  not  strictly  speaking  a  party  to  these
    proceedings - but necessarily his position is  inextricably  linked  to
    those of his parents.

3.   The First Appellant is indeed the principal applicant and Appellant  in
    matters in relation to the couple's immigration history.  His  wife  is
    essentially a dependant in  immigration  terms.  Accordingly  hereafter
    when I refer to 'the Appellant', I am referring to the First  Appellant
    unless the meaning indicates otherwise.

4.    For  present  purposes  it  is  unnecessary  to  detail  the  previous
    immigration  histories:  suffice  to  say,  the   Appellant   made   an
    application for indefinite leave to remain on 26  August  2016  on  the
    basis of ten years' continuous lawful residence.

5.   The application was refused for reasons  set  out  in  a  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 11 January 2018.  The Respondent did not
    dispute the fact of the Appellant's continuous lawful residence in  the
    United Kingdom for a period of ten years, but refused  the  application
    with particular reference to paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules.
     Paragraph 322(5) was invoked with reference to matters revealed during
    the course of investigation and enquiry showing  that  the  Appellant's
    tax returns did not correlate with the levels  of  income  declared  in
    support of some of his immigration applications.

6.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

7.   The appeal eventually came to  be  considered  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bulpitt on 1 March  2019.   The  Appellant  did  not  attend  and
    neither did his wife.  A representative instructed by  the  Appellant's
    solicitors attended - instructed only to apply for an adjournment.   It
    appears that the Appellant's brother attended the hearing.

8.   The application  for  the  adjournment  was  refused  and  the  hearing
    thereafter proceeded in the Appellant's absence.

9.   I pause to note that after the application had been refused, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge indicated that he was prepared to  put  the  matter
    back until later in the day  to  allow  the  Appellant  to  attend  the
    hearing but this offer was declined (paragraph 25).

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed  the  linked  appeals  for  the
    reasons given in the Decision and Reasons promulgated on 19 March 2019.



11.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    which was granted  on  22  April  2019  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Osborne.

12.  The primary focus of the challenge to the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is in  relation  to  the  refusal  to  grant  an  adjournment.
    Further to this, there is also a challenge  to  the  substance  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal - albeit less weight appears to  be
    placed on this latter aspect of the challenge.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal dealt with the application for  adjournment  at
    some  considerable  length;  even  before   directly   addressing   the
    application the Judge set out the history of the appeals  in  order  to
    provide the context. I can do little better by way of illustrating  the
    detailed thoroughness of the  Judge's  approach  than  reproducing  the
    relevant paragraphs from the Decision in their entirety:

         "The History of the Appeals

         7.   Neither appellant attended the  hearing  before  me.   At  the
             commencement of the hearing an application to adjourn was made
             on  behalf  of  the  appellants  by  Mr  Maurantonis,  Counsel
             instructed by Connaughts solicitors.  Mr Maurantonis  made  it
             clear to me that he was instructed only to make an application
             to adjourn and he would thereafter be engaged in a hearing  in
             another court.  To set the application to adjourn into context
             it is necessary to explain in some detail the history  of  the
             appellants' applications and their appeals.

         8.   When they submitted their applications in August 2016 the  two
             appellants were not  represented  by  solicitors.   The  first
             appellant's application was brought on the basis of his having
             had at least 10  years  continuous  lawful  residence  in  the
             United Kingdom and therefore he qualified for indefinite leave
             to remain by virtue  of  paragraph  276B  of  the  immigration
             rules.  The second appellant's application was brought on  the
             presumption that the first appellant's  application  would  be
             approved on the basis that  she  was  the  wife  of  a  person
             settled in the United Kingdom and therefore she qualified  for
             leave to remain by virtue of appendix FM of the rules.  Within
             their applications the  appellant's  both  made  reference  to
             their son Syed who was born on 18 August 2012 in London.

         9.    In  response  to  the  first  appellant's   application   the
             respondent wrote to him in May 2017 asking him to  complete  a
             tax  questionnaire  and  provide  evidence,  including  a  tax
             summary for the years during which he  was  self-employed  for
             consideration by the respondent when deciding his application.
              At this  point  the  appellant  instructed  DJ  Webb  and  Co
             Solicitors (DJ Webb) to represent him and his  wife  in  their
             immigration applications.  The respondent's bundle contains  a
             letter from DJ Webb dated 6 June 2017 in which they enclosed a
             letter of authority from the first appellant authorising  them
             to represent him.  In their letter DJ Webb explained  that  it
             had  become  apparent  to   the   appellant   that   incorrect
             information had previously been supplied to HMRC and therefore
             he had recently submitted  an  amended  set  of  tax  returns,
             copies of  which  were  enclosed  with  the  letter.   Further
             letters from DJ Webb were sent on 15 August 2017 and 5 January
             2018   providing   additional   explanations   and   documents
             concerning the appellant's amended tax returns.

         10.  The  respondent  refused  the  first  appellant's  application
             because, although  it  was  accepted  that  he  had  10  years
             continuous lawful residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  was
             decided in accordance with paragraph 322(5) of the immigration
             rules, that it  would  be  undesirable  to  permit  the  first
             appellant to remain in the United Kingdom in the light of  his
             conduct and character or associations.   This  was  due  to  a
             discrepancy between the income declared by the first appellant
             to the respondent when seeking leave to remain in  the  United
             Kingdom in April 2011 and the income  declared  by  the  first
             appellant to HMRC when making his tax  returns  for  the  same
             year and also a discrepancy between the income declared to the
             respondent when seeking leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
             in June 2013 and the amount of tax paid that year.  The second
             appellant's application was subsequently refused on the  basis
             that the  first  appellant  was  not  settled  in  the  United
             Kingdom.

         11.  Following the refusal by the  respondent  of  both  appellants
             applications, notices of appeal were submitted to the Tribunal
             by DJ Webb on the appellants' behalf.  The notices  identified
             DJ Webb as the appellant's legal  representatives.   Later  DJ
             Webb wrote to the Tribunal in January  and  February  2018  to
             correct the information about the  appellant's  address  which
             the Tribunal held.

         12.  The two appeals were first listed for hearing on  6  September
             2018.  Prior to the hearing DJ Webb wrote  to  the  respondent
             and the Tribunal chasing the service of a respondent's bundle.
              An appellant's bundle was served by DJ Webb  on  5  September
             2018 together  with  a  skeleton  argument.   The  appellant's
             bundle included a 10 page witness  statement  from  the  first
             appellant and a four page witness statement  from  the  second
             appellant.   The  bundle  also  contained  the  completed  tax
             questionnaire, amended tax return, amended tax calculations, a
             letter from HMRC and evidence of payment by the  appellant  to
             HMRC of his outstanding tax bill.

         13.  Neither appellant attended the hearing on  6  September  2018.
             Mr Shah a solicitor from DJ Webb, did appear and informed  the
             tribunal that the first appellant had gone to the accident and
             emergency department of Royal  London  Hospital  that  morning
             complaining of chest pains.  On this basis the hearing of  the
             appeals was adjourned, and the new date of hearing -  1  March
             2019 - was fixed.  The appellant was directed to serve medical
             evidence relating to his attendance at hospital  within  seven
             days.  In accordance with that direction DJ Webb wrote to  the
             tribunal on 10  September  2018  enclosing  a  certificate  of
             attendance  which  confirmed  tht  the  first  appellant   had
             attended the emergency department of the Royal London Hospital
             at 11.17 on 6 September together with  a  statutory  sick  pay
             form which confirmed that the appellant was fit to  return  to
             work the following day 7 September 2018.

         14.  Upon receipt of the written notice of the  new  hearing  date.
             DJ Webb wrote to the tribunal on 13 November 2018 to confirm a
             change of the appellants'  address.   The  next  communication
             concerning these appeals received by the tribunal was a letter
             dated 22nd of February 2019 from DJ Webb stating that they had
             been informed that day  that  the  appellants  had  instructed
             Connaughts solicitors to represent them in  their  immigration
             proceedings and asking to be taken off the record.   This  was
             followed by a further  letter  from  DJ  Webb  dated  25th  of
             February to the same effect which was sent to the tribunal  by
             special delivery.

         15.  At 6.46pm on 25  February  2019  Connaughts  Solicitors  faxed
             notification that they had been instructed and a  request  for
             an adjournment of  the  hearing  on  1st  March  2019  to  the
             tribunal.  Unfortunately the fax was not linked  to  the  case
             papers  prior  to  the  hearing  on  1st  March  2019  so  the
             application to adjourn was not considered until the morning of
             the hearing.

         The Application to Adjourn

         16.  As previously stated, neither appellant attended the  hearing.
             Instead, the brother of the first appellant  attended  with  a
             bundle  of  papers  including   a   letter   from   Connaughts
             Solicitors, a copy of the application  to  adjourn  which  had
             previously been faxed to the Tribunal and a  letter  from  the
             first appellant dated 28 February 2019.  Mr  Maurantonis  told
             me that his understanding was  that  the  appellants  had  not
             attended  because  having  received  advice  from  their   new
             solicitors they anticipated  the  case  being  adjourned.   He
             confirmed that the appellants still lived in East  London  and
             that he was able to contact them through the first appellant's
             brother who remained throughout the hearing.

         17.   On  behalf  of  the  appellants,  Mr  Maurankonis  sought  an
             adjournment of the appeal hearing on the basis that their  new
             solicitors were not in a position to  adequately  prepare  for
             the hearing and therefore there could not be a  fair  hearing.
             Mr Maurankonis relied on the application to adjourn drafted by
             Connaughts  Solicitors.   This   confirmed   that   Connaughts
             Solicitors were instructed by the  appellant  on  18  February
             2019.  It stated that since then they had written to  DJ  Webb
             on 21st and 22nd February 2019 asking a copy of the  file  but
             had received no response to their letters.

         18.  The letter from the first appellant suggested that the  reason
             why he had changed solicitors was because  responsibility  for
             his case had recently been passed from the most senior  lawyer
             at DJ Webb to a new lawyer at the firm.  The  first  appellant
             states that after working a few days with the new solicitor he
             was not at all happy and so chose to appoint  a  new  firm  to
             represent him and his wife.  The letter from Connaughts gave a
             different explanation,  it  says  that  despite  multiple  and
             frantic requests the appellant had been unable to get in touch
             with his previous solicitors (DJ Webb).

         19.  Mr Maurantonis submitted that without papers it had  not  been
             possible for Connaughts Solicitors to prepare for the  hearing
             and in these circumstances the appellants would be deprived of
             a fair hearing of their appeal if it were not be deprived of a
             fair hearing of their appeal if it were not adjourned.

         20.  On behalf of the respondent Ms Kugendran  submitted  that  the
             appellants were seeking to manipulate the tribunal in order to
             ensure that their appeals were heard after their son's seventh
             birthday at which point he would become a qualifying child  as
             defined in section 117D Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
             Act 2002.  Ms Kugendran submitted that this was apparent  from
             the appellant's failure to attend either of the hearing  dates
             and the late decision  to  change  solicitors.   Ms  Kugendran
             pointed out that the hearing date  had  been  set  six  months
             earlier giving the appellants ample  opportunity  to  instruct
             new representatives, but they chose  to  do  so  very  shortly
             before the scheduled hearing.   On  this  basis  Ms  Kugendran
             submitted that it would be in the  interests  of  justice  and
             fairness for the appeal to proceed.

         21.  It is common ground that the  Rule  4(3)(h)  of  the  Tribunal
             Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration   and   Asylum
             Chamber) Rules 2014 (the Rules) gives me the power to  adjourn
             the hearing and that rule 28 of the Rules gives me  the  power
             to proceed with the hearing in the absence of the  appellant's
             if it is in the  interests  of  justice  to  do  so.   I  must
             exercise my discretion in respect of both these  rules  within
             the overriding objective set out in rule two which is to  deal
             with cases fairly  and  justly  (see  rule  2  (3)).   Further
             guidance is provided to me in the Presidential  Guidance  Note
             number  one  of  2014,  paragraphs  6-9  of  which  deal  with
             applications  for  adjournments.   As  paragraph  6  of   that
             guidance makes clear the Upper Tribunal  decision  in  Nwaigwe
             (adjournment; fairness) (2014) UKUT 00418 (IAC) emphasises the
             importance of the test of fairness and the question of whether
             a party will be deprived of a fair hearing if  an  adjournment
             is refused.  I have taken into consideration and applied  this
             guidance when reaching my decision to refuse an adjournment.

         22.  As paragraph  6  of  Nwaigwe  recognises:  'in  some  cases  ,
             adjournment applications  based  on  particularly  trivial  or
             unmeritorious grounds may give rise to an assessment that  the
             process of the tribunal is being misused and will result in  a
             refusal.'  Having considered the  history  of  these  appeals,
             including the application for an adjournment  itself  I  found
             that it is likely that this was  one  such  case.   I  do  not
             accept the suggestion in the letter from Connaughts Solicitors
             that despite the multiple and frantic requests  the  appellant
             had been unable to get in touch with  DJ  Webb  solicitors  to
             prepare for the appeal.  This suggestion is inconsistent  with
             the letter from the first  appellant  in  which  he  describes
             'working for a few days with the new solicitor from DJ  Webb'.
             The  suggestion  is   also   inconsistent   with   DJ   Webb's
             conscientious and proactive dealings throughout the process of
             the appeal.  I consider  it  very  unlikely  that  a  firm  of
             solicitors would refuse to respond to requests for information
             from a client and from his new solicitors while simultaneously
             repeatedly  corresponding  with   the   tribunal.   In   these
             circumstances I do not accept the explanation  given  for  the
             very late change in solicitors.

         23.  Instead I find that the  late  change  of  solicitors  was  an
             attempt to present to the tribunal a fait accompli whereby the
             Tribunal was consider itself bound to  grant  an  adjournment.
             In reaching this conclusion  I  take  into  account  the  slow
             response to the change in solicitors including the  fact  that
             despite the impending  hearing  DJ  Webb  were  not  asked  to
             provide papers  until  three  days  after  the  appellant  had
             instructed his new solicitors.  Further, despite the two firms
             of solicitors offices being in close proximity no attempt  was
             made by either the new solicitors or the appellant  themselves
             to go to DJ Webb's and retrieve the papers.   Additionally,  I
             take account of the fact that neither appellant  attended  the
             hearing.  As Mr Maurantonis accepted, the appellants would not
             have been advised by the new solicitors that there was no need
             to attend and the presence of the  first  appellant's  brother
             with a written request for an  adjournment  demonstrates  that
             the appellants knew that the question of  whether  or  not  an
             adjournment  would  be  granted  was  still  to  be  resolved.
             Finally, I take account of the submission by Ms Kugendran that
             there is a clear incentive for the  appellants  to  delay  the
             hearing of this appeal until after  their  son's  birthday  in
             August.  In all these circumstances I found that the  Tribunal
             process was being misused through the application to  adjourn.



         24.  Notwithstanding this finding, I went on to consider whether  a
             fair  hearing  would  be  possible  in  the  absence  of   the
             appellants.  This appeal  revolves  around  a  straightforward
             disputed issue which is whether the  agreed  discrepancies  in
             the  first  appellant's  tax  returns  as  compared   to   his
             immigration applications means it is undesirable to permit him
             to remain in the United  Kingdom.   The  first  appellant  has
             known  about  this  issue   wince   he   completed   the   tax
             questionnaire in May 2017.  He has therefore had 20 months  to
             prepare for an argument over this  disputed  issue.   In  fact
             there is already significant evidence before me of  the  first
             appellant's position on this disputed issue and  his  evidence
             about it.  There are first the letters from DJ Webb solicitors
             from June and  August  2017  which  set  out  the  appellant's
             position.   More  recently  a  40  page  appellant's   bundle,
             including the appellant  first  appellant's  10  page  witness
             statement was served in advance of the adjourned hearing on  8
             September 2018 and but for the first appellant's  chest  pains
             this bundle would have formed the appellant's evidence on  the
             issue of that hearing.  Additionally a skeleton  argument  was
             also prepared and served ready for  that  hearing.   There  is
             therefore a large amount of evidence before  the  tribunal  on
             behalf the two appellants despite  their  absence.   In  these
             circumstances I found that a fair hearing was plausible in the
             appellant's absence.  When reaching this conclusion I also had
             regard to rule 2(2)(e) of the rules which states that  dealing
             with cases fairly and justly includes avoiding delay so far as
             compatible with proper consideration of the issues.

         25.  I therefore found that dealing with these appeals  fairly  and
             justly  meant  refusing  the  application   to   adjourn   and
             proceeding with the hearing.  Since the  appellant's  live  in
             London, when I informed  Mr  Maurantonis  of  my  decision  to
             refuse an adjournment I told him that I would put  the  matter
             back until the afternoon to enable the  appellant  to  attend.
             Having spoken to the first appellant's brother Mr  Maurantonis
             confirmed that the appellants would still not be attending the
             hearing.  On this basis I proceeded to hear the appeal and  Mr
             Maurantonis withdrew."

14.  The challenge to the refusal of the  application  to  adjourn  is  made
    with reference to paragraphs 2-5 of  the  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal.

15.  In respect of paragraph 2, which is broken down into four  subsections,
    Mr Badar has ably and succinctly sought to amplify certain  aspects  of
    the challenge.   So  far  as  paragraphs  3  to  5  are  concerned,  he
    acknowledges that these can essentially be summed up by the overarching
    submission that it was unfair for the appeal to proceed in the  absence
    of the Appellant because necessarily  that  inhibited  his  ability  to
    present his case to the Tribunal.

16.  In respect of paragraph 2 of the Grounds, subparagraph (i)  essentially
    'sets the scene' and contains no specific submission.

17.  Subparagraph (ii) essentially pleads that the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    in error in finding the basis upon which the Appellant had indicated he
    had had to change representatives was inconsistent. The  ground  is  in
    these terms:

         "The explanation of why the Applicant changed  solicitors  is:  the
         Applicant states that his matter had  been  passed  from  the  most
         senior lawyer to  a  new  lawyer.   The  Applicant's  cover  letter
         explains that the Applicant was unable to get  in  touch  with  his
         lawyer.  The IJ finds this as inconsistent  (p.22).   It  is  clear
         that the statement corroborates the Applicant's version  of  events
         that his matter was transferred from a  senior  lawyer  to  another
         one, whom the Applicant is unable to  get  in  touch  with.   As  a
         result, the Applicant changed legal representatives  prior  to  the
         hearing."

18.  In this context my attention was directed in  particular  to  paragraph
    18, where the Judge refers to the materials that  were  before  him  in
    support of the application, and also to paragraph 22  where  the  Judge
    draws these matters together before concluding that he did "not  accept
    the explanation given for the very late change in solicitors".

19.  The materials referred to at paragraph 18 are a  matter  of  record  on
    file.  The letter from the Appellant that was presented in  support  of
    the application for the adjournment indeed includes  matters  that  are
    adequately represented by the Judge's  summary  at  paragraph  18:  for
    example - "I was not at all happy after working a  few  days  with  new
    solicitor as I had to tell him everything from start to end".  Equally,
    the Judge's reference to the written submission seems to  be  a  clear,
    accurate, and adequate reflection of a passage at paragraph  4  of  the
    written submission - "his reason for changing legal representation  was
    due to the fact that  despite  the  Applicant's  multiple  (and  lately
    frantic) request he was unable to get in touch with his previous  legal
    representatives to prepare for his appeal".

20.  In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  absolutely  correct
    to  identify  that  these  were  discrepant,  inconsistent,   accounts.
    Necessarily this undermined the credibility of the explanation that was
    being advanced as to why the Appellant had felt it necessary to  change
    his legal representatives.

21.   In  the  circumstances  I  can  find  nothing  of  any  substance   in
    subparagraph (ii) of paragraph 2 of the grounds of challenge.

22.  Subparagraph 2(iii) is in these terms.

         "As the IJ mentioned in p. 10, the Applicant already meets the core
         requirements of 276B.  The only reason for refusal is under 322(5).
          Succeeding under Section 117D (p.20/23) would  still  entail  that
         the  issue  under  322(5)  would  need  to  be  dealt  with.    The
         Applicant's child meeting the requirements of the Section  117D  is
         not a trump card, nor would have the importance  of  qualification,
         for example, under Rule 276B...  The Respondent's  assumption  that
         the Applicants seek to 'manipulate'  the  Tribunal,  apart  from  a
         serious unsubstantiated allegation, could  not  possibly  have  the
         effect that it had made out to be.  Unfortunately, the IJ  accepted
         this reasoning, at paragraph 23."

23.  In amplification of this ground Mr Badar directed  my  attention  to  a
    passage in the recent case of Balajigari v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home  Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  673   at   paragraph   39,   which
    uncontroversially indicates that the  circumstance  of  there  being  a
    qualifying child will not necessarily lead  to  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain depending upon the circumstances of a particular case.

24.  It seems to me that the difficulty with the submission at  subparagraph
    (iii) is that it is premised on the notion that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge thought that if the Appellant could delay his appeal  until  such
    time as his son reached the age  of  7  (i.e.  August  2019),  when  he
    perceived that he would win his case by simple reason of there being  a
    qualifying child. I do not see that that was the approach of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

25.  I considered with Mr Badar the substance of  the  Presenting  Officer's
    submissions before the First-tier  Tribunal  (paragraph  20),  and  the
    Judge's conclusions in this regard (paragraph 23).  In neither of those
    passages - or anywhere else - does the foundation for the submission in
    subparagraph (iii) emerge.  I cannot identify at all  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge thought that the Appellant considered that he would
    automatically win his case if he could delay matters until such time as
    his child became a qualifying child. Rather, the Judge proceeds on  the
    basis that this might improve the Appellant's prospects in the  appeal:
    it seems to me that that was a matter that was open to the Judge.

26.  The remaining ground of challenge  under  paragraph  2  -  subparagraph
    (iv) - is essentially  that  the  Judge  introduced  factors  into  the
    Article 8 consideration of his own motion.  This is a matter that  goes
    to the substance of the decision in the appeal, rather than the reasons
    for refusing the adjournment.  On that basis I do not consider it  adds
    anything to the primary submission.

27.  It seems to me absolutely clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    considered the application for adjournment with manifest  care  and  in
    very considerable detail.  The full contextual history was  referenced;
    the substance of the application was expressly  considered;  the  Judge
    made findings of primary fact that were open to him on  the  materials;
    the findings were considered appropriately within the framework of  the
    Procedure Rules and the  Presidential  Guidance  Note,  and  also  with
    reference to guidance  from  case  law  such  as  Nwaigwe.   Clear  and
    sustainable reasons were given for refusing the application.

28.   The  essential  position  was  that  the  Appellant  had   had   ample
    opportunity to participate in the appeal process.  He  had  prepared  a
    bundle and statements addressing the issues in  the  appeal.  The  only
    claimed difficulty being presented at the time  of  the  hearing  on  1
    March 2019 arose because - on his  account  -  he  had  had  to  change
    representatives at short notice.  The Judge rejected this  explanation,
    and necessarily therefore rejected the offered explanation of  why  the
    Appellant felt unable to participate in proceedings at the time of  the
    listed hearing.  In short, the Appellant  was  unable  to  explain  his
    claimed present difficulties.  Even then, the Judge made it clear  that
    it was open to the Appellant to attend the hearing  so  that  he  could
    provide oral  evidence  in  support  of  his  written  evidence.   That
    invitation was declined; no reason was offered for declining - that  to
    the First-tier Tribunal or now to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  all  the
    circumstances I fail to see that the Appellant has had  anything  other
    than the fullest opportunity to engage with the appeal process. In  all
    such circumstances I can identify no procedural unfairness in  refusing
    to grant an adjournment.  I reject the primary basis of the  challenge.



29.  As regards the challenge to the substance of the appeal, I  have  noted
    already the residual aspect of the primary challenge seeking to  impugn
    an aspect of  the  overall  balance  with  reference  to  paragraph  46
    (paragraph 2(iv) of the grounds).  In this context Mr Badar  identified
    that it was specifically the factor listed at paragraph 46(e) to  which
    objection was taken - "The appellants would return to Bangladesh having
    achieved an education and job experience in the  United  Kingdom  which
    would give them an advantage in the job market in Bangladesh".   It  is
    submitted that that was essentially a speculative observation, and  not
    founded on any express evidence.

30.  True it might be that there was no express evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal with regard to the job market in Bangladesh, but it seems
    to me that it was a reasonable inference for the Judge to draw that the
    experience gained during the time in the United  Kingdom  would  be  of
    some value in  the  job  market  in  Bangladesh  which  would  put  the
    Appellant at an advantage over others without such  international  work
    experience.   I  can  find  nothing  expressly  objectionable  in  that
    consideration.

31.  The focus of paragraphs 6 and 7 of the  grounds  of  challenge  are  in
    reference to the Judge's observation at paragraphs  44  in  respect  of
    'best interests' of the child, and the case of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC
    53.  The primary criticism in this regard is that the Judge  considered
    the 'real world' position on the premise that the parents did not  have
    lawful status in the United Kingdom, it being pointed out that  at  all
    material times the  Appellants  had  had  leave  to  remain,  had  made
    applications 'in-time', and had been successful in those  applications.
    Whilst those circumstances are correct, it seems  to  me  it  does  not
    undermine what was being said  by  the  Judge  at  paragraph  44.   The
    position with regard to the 'real world' situation in  considering  the
    position of the Appellants' child was premised on the position  of  the
    parents being that they would not have further leave to remain - if  it
    was otherwise the situation  for  the  child  would  not  require  such
    consideration.

32.  Criticism is also made that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    factor into the 'balance sheet' approach the period of lawful residence
    that the Appellant had enjoyed in the United Kingdom.  It seems  to  me
    that that is not a matter ultimately of any  material  relevance.   The
    Judge sets out at paragraphs 45-48 - again it seems to me with manifest
    care and detail - the 'balance sheet', putting the factors against  the
    Appellants at paragraph 46 and the factors in favour of the  Appellants
    at paragraphs 47.  Included in paragraph 47 is a recognition  that  the
    Appellants have lived in the United Kingdom for a  considerable  period
    of time.  I do not accept that it is likely that the Judge  lost  sight
    of the fact that that was pursuant to leave duly granted.  However, any
    reliance upon the lawfulness of that position is necessarily undermined
    by the fact that successive periods  of  leave  were  only  secured  by
    presenting material that did not adequately  or  properly  reflect  the
    Appellant's economic circumstances and which was a  matter  of  express
    adverse finding by the First-tier Tribunal Judge (see paragraph 40).

33.  Accordingly, I can see nothing of material  substance  in  any  of  the
    matters of challenge to the substantive decision under Article 8.

Notices of Decisions

34.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained  no  material  error
    of law and accordingly stand

35.  Both appeals remain dismissed.

36.  No anonymity directions are sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 3 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
