
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04681/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 29 October 2019                   |On 4 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                  GANG [Z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Jagadesham, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent made on 7 February 2018 to refuse his human rights claim.

 2. His appeal against that decision was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal
    in a decision promulgated on 16 November 2018 but, for the reasons  set
    out in the attached decision, that decision was set aside by the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK on 14th January 1992  and  was  granted
    leave to enter as a student until 14th January 1993.  On 3rd April 1992
    he was granted further leave to remain until 31st  December  1994.  His
    leave to remain as a student was subsequently  further  extended  until
    25th July 1996.

 4. On 16th November 1995 the appellant pleaded guilty to the  manslaughter
    of his wife.  He was sentenced to three years' imprisonment.

 5. On 9th May  1996  the  appellant  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
    deportation.  On  19th  June  1996  a  decision  was  made  to  make  a
    deportation order.  The appellant appealed  against  that  decision  on
    27th June 1996 and made an asylum claim on  11th  December  1996.   The
    asylum claim was refused on 17th January 1998.  The  appellant  entered
    an appeal which was treated as abandoned when he failed to  attend  the
    hearing.  On 26th October 1998 a signed deportation order was served on
    him.

 6. On 26th April 2001 the appellant was listed as an  absconder.   He  re-
    established contact with the Home Office on  10th  September  2015  and
    attempted to regularise his stay in the UK. Representations  were  made
    on his behalf that he should be allowed to remain in the UK, based upon
    his private and family life. He had by then been in a relationship with
    a new partner with whom he had two children.  That  relationship  broke
    down.

 7. The Secretary of State refused the human rights claim on  7th  February
    2018.  It was accepted that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his daughter born in 2004 and his  son  born
    in 2009, and it was accepted that the children are British citizens.

 8. It was accepted that it would be unduly harsh for the children to  live
    in China  with  the  appellant.   They  live  with  their  mother  (the
    appellant's former partner).  It was not  accepted  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK if the appellant  was
    deported.

 9. At the FtT hearing the judge noted that the appellant's  children  were
    aged 14 and 9 at the date of hearing.  The judge  noted  [2]  that  the
    basis of the appeal was  that  it  would  not  be  proportionate  under
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the appellant's  children
    to remain in the UK without him.

10. The judge found that the appellant had absconded for a very significant
    period and that he did not live with his children, but saw them once  a
    week and from time to time they stayed with  him.   The  appellant  had
    taken his children on holidays and also took them  to  school  parents'
    evenings.  He provided  some  finance  for  their  maintenance  and  at
    paragraph 15 it was found that the appellant "and  the  children  enjoy
    lively, social media exchanges."

11. The judge noted that there was no independent social  worker's  report,
    as the children's mother would not consent to this.   The  judge  noted
    and accepted that the mother's present partner had sent  text  messages
    to the appellant, threatening to tell his children about  his  criminal
    conviction, about which they knew nothing.

12. The judge  at  paragraph  [18]  was  "perturbed  about  the  children's
    situation."  The judge found  at  paragraph  [26]  "that  it  would  be
    extremely damaging for the children to be abruptly deprived of  contact
    with their father.  The children have got used to having their  father.
    There is the added difficulty of their father's past and  how  that  is
    dealt with."

13. The judge also found at [26] that "this appeal falls in favour  of  the
    appellant's children rather than the public interest in seeing  foreign
    criminals deported."  At paragraph 27 the judge found "it is shown that
    removal  of  the  appellant  would  be  disproportionate  to  the  best
    interests of the children.  That is the only aspect that has  exercised
    the Tribunal."  The appeal was  therefore  allowed  with  reference  to
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

14. The respondent then  sought  permission  to  appeal.  Firstly,  it  was
    contended the judge had made a material misdirection in  law.   It  was
    accepted that the judge had summarised the relevant  Immigration  Rules
    in relation to deportation, but had not engaged with  them  or  made  a
    finding.  It was submitted that the Immigration Rules remain central to
    the assessment of whether deportation is proportionate  and  the  judge
    had failed to consider whether deportation would be unduly harsh  which
    was the appropriate test.

15. It was contended that the judge had adopted a free-standing  Article  8
    assessment rather than considering whether the exception to deportation
    in section 117C (5) applied, or the similar exception in paragraph 399A
    of the Immigration Rules.

16. The second Ground of Appeal claimed that the judge had given inadequate
    reasons for the conclusion reached.  It was submitted that the findings
    made  by  the  judge  revealed  no  more  than  the  usual  outcome  of
    deportation cases, and the judge had identified nothing which could  be
    said to amount to unduly harsh or very compelling.  Reliance was placed
    upon KO (Nigeria) and Others [2018] UKSC 53.

17. It was submitted that the judge had treated the best interests  of  the
    children  as  the  primary  consideration   rather   than   a   primary
    consideration and had not considered the best interests in the  context
    of deportation.  It was contended  that  the  judge  had  not  attached
    weight to the fact that the Claimant had absconded between 2001 -  2015
    and remained in the UK without leave since  26th  July  1996,  and  had
    placed too much significance on the Claimant's rehabilitation  and  the
    fact that he did not represent a danger to the public.

18. Permission to appeal was granted on 18 December 2018  by  FtT  Judge  S
    Smith in the following terms;

         "3.  There is an arguable material error  of  law.   The  operative
             part of the judge's analysis arguably leapt prematurely into a
             free-standing Article 8 assessment, without referring  to  the
             applicable rules and statutory framework  established  by  the
             Respondent and parliament respectively to govern the  approach
             to the public interest in deportation matters.  In  doing  so,
             the public interest in the deportation  of  foreign  criminals
             was arguably understated.   The  judge  arguably  tainted  his
             assessment of the children's best interests by focusing on the
             "largely irrelevant" question of when the children  should  be
             informed about their father's criminal past,  rather  than  by
             considering that a  certain  amount  of  harshness  is  "due".
             Finally,  the  judge  arguably  did  place  too  much  on  the
             Appellant's rehabilitation,  at  the  expense  of  the  public
             interest in the deportation of foreign criminals."

19. The appeal was then listed before the Upper Tribunal on  11  July  2019
    when it was heard by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  and  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hall. For the reasons given in  the  attached  decision,
    they found that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error of law.

20. With reference to the first ground, the judge did make reference to the
    relevant  exception  to  deportation  in   section   117C(5)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002  Act)  and
    paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules.   The  judge  did  not  however
    engage with the relevant test.  The issue to be decided  by  the  judge
    was whether the Claimant's deportation would be  unduly  harsh  on  his
    children.  The Secretary of State accepted  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to live in China, and therefore  the  issue  was
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in  the  UK
    without the Claimant.

21. The judge did not follow  the  guidance  in  KO  (Nigeria),  which  was
    published on 24th October 2018, after the FtT hearing on 4th  September
    2018, but before promulgation of the  FtT  decision  on  16th  November
    2018.  At paragraph 23 of KO (Nigeria) it is stated;

         "23. On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly
             intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
             "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account of  the
             public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
             Further the word "unduly" implies an  element  of  comparison.
             It assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is
             a level which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant
             context.  "Unduly" implies something going beyond that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),  that  is
             the public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.
             One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent."

22. There is no proper indication in the FtT decision that  the  judge  has
    approached the appeal by considering the high threshold of  whether  it
    would be unduly harsh,  and  has  failed  to  make  findings  upon  the
    appropriate test.

23. With  reference  to  the  second  ground  there  is  an  inadequacy  of
    reasoning.   Guidance  on  adequacy  of  reasoning  is   contained   in
    Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) the headnote
    of which is set out below;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

24. In this appeal it was accepted that the children do not live  with  the
    appellant.  The judge noted the absence of an independent social worker
    report and there was no evidence from the mother of the children.

25. The decision appears to be largely based upon the judge's concern  that
    the mother's current partner may tell the children about the Claimant's
    previous conviction.  It is unclear how the appellant's presence in the
    UK would make a difference to whether or not the disclosure is made.

26. It is unclear why at paragraph [26] the judge concludes that  it  would
    be extremely damaging for the  children  to  be  abruptly  deprived  of
    contact with their father.  It is unclear why this would amount to  the
    test of "unduly harsh" being satisfied.

27. At paragraph [27] the judge confirms that the removal of the  appellant
    would be disproportionate to the best interests of  the  children,  and
    that "is the only aspect that has exercised  the  Tribunal".  The  best
    interests of children are a primary consideration but not  a  paramount
    consideration and are  not  the  only  consideration.   The  conclusion
    reached by the judge at paragraph [26] is "that proportionality in this
    appeal falls in favour of the  appellant's  children  rather  than  the
    public interest in seeing foreign criminals  deported."   There  is  no
    adequate reasoning as to why this is the case,  which  stems  from  the
    fact that the judge appears to have considered first and foremost,  the
    best interests of the children,  rather  than  considering  the  public
    interest  in  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  and   whether   the
    deportation would be "unduly harsh."

28. The matter was then adjourned for further evidence and submissions.  It
    then came before me sitting alone on 30 October 2019 for it to  be  re-
    made, taking into account the additional evidence produced.  That is in
    the form of witness statements from the appellant, his  estranged  wife
    and a report from Professor Zeitlin, a psychiatrist.   In  addition,  I
    heard evidence from the appellant who adopted his witness statement but
    was not cross-examined.

29. Mr McVeety submitted that limited  weight  could  be  attached  to  the
    report of Professor Zeitlin as he had considered only the documents put
    before him; he had not had an interview with either  the  appellant  or
    the children.  While it was not doubted that the children were  unaware
    of the appellant's conviction for manslaughter in which he  had  killed
    his former wife, that was a situation which had  arisen  owing  to  the
    actions of the appellant and his former  wife.   He  submitted  further
    that  the  consequences  of  the  children  learning  of  this,   taken
    cumulatively with the other issues,   were  not  shown  by  the  expert
    report to be so serious such that  the  deportation  of  the  appellant
    would be unduly harsh, relying on PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213  at
    [39].   He  submitted  that  whilst  there  would  be  changes  in  the
    children's situation in that the norms would be changed  that  was  the
    effect of deportation.  He submitted  there  must  be  something  which
    elevates it beyond that which, he submitted, was not the case here.  It
    was accepted that the appellant provides day-to-day  guidance  for  the
    children  and  that  the  risk  identified  by  Professor  Zeitlin  was
    theoretical.

30. Mr Jagadesham relied on his skeleton argument,  submitting  that  there
    was an active and deeply involved relationship  between  the  appellant
    and his children.  He submitted it was  important  to  note  that  both
    children, in particular the daughter, had messaged  their  father  when
    encountering difficulties.   He  accepted  that  there  was  no  direct
    contact between Professor Zeitlin and the children but this was due  to
    the mother not even permitting social workers to get involved and  that
    what I should be concerned with here was the best  available  evidence.
    It was accepted that the children will need  to  learn  of  what  their
    father had done at some point and that Professor  Zeitlin  was  of  the
    opinion that the children would need him to be present.   He  submitted
    this is not a case where there was a  commonplace  emotional  fall-out;
    this was not rewarding the actions of the parents but  recognising  the
    specifics of the  situation.   He  submitted  that  there  would  be  a
    disclosure to the children if the father was  deported  and  whilst  in
    hindsight it might have been better if they had been told, this was not
    so.  He submitted that this was a delicate situation made all the  more
    complex by the attitude of the new partner as shown by his texts.

31. The appellant asked to address me which I permitted.  He explained that
    he had been involved with the daily running of his children's lives and
    they had lived with him until four years earlier.   The  birth  of  the
    daughter had been difficult and the mother had been ill  and  they  had
    formed a very close bond.  He explained his daughter was timid, had not
    many friends and relied on him to a significant degree.

    The Law

32. Section 117C provides as follows:-

         "117C  Article 8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

33. The Immigration Rules provide:

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported, because of
             compelling circumstances over and above those described in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain
             in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

34. In KO (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2018]  UKSC  53  the  Supreme  Court  held  at
    paragraph 23:-

         "23. On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies  something  going  beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set  by  section  117C(1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my  view  (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next  section)  is  a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the  parent's  offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence.  Nor  (contrary  to  the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR  240,
         paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement  to  show  "very
         compelling reasons". That would  be  in  effect  to  replicate  the
         additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect   to
         sentences of four years or more."

    In addition, at [27] the Supreme Court  approved  guidance  as  to  the
    meaning of unduly harsh given in MK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD  [2015]  UKUT
    223 saying this:-

         27.  Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh"  in
         this context was given by the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J President
         and UT Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), [2015]  INLR  563,  para
         46, a decision given  on  15  April  2015.  They  referred  to  the
         "evaluative assessment" required of the tribunal:

             "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly  harsh'
             does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,  undesirable
             or merely difficult. Rather,  it  poses  a  considerably  more
             elevated threshold. 'Harsh' in this context, denotes something
             severe,  or  bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or
             comfortable. Furthermore, the addition of the adverb  'unduly'
             raises an already elevated standard still higher."

    On the facts of that particular case, the Upper Tribunal held that  the
    test was satisfied:

         "Approached in this way, we have no hesitation in  concluding  that
         it would be unduly harsh for either  of  the  two  seven  year  old
         British citizen children concerned to  be  abruptly  uprooted  from
         their United Kingdom life setting and lifestyle and exiled to  this
         struggling, impoverished and plague stricken west African state. No
         reasonable or right thinking person would  consider  this  anything
         less that cruel."
    This view was based simply on the wording of the subsection, and did
    not apparently depend on any view of the relative severity of the
    particular offence. I do not understand the conclusion on the facts of
    that case to be controversial.

35. Commenting on KO (Nigeria), the Upper Tribunal in RA (Iraq) said this:-

         (1)  In KO (Nigeria) & Others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53, the approval by the Supreme Court of the
         test of "unduly harsh"  in  section  117C(5)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, formulated by the  Upper  Tribunal
         in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), does not mean that the test includes the way
         in which the Upper Tribunal applied its formulation to the facts of
         the case before it.

         (2)  The way in which a court or tribunal should  approach  section
         117C remains as set out  in  the  judgment  of  Jackson  LJ  in  NA
         (Pakistan) & Another v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 662.

         (3)   Section  117C(6)  applies  to  both  categories  of   foreign
         criminals  described  by  Lord  Carnwath  in  paragraph  20  of  KO
         (Nigeria);  namely,  those  who  have   not   been   sentenced   to
         imprisonment of 4 years or more, and those  who  have.  Determining
         the seriousness of the  particular  offence  will  normally  be  by
         reference to the length of sentence imposed and what the sentencing
         judge had to say about seriousness and mitigation; but the ultimate
         decision is for the court  or  tribunal  deciding  the  deportation
         case.

         (4)  Rehabilitation will not ordinarily  bear  material  weight  in
         favour of a foreign criminal.

36. It is also evident from the decision of the Upper Tribunal in that case
    that if Exception 1 or 2 is not met, then it would be necessary  to  go
    on  to  consider  whether  there  are   nonetheless   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

37. In SSHD v PG (Jamaica)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1213  the  Court  of  Appeal
    described the issue as this:-

         38.  The decision in KO (Nigeria) requires this court to  adopt  an
         approach which differs from that taken by Judge Griffith and  Judge
         Finch. In the circumstances of this  appeal,  I  do  not  think  it
         necessary to refer to decisions predating KO (Nigeria), because  it
         is no longer appropriate, when considering section 117C(5)  of  the
         2002 Act, to balance the severity of the consequences for  SAT  and
         the children of PG's deportation against  the  seriousness  of  his
         offending. The issue is whether there was evidence on which it  was
         properly open to Judge Griffith to  find  that  deportation  of  PG
         would result for SAT and/or the children in a degree  of  harshness
         going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any partner  or
         child of a foreign criminal facing deportation.

         39.  Formulating the issue in that way, there is in  my  view  only
         one answer to  the  question.  I  recognise  of  course  the  human
         realities of the situation, and I do not doubt  that  SAT  and  the
         three children will suffer great distress if PG is deported. Nor do
         I doubt that their lives will in a number  of  ways  be  made  more
         difficult than they are at  present.  But  those,  sadly,  are  the
         likely consequences of the deportation of any foreign criminal  who
         has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  partner  and/or
         children in this country. I accept Mr Lewis's submission that if PG
         is deported, the effect on SAT and/or their three children will not
         go beyond the degree of harshness which is necessarily involved for
         the partner or child of a foreign criminal who is deported. That is
         so, notwithstanding that  the  passage  of  time  has  provided  an
         opportunity for the family ties between PG,  SAT  and  their  three
         children to become stronger than they were  at  an  earlier  stage.
         Although no detail was provided to this court of the  circumstances
         of what I have referred to as the knife incident,  there  seems  no
         reason to doubt that it was both a comfort and an advantage for SAT
         and the children,  in  particular  R,  that  PG  was  available  to
         intervene when his son was a victim of  crime.  I  agree,  however,
         with Mr Lewis's submission that the knife incident, serious  though
         it may have been, cannot of itself  elevate  this  case  above  the
         norm.  Many  parents  of  teenage  children  are  confronted   with
         difficulties and upsetting events of one sort or another, and  have
         to face one or more of their children going  through  "a  difficult
         period" for one reason or another, and the fact that a  parent  who
         is a foreign criminal will no longer be in a position to assist  in
         such circumstances cannot of itself mean that the  effects  of  his
         deportation are unduly harsh for his partner and/or  children.  Nor
         can the difficulties which SAT will inevitably face,  increased  as
         they are by her laudable ongoing efforts to further  her  education
         and so to improve her earning capacity, elevate the case above  the
         commonplace so far as the effects of PG's deportation  on  her  are
         concerned. In this  regard,  I  think  it  significant  that  Judge
         Griffith at paragraph 67 of her judgment referred to the "emotional
         and behavioural fallout" with which  SAT  would  have  to  deal:  a
         phrase which, to my mind, accurately summarises the effect  on  SAT
         of PG's deportation, but at the same time reflects its  commonplace
         nature.

38. I accept, and it is not  in  dispute,  that  there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the appellant and his children

39. The appellant spoke movingly about his relationship with his  children,
    in particular with his daughter.  I have no doubt that although they no
    longer live together there is a very close, emotional bond between them
    and that his daughter places a significant degree of trust  in  him  as
    shown by what she wishes to explain to him.  I am satisfied  also  that
    the relationship is close enough for the son to be demonstrating to his
    father in WhatsApp messages how he can now write in Mandarin.

40. While I accept  that  the  appellant  does  no  longer  live  with  his
    children, the relationship is still very close and that  both  children
    look to him for guidance.

41. There is an unusual context to this case.  As noted, the appellant  was
    previously convicted of the manslaughter of his then  wife  some  years
    ago.  That was well before the children were born and they are  unaware
    of his conviction.  That is because the appellant and his  second  wife
    chose not to tell the children of this or, it appears, the  deportation
    proceedings or the fact that the appellant may be  compelled  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  It is not for me to judge  whether  that  was  the
    correct course of action; it is simply the factual  background  to  the
    case.

42. Given the ages of the children now, it is inevitable  that  they  would
    wish to ask questions as to why their father is being required to leave
    the United Kingdom.  Again, what the appellant and his  wife  (and  for
    that matter her new partner) tell the children is a matter for them.

43. I accept  from  Professor  Zeitlin's  report  that  there  are  studies
    regarding the trauma which occurs to children when they learn that  one
    parent has killed the other.  That  would  inevitably  be  a  traumatic
    episode for a child in that position.  But that is  not  the  situation
    here, as Professor Zeitlin recognises.  Further, as  Professor  Zeitlin
    has not spoken to any of the people involved, any observations  he  can
    make are generic and not related to the specific circumstances of those
    involved.

44. In this context, and  whilst  I  do  not  dispute  Professor  Zeitlin's
    expertise, I conclude that his report is (and this is not  a  criticism
    of him, merely an observation) in the absence of any direct contact  or
    interview with those involved, of limited  value.   It  does  not,  for
    example, identify any particular vulnerabilities within the children or
    that they have any particular emotional needs over and above what would
    be normal in the circumstances of children who  are  living  separately
    from their father, albeit having regular contact.

45. Nor is the timing of the revelation to the children of the  appellant's
    conviction necessarily going to occur after the appellant is  deported.
    There appears to be no good reason why this  could  not  be  undertaken
    relatively  quickly  and  the  children  prepared  for  their  father's
    removal.   In  reality,  there  is  insufficient  evidence   that   the
    circumstances in this case will  be  so  traumatic  as  to  render  the
    situation of the children unduly harsh.  There is no  reason  why  they
    would not be able to communicate with their  father  in  China  in  the
    manner they  do  so,  albeit  that  some  messaging  services  make  it
    difficult to exchange photographs from behind  the  firewall  in  place
    between China and the rest of the world.  There does not appear  to  be
    any reason why they could not visit China with  their  mother  or  meet
    somewhere else outside the United Kingdom.

46. It appears that most of the harm that it is argued will  occur  to  the
    children will flow from the fact that  the  appellant  and  his  former
    partner have simply not told the children the reality of the situation.
     One might have thought that they would have given  some  consideration
    to the fact that the children will need to find out  someday  what  has
    happened and consequently they will learn that their parents, the  most
    important adults in their life, have concealed important  matters  from
    them.

47. Turning back to PG (Jamaica) I have no doubt that the children's  lives
    will be more difficult than they are at present.  There is, I consider,
    insufficient material to show that the  consequences  are  such  as  to
    elevate this case above the norm and I accept that the appellant,  will
    no longer be in a position to assist  the  former  partner  in  looking
    after the children.  There will inevitably in this case be an emotional
    and possibly also a behavioural fall-out but there is nothing  in  this
    case which although it is unusual in the form of the  concealment  that
    has gone on, such as to make the effects on the children of deportation
    unduly harsh.  Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the appellant meets
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules such  that  he  falls  within
    Exception 2.

48. I must therefore go on to continue whether despite the  fact  that  the
    exception  is  not  met,  there   are   nonetheless   very   compelling
    circumstances   such    that    the    appellant's    deportation    is
    disproportionate.

49. I bear in mind that in this case the appellant's conviction was a  long
    time ago but equally he has never had leave to be here.  His age  is  a
    matter which I take into account along with the other factors  set  out
    in Section 117C and 117B.  I have no doubt that the appellant  is  able
    to speak English and would  be  able  to  be  financially  independent.
    These, however, are neutral matters.   His  conviction  was  inevitably
    serious resulting in a three year sentence upon a guilty plea.

50. I have considered the extent to which the appellant has come  close  to
    meeting exceptions 1 and 2. He is not in a relationship with a partner.
    While he does have a relationship with his children, he does  not  meet
    that exception and does not live with them.

51. There is insufficient evidence to show  that  the  appellant  would  be
    unable to support himself in China or to obtain employment  there  even
    though I accept he has not lived  there  for  many  years.   Given  the
    changes which have taken place in that country it may be difficult  for
    him to adapt but equally he has skills obtained in the  United  Kingdom
    including clear fluency in English.   I do not  consider  that  in  the
    circumstances of this case, given the appellant's  immigration  status,
    that any blame  attaches  to  the  respondent  for  not  deporting  the
    appellant.

52. Taking all of these factors into account, and viewing the evidence as a
    whole I conclude that there are not very compelling circumstances  such
    that deportation would be  disproportionate.   Accordingly,  for  these
    reasons, I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

53. I remake the appeal by dismissing it on all grounds.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 29 November 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



