
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/04404/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th February 2019                  |    On 19th March 2019                |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               Mr Mannan Rana
                        (NO ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I MacDonald QC (Counsel), instructed by Adam
                    Bernard Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Boyes, promulgated on 8th November 2018, following a hearing at Hatton
Cross on 19th September 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied
for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus
the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, 3rd December 1988, and was
born on 3rd December 1988.  He appealed against the decision of the
Respondent dated 31st January 2018, refusing to grant him indefinite leave
to remain.

The Salient Facts

The salient facts are not in dispute.  The Appellant entered the UK on 30th
August 2007.  He entered as a student.  He had leave until 31st July 2009.
He was granted further periods of leave to remain until 31st October 2009.
All of his subsequent applications for leave to remain were made in time.
He had continuous lawful residence from 30th August 2007 until 30th January
2015.  On 29th January 2015, however, he made an application for further
leave to remain on human rights grounds.  His application was refused.  He
appealed.  The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill on 18th
May 2016 and dismissed on 25th May 2016.  It is accepted by all concerned
that the Appellant's appeal rights were exhausted on 2nd March 2017.
Thereafter, the Appellant remained in the UK.  He did so until he made an
application for further leave to remain on family and private life grounds
on 14th March 2017.  On 3rd August 2017 he made a variation of leave to
remain on the basis of ten years' lawful continuous residence in this
country.  It is the refusal of that application that is the subject matter
of this appeal.  This is because the Respondent Secretary of State
maintains that the Appellant had not accrued ten years' lawful residence
and did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276B(i)(a) of the
Immigration Rules.

The Judge's Findings

Judge Boyes on 19th September 2018 had regard to the continuous lawful
residence provisions of the Immigration Rules, drawing specific attention
to the Rule in relation to ten years' continuous lawful residence at
paragraph 276A(b).  This refers to "lawful residence" as meaning
"continuous residence" (that is, pursuant to existing leave to enter or
remain).  Under Rule 39E of the Immigration Rules, if an application was
made within fourteen days of the applicant's leave expiring, then there is
what is referred to as "exceptions for overstayers".

At the hearing before Judge Boyes, however, Counsel at the time did not
rely upon paragraph 39E, although he was made aware of this, and the judge
observed that:

"This is quite right because paragraph 39E when read together with
paragraph 276B(iii) dictates whether or not an applicant is treated as
being in the UK in breach of the Immigration Rules at the time that the
application is made. Paragraph 39E does not create 'lawful' residence for
the purposes of 276A(b)" (see the determination of Judge Boyes at paragraph
22).

The judge went on to state that:

"The main thrust of the argument put to me was that whilst the Appellant
did not have Section 3C leave during the time that he was waiting for his
most recent application to determine, he was permitted to remain in the UK
whilst waiting for the decision.  He made his application during the
fourteen days permitted by Rule 39E.  It is submitted that there is no real
difference between being present with 3C leave whilst waiting for an
application to be determined and being present with the grace of the
Respondent.  The public interest of maintaining effective immigration
controls should therefore weigh against him when the proportionality
balancing exercise is undertaken" (paragraph 30).

The judge went on to say that this argument was not tenable because:

"The difficulty with this argument is that the whole premise upon which the
legibility under paragraph 276B is having accrued ten years of lawful
residence.  The fact that the Appellant was permitted to remain whilst
waiting for the outcome of his application is not tantamount to being
granted leave during this period" (paragraph 31).

This being so, the judge's firm conclusion was that:

"In the circumstances, I do not consider that the fact that the Appellant
was permitted to remain whilst waiting for his most recent application and
appeal to be determined weighs heavily in his favour when the
proportionality balancing exercise is undertaken" (paragraph 33).

The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

The grounds of application state that the judge was mistaken, as a matter
of law, in coming to this conclusion because, once the Appellant's Section
3C leave ended, which was accepted by all concerned to have ended on 2nd
March 2017 when the Appellant became appeal rights exhausted, he then had,
under Section 39E, the option of applying for further leave to remain with
in fourteen days.  As the judge recognises in his statement of fact (at
paragraph 6), the Appellant applied for further leave on private and family
life grounds on 14th March 2017.  This was within the fourteen day period
allowed.  The Appellant, by virtue of having exercised his right of appeal
under Section 39E, was now a person with "lawful residence", and it was
wrong to suggest that during this period he was simply in the UK as a
matter of grace on the part of the Home Office.  If he did indeed have
lawful residence during that time, then this could be factored into the
overall calculation of his ten year period of lawful residence to enable
him to apply for indefinite leave.  When on 3rd August 2017 the Appellant
made a variation of leave, which he was entitled to do under the
Immigration Rules, he was seeking to avail himself of having been in this
country for ten years, and that would have been ten years of lawful
residence, which he could place reliance upon for the purposes of his
indefinite leave to remain application.

On 14th January 2019 permission to appeal was granted by the Upper
Tribunal.  The Tribunal stated that there was an interesting point of
construction raised here.  This was whether a period of overstaying once
the applicant's leave has expired falls to be disregarded (in a manner that
it can count as lawful leave for the ten year period of lawful stay) if
paragraph 39 applies.  Or, whether it is a case that this is limited to the
issue of whether the applicant is to be treated as an overstayer and so
cannot meet the requirement of paragraph 276B(v).  The Tribunal in granting
permission went on to say that the wording of paragraph 276B(v) when
dealing with "previous periods of overstaying" arguably requires qualifying
periods without leave to be "disregarded" in the sense of counting towards
"lawful continuous leave".  The issue is, in part, whether the two parts of
paragraph 276B(v) should be read as having different effects.

Submissions

At the hearing before me on 19th February 2019, Mr Ian MacDonald QC,
appearing on behalf of the Appellant, relied upon his well-crafted and
succinct skeleton argument.  He submitted that at paragraph 276B(v) has to
be read in conjunction with paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules because
the former makes it clear that the requirements to be met by an applicant
for indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence in the
United Kingdom are that:

" (v)    The applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws,
except that, where paragraph 39E of these Rules applies, any current period
of overstaying will be disregarded.  ..."

Therefore, the effect of paragraph 276B(v) is that the Appellant's
continuity of residence is treated as continuous if there is only a period
of overstaying of fourteen days during which he has made an application.
It is true that the judge does draw attention to these provisions (at
paragraph 22) but he neglects to demonstrate that for the purposes of
lawful residence in paragraph 276B(v) Section 39E has to be considered.
When the judge states (at paragraph 30) that the Appellant made his
application "during the fourteen days permitted by Rule 39E" the judge does
not cross-refer to paragraph 276B(v).  On the contrary, the judge's view is
that the Appellant is simply allowed to remain in this country by grace of
the Respondent and this is where the error of law stands.

Second, submitted Mr MacDonald QC, the judge also erred in stating that, "I
do not consider that the fact that the Appellant was permitted to remain
whilst waiting for his most recent application and appeals to be
determined, weighs heavily in his favour when the proportionality balancing
exercise is undertaken" (at paragraph 33).  This is because if the
Appellant had continuous lawful leave at the time, then the public interest
in favour of immigration control simply falls away.

Third, the judge was plainly wrong in stating (at paragraph 32) that the
Section 3C(4) provision excludes a person from making an application for
variation of a leave whilst leave is extended by virtue of Section 3C.
However, in the Appellant's case Section 3C no longer applied once the
Appellant had exhausted his appeal rights on 2nd March 2017.  His
application made on 14th March 2017 was well after this date and Section 3C
did not apply.

In short, accordingly, Mr MacDonald submitted that the Appellant's appeal
should have been allowed on the basis that his claim was "Rules-
compatible".  I should make a finding of an error of law and simply remake
the decision and allow the appeal.

For his part, Mr Tarlow submitted that the Appellant's application was
varied to a long residence application on 4th August 2017.  This was before
the Appellant could claim ten years' continuous lawful residence.  He had
arrived in the UK, after all, only on 30th August 2007.  Even if paragraph
39 applied, this could not create lawful residence but merely allow the
Appellant to be lawfully present in the UK at the date of the application.

Error of Law

I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved the
making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such
that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision.  My reasons
are as follows.  First, this is a case where the Appellant has actually
complied with the Immigration Rules.  Once he became appeal rights
exhausted on 2nd March 2017, he could make a Section 39E application for
further leave, provided he did so within fourteen days, and the Appellant
so applied on 14th March 2017.  The effect of such a Section 39E
application was that the Appellant then could claim to have lawful
residence because under paragraph 276B(v), which specifically deals with
requirements to be met by "an applicant for indefinite leave to remain on
the ground of long residence", if a paragraph 39E application had been made
then "any current period of overstaying will be disregarded".

It is incorrect, therefore, to refer to this period as one where the
Appellant is remaining in the UK with grace of the Respondent Secretary of
State.  The Appellant was moreover allowed to vary his leave, once he had
made an application, so that the variation that was subsequently made after
14th March 2017 on 3rd August 2017, by which time the Appellant had been in
the UK for ten years, was one that was entirely open to him.  The
Appellant, in short, was "Rules-compliant" and stood to succeed under the
Immigration Rules.

Second, as far as proportionality is concerned, it was not correct to say
that the fact that he had made this application would not weigh heavily in
his favour in the proportionality exercise, because there was no public
interest consideration to weigh heavily against him, as he had not flouted
the Immigration Rules, and had merely exercised the rights that he had
under the Immigration Rules.  This was an Appellant who did not have any
adverse immigration history.  His was, in fact, a human rights appeal.  It
was therefore strongly in his favour that he had set out to comply with the
Immigration Rules at every stage and to make his application consistently
in accordance with them.  The normal weight to be granted to public
interest in favour of immigration control did not apply in this case.



Remaking the Decision

I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I have heard
today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons I have set out above.  A
common mistake in many of these cases is that a consideration of the
Appellant's situation stops at the point where his Section 3C leave ends.
That is of course correct at one level.  However, where it is necessary to
do so, consideration must be given to paragraph 276B(v), which is dealing
with continuity of legal residence in relation to an application for
"indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence", because it is
this provision that expressly draws attention to a paragraph 39E
application, which may have been made at the end of the Section 3C leave,
and where that is the case, proper consideration must be given to this as a
separate matter.  On that basis, this appeal is allowed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law such that It  falls  to  be  set  aside.   I  set  aside  the
decision of the original judge.  I remake the  decision  as  follows.   This
appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th March 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th Mach 2019

