
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04058/2020

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard remotely via video (Teams)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2021                  |On 11 October 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               PAMELA NYAKATO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms S Saifolahi, Counsel, instructed by Davies,
Blunden & Evans

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Microsoft  Teams. A  face-to-face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is an appeal by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  ("appellant")
         against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  C.A.S.
         O'Garro ("the judge") promulgated on 27 January 2021 in  which  she
         allowed  the  human  rights  appeal   of   Pamela   Nyakato   ("the
         respondent") against a decision of the appellant dated  22  January
         2020 refusing the appellant's human rights claim (in the form of an
         application  for  entry  clearance  under  the  Immigration   Rules
         involving a de facto adoption).

      2. The respondent is a national of Uganda who was born on  15  January
         2002. On 2 October 2019, when she was 17 years old, she applied for
         entry clearance to the UK under paragraph 310  of  the  Immigration
         Rules. She wished to  join  David  Thomas  (the  1st  sponsor)  and
         Phyllis  Thomas  (the  2nd  sponsor),  both  of  whom  are  British
         citizens, as their de facto adopted  daughter.  The  sponsors  were
         living in Uganda as missionaries. It is not  in  dispute  that  the
         respondent initially came to live with her sponsors in 2010 under a
         foster care placement authorised by the Masindi  District  Services
         in Uganda.

      3. The appellant accepted that the respondent met the requirements  of
         the immigration rules relating to de facto adoptions and  that  she
         was the de facto adopted daughter of the two sponsors, as  per  the
         requirements of paragraph  309A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which
         states:

             For the purposes of adoption under paragraphs 310-316C a de
             facto adoption shall be regarded as having taken place if:

             (a)  at the time immediately preceding the making of the
             application for entry clearance under these Rules the adoptive
             parent or parents have been living abroad (in applications
             involving two parents both must have lived abroad together)
             for at least a period of time equal to the first period
             mentioned in sub-paragraph (b)(i) and must have cared for the
             child for at least a period of time equal to the second period
             material in that sub-paragraph; and

             (b)  during their time abroad, the adoptive parent or parents
             have:

                   i) lived together for a minimum period of 18 months, of
                      which the 12 months immediately preceding the
                      application for entry clearance must have been spent
                      living together with the child; and

                  ii) have assumed the role of the child's parents, since
                      the beginning of the 18 month period, so that there
                      has been a genuine transfer of parental
                      responsibility.

      4. The appellant accepted that  the  respondent  had  lived  with  her
         sponsors for 9 years continuously and that there had  been  a  full
         transfer of parental responsibility. The appellant was not  however
         satisfied that the respondent met the requirements of paragraph 310
         (ix) or (x) of the Immigration Rules. Paragraph 310  sets  out  the
         requirements for indefinite leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  as
         the adopted child of a parent or parents  present  and  settled  or
         being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom. Paragraph  310
         (ix) and (x) require that the respondent:

             (ix) was adopted due to the inability of the original
             parent(s) or current carer(s) to care for him and there has
             been a genuine transfer of parental responsibility to the
             adoptive parents; and

             (x)  has lost or broken his ties with his family of origin;

      5. In the Reasons For Refusal Letter the appellant explained that  the
         respondent failed to provide any official documentation  confirming
         her identity and that  of  her  biological  parents.  Although  the
         appellant  acknowledge  that  court  documents  provided  with  the
         application gave the names of the respondent's  biological  parents
         and  detailed  the  circumstances  in  which  they  abandoned   the
         respondent, in the absence of a birth certificate the appellant was
         not satisfied as to the identities of the  respondent's  biological
         parents. The appellant was not therefore satisfied that they  "have
         been or continue to be completely absent" in the respondent's life.
         I pause to note that there is no requirement in the relevant  rules
         that  the  biological  parents  be  "completely  absent"   in   the
         respondent's  life.  The  appellant  indicated  that  she  was  not
         satisfied that the current whereabouts of  the  biological  parents
         were unknown (I again note that this is not a  requirement  of  the
         relevant rules) or that they consented to the respondent relocating
         to the UK. The appellant then stated that  she  was  not  satisfied
         that the respondent  was  adopted  due  to  the  inability  of  her
         original parents to care for her  as  the  respondent  provided  no
         other evidence to substantiate the statements  and  the  statements
         made in the court  documents.  Nor  was  the  appellant  satisfied,
         presumably for the same reasons, that the respondent had broken  or
         lost her ties with her family of origin.

      6. The respondent appealed the appellant's decision to the  First-tier
         Tribunal pursuant to  s.82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      7. The judge had before her two bundles of documents produced  by  the
         respondent that included,  inter  alia,  statements  from  the  two
         sponsors, a birth certificate issued to the respondent on  28  July
         2010, various official documents issued in  2010  relating  to  the
         respondent's  foster  placement  with   the   sponsors   (including
         correspondence  from  the  District  Probation/Welfare  Officer  of
         Masindi  District,  the  Application  and  Undertaking   Forms,   a
         Prospective Foster Parent Record, a letter dated  25  October  2012
         from a Community Development  Officer  addressed  to  a  Magistrate
         requesting a Care Order  in  respect  of  the  respondent  and  her
         sponsors and which indicated that the sponsors were being supported
         by the Probation Office, the Care Order issued by  the  Magistrate,
         letters from  the  respondent's  schools  and  photographs  of  the
         respondent with her sponsors. The appellant's bundle  of  documents
         included, inter alia, an Assessment Report dated 4 August  2017  in
         respect of the sponsors  written  by  the  District  Probation  and
         Social Welfare Officer, and an Order  of  the  Ugandan  High  Court
         dated 6 September 2018 relating to the sponsor's  adoption  of  the
         respondent under Ugandan law. The judge  additional  had  an  email
         from the sponsors' lawyer in Uganda  dated  23  January  2021.  The
         judge heard oral evidence from both sponsors.

      8. In her decision the judge accurately summarised the reasons for the
         appellant's decision refusing  entry  clearance  and  the  relevant
         legal provisions.  The  judge  summarised  the  evidence  from  the
         sponsors.  This  included  evidence  that  the  sponsors  had  been
         informed when they fostered  the  respondent  that  her  biological
         parents separated when she was 5 months old due to  the  biological
         father's  violent  behaviour  caused  by  his  drinking,  and  that
         although the respondent lived with her father for the first 5 years
         of her life, her father then passed her to different homes. It  was
         the sponsors' evidence that, in the 10 years  that  the  respondent
         lived with them in  Uganda,  neither  biological  parent  made  any
         contact with her apart from when required  to  attend  the  Welfare
         Offices and Court appointments. The judge  recorded  the  sponsors'
         evidence to the  effect  that  the  Ugandan  Welfare  Services  had
         approved and supervised the foster placement in  consultation  with
         the biological parents, followed by the grant of the Care Order and
         finally the Adoption Order, and that none of this would have  taken
         place if the Ugandan authorities  were  not  satisfied  as  to  the
         identity  of  the  respondent's  birth  family  and  their  claimed
         relationship.

      9. In the section of her decision headed 'Consideration and  Findings'
         the  judge  accurately  referred  to  the  appropriate  burden  and
         standard of proof and properly indicated that, in assessing whether
         the appellant's decision breached Article 8 ECHR, she  applied  the
         principles enunciated in TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v SSHD [2018]
         EWCA Civ 1109.

     10. The judge noted the appellant's acceptance of a de facto  adoption,
         which necessarily included an acceptance  that  there  had  been  a
         genuine transfer of parental responsibility  to  the  sponsors.  In
         assessing whether the respondent had lost or broken her  ties  with
         her biological parents the judge considered the approach  taken  by
         Mr Justice Collins in Boadi v ECO - Ghana [2002]  UKIAT  01323,  at
         paragraphs 15 and 16:

             15.  We are satisfied that 'ties with his  family  of  origin'
             does not have the wide meaning the adjudicator has applied. It
             is intended to ensure that the adoption  is  not  as  it  were
             temporary and that, once the child has obtained the  entry  to
             the United Kingdom which the adoption will achieve, the family
             of origin takes back responsibility. There must be a  loss  or
             break of the ties of responsibility. Those  of  affection  may
             remain. Were it otherwise, a child of a single parent who  was
             smitten with a terminal illness and was wholly unable to  care
             for him or her could not join adoptive parents merely  because
             he or she retained affection for and visited the dying parent.

             16.  The existence of  the  wider  ties  referred  to  by  the
             adjudicator may throw doubt on the genuineness of the adoption
             and may justify in a particular case a finding that  Paragraph
             310(ix) or (xi) has  not  been  satisfied.  But  if  an  Entry
             Clearance Officer is  satisfied  that  310(ix)  and  (xi)  are
             satisfied he should only refuse under 310(x) if not  satisfied
             that the adoption is intended to be  permanent  and  that  the
             family of origin is not going to take back responsibility when
             the entry is achieved. We doubt that a refusal based solely on
             310(x) would save in exceptional  circumstances  be  justified
             since the lack of permanency would usually result in a failure
             to meet  the  requirements  of  310(xi).  While  we  have  not
             considered Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
             Rights directly, we are sure that any  other  construction  of
             310(x) would not meet its requirements. This fortifies  us  in
             our construction of 310(x).

     11. The judge applied the approach taken  by  Mr  Justice  Collins  and
         found that the sponsors  had  been  making  all  the  decisions  in
         respect of the respondent for the previous 9 years, a point already
         accepted by the appellant in respect of the existence of a de facto
         adoption.  The  judge   was   consequently   satisfied   that   the
         respondent's ties with her biological parents had been broken.

     12. The judge then noted that, although a birth certificate relating to
         the respondent had been provided, the date of issue was  not  clear
         and it was agreed by the  parties  that  limited  weight  could  be
         accorded to  the  document.  At  [35]  the  judge  found  that  the
         respondent's full history of involvement with the  Ugandan  Welfare
         Services from the time she was fostered with the sponsors  to  when
         she was adopted by them according to Ugandan law, with reference to
         the documents before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  of  "some
         assistance" in determining the respondent's identity  and  that  of
         her birth parents. At [36] the judge had no doubt that the  Ugandan
         Welfare services who placed the respondent with the sponsors  would
         only have done so once they had done a full and  proper  assessment
         of the respondent's family background and her care needs, and  that
         they would have identified the biological parents as part  of  that
         assessment, with particular reference to  the  Welfare  Assessment.
         The judge found that the relevant courts would have been  satisfied
         that  the  biological  parents  were  properly  identified  in  the
         granting of the Care Order and then the Adoption Order. At [39] the
         judge additionally noted the email from  the  sponsors'  lawyer  in
         Uganda confirming that the biological parents were present  at  the
         High Court and that their consent was obtained in relation  to  the
         Adoption Order. At [40] the judge stated:

             "There is also the credible evidence of the sponsors  who  met
             the [respondent's] birth parents and would have been satisfied
             by  Uganda's  Welfare  authorities  of  the  identity  of  the
             [respondent's] birth parents when the [respondent] was  placed
             in their care."

     13. At  [41]  the  judge  indicated  that  she  was  satisfied  of  the
         identities of the respondent's biological parents, and at [42]  the
         judge indicated her satisfaction that the requirements of paragraph
         310 of the Immigration Rules were met. The appeal was allowed.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     14. The grounds of appeal, which are poorly drafted, contend  that  the
         judge's decision runs counter to  the  Hague  Convention  1993  and
         effectively disregards the relevant provisions of the Adoption  and
         Children Act 2002 and the Adoption Order 2013 which confirms that a
         Ugandan adoption is not recognised in the UK. The  written  grounds
         contend that the judge  should  have  scrutinised  the  proceedings
         undertaken by the Ugandan Welfare authorities more  carefully.  The
         grounds contend that the judge  was  not  entitled  to  her  'bare'
         acceptance of the  sponsors'  evidence  that  the  Ugandan  welfare
         services would not have placed the respondent with them  as  foster
         carers, or issued the Care Order and Adoption  Order  unless  there
         had been consultation with the biological parents  in  which  their
         identities were ascertained, in the absence of a  verifiable  birth
         certificate. It  is  claimed  the  judge  accorded  weight  to  the
         evidence  from  the  Ugandan  Welfare  services  "without   further
         explanation and scrutiny." The grounds contend  that,  although  it
         was a matter for the judge as  to  what  weight  was  accorded  the
         evidence, her findings did not assuage the appellant's concerns  as
         to the identity of the biological parents and their  relinquishment
         of all contact with the  respondent.  In  challenging  the  judge's
         acceptance of the validity  of  the  processes  undertaken  by  the
         Ugandan welfare services the  written  grounds  claimed  there  was
         clear evidence of corruption regarding adoption processes in Uganda
         and reference was made to a  Guardian  newspaper  report  that  the
         appellant accepted had not  been  before  the  judge  (nor  was  it
         provided   to   the   Upper   Tribunal    or    the    respondent's
         representatives). The  grounds  referred  to  the  risk  of  modern
         slavery and child trafficking in situations  where  adoptions  were
         used as a cloak for children being brought to the UK against  their
         will  and  that  a  more  robust  application  of  the   evidential
         requirements should have been undertaken.

     15. The written grounds  further  contend  that  the  judge  failed  to
         conduct a careful and holistic assessment of  the  welfare  of  the
         respondent. Refence was made  to  paragraph  310(xi)  despite  this
         particular subparagraph, relating to  'adoptions  of  convenience',
         never being raised as an issue either in the  Reasons  For  Refusal
         Letter, or the Entry Clearance Manager's (ECM)  Review,  or  before
         the First-tier Tribunal hearing itself. The  grounds  contend  that
         the requirements of paragraph 310(xi) and (x) (and (xi))  were  not
         resolved by the judge who failed  to  ensure  the  welfare  of  the
         respondent in accordance with the spirit of s.55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The failure by the respondent
         to provide official documentation confirming the identities of  the
         respondent and her biological parents  was  relevant  in  assessing
         whether  the  biological  parents  were  present  or  not  in   the
         respondent's life.

     16. The written grounds additionally included  assertions  relating  to
         the 1st sponsor that were not  made  in  the  Reasons  For  Refusal
         Letter or in the ECM Review or in the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
         itself. The First-tier Tribunal refused permission  to  proceed  in
         respect of these grounds, but permission was granted in respect  of
         the other grounds on the basis that it  was  arguable  that,  given
         that the UK did not recognise Ugandan adoptions, the  judge  should
         not  have  attached  the  weight  she  did  to  the  Ugandan  court
         processes.

     17. At the outset of the 'error of  law'  hearing  Mr  Avery  confirmed
         that, despite the promulgation of EH (PTA:  limited  grounds;  Cart
         JR) Bangladesh [2021] UKUT 00117 (IAC), he did not wish to rely  on
         the grounds  in  respect  of  which  permission  had  already  been
         refused. Nor were any submissions made by Mr Avery on the basis  of
         paragraph 310(xi) given that this had never been identified  as  an
         issue in contention.

     18. In clear and economical submissions Mr  Avery  explained  that  the
         purpose of paragraph 310(ix) and (x) was to prevent  the  trade  in
         children, for example where a family may 'sell' a child because  of
         their impoverished conditions. It was therefore necessary  to  have
         solid information about the biological parents. Mr Avery  submitted
         that the judge accepted the evidence before  her  without  question
         and that her observation that she had 'no doubt' that  the  Ugandan
         Welfare authorities would only have placed the respondent with  the
         sponsors  as  foster  parents  once  they  had  undertaken  a  full
         assessment of the family background was an assumption not  open  to
         her,  although  Mr  Avery  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  not
         identified any particular aspect of  the  official  documents  that
         undermined their validity or reliability. The judge failed to apply
         the spirit of s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
         2009 (requiring a decision-maker, including  a  tribunal,  to  take
         into  account  the  best  interests  of  children  as   a   primary
         consideration) in assessing whether the requirements  of  paragraph
         310 (ix) and (x) were met.

     19. On behalf  of  the  respondent  Ms  Saifolahi  adopted  a  skeleton
         argument produced to the Tribunal shorty before  the  hearing.  She
         argued that the judge found that the documents before her  were  of
         'some assistance', indicating that the judge did  not  place  great
         significance on the Ugandan adoption process in making her findings
         of fact. The judge was entitled to consider, having regard  to  the
         evidence before her in  the  round,  that  the  identities  of  the
         biological  parents  would  have  been  known  during  the   foster
         placement process and the process for obtaining the Care Order  and
         the Adoption Order, having particular regard to the  evidence  from
         the sponsors whose credibility was not  challenged.  The  appellant
         failed to acknowledge that a birth certificate had  been  produced,
         although the year of its issuance was unclear from  the  copy.  The
         judge was entitled to  attach  weight  to  the  evidence  from  the
         sponsors and the email from Susan Zemeisu, the lawyer who acted for
         them in Uganda who confirmed that she met and interviewed the birth
         parents. The contention by the appellant that the judge should have
         adopted  a  more  cautious  approach  to  the   various   processes
         undertaken by the Ugandan  authorities  failed  to  appreciate  the
         entirety of the judge's approach where she considered  the  written
         and oral evidence from the sponsors whose credibility had not  been
         challenged. Ms Saifolahi submitted that the appellant  accepted  at
         the outset that there had  been  a  genuine  transfer  of  parental
         responsibility and that  the  sponsors  had  been  making  all  the
         decisions in relation to the respondent's welfare for over 9 years.



     20.  I reserved my decision.

Discussion

     21. There is no merit in the written grounds of appeal  to  the  extent
         that they may suggest that  the  judge's  decision  disregards  the
         relevant provisions of the Adoption and Children Act 2002  and  the
         Adoption Order 2013. At no stage of her  decision  does  the  judge
         suggest or indicate in any manner that  she  regarded  the  Ugandan
         adoption as one recognised in the UK. The application was  made  on
         the basis that  there  had  been  a  de  facto  adoption,  and  the
         existence of a de facto adoption was recognised  by  the  appellant
         herself.

     22. Although the UK does not recognise adoptions conducted through  the
         legal processes in Uganda, this does  not  mean  that  only  little
         weight should always be attached to court documents  and  processes
         relating  to  Care  Orders  and  Adoption  Orders   and   processes
         undertaken  by  the  Ugandan  authorities  in  relation  to  foster
         placements, or to the  documents  issued  by  the  Ugandan  welfare
         services. The appellant herself relied on "multiple social services
         documents issued by the authorities in Uganda" in  concluding  that
         there was a de facto adoption in  line  with  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 309A of the Immigration Rules.

     23. In this particular appeal the  appellant  has  not  identified  any
         particular aspect  of  the  various  welfare  documents  and  court
         Orders, including the Assessment Report  conducted  by  a  District
         Probation  and  Social  Welfare  Officer,  which   identified   the
         respondent and her biological parents, that was either  capable  of
         undermining the accuracy of the content of  the  documents  or  the
         assertions contained therein. The various documents  identified  at
         paragraph 7 above were prima facie reliable and valid. At the First-
         tier Tribunal hearing the appellant did not introduce any  evidence
         tending to undermine the authenticity of these specific  documents.
         The Assessment Report indicated that the respondent was well  known
         to the author of the report,  who  was  a  District  Probation  and
         Social Welfare Officer. The Social  Welfare  Officer  outlined  the
         respondent's background and her early childhood and gave the  names
         and ages of the biological parents and their places  of  residence.
         The report noted that the respondent and her biological parents had
         not lived together for 10 years, a point confirmed by the sponsors.
         In these circumstances,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  particular
         identified  reason  to  doubt  the  authenticity  of  the  official
         documents  issued  by  the  Ugandan  authorities,  the  judge   was
         rationally entitled to attach weight to the official  documentation
         that identified the respondent and her biological parents.

     24. The judge did not however  just  rely  on  the  official  documents
         relating to the foster placement, the Care Order and  the  Adoption
         Order. The judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence  before  her  was
         conducted 'in the round', as indicated by her at [25]. I note  from
         the judge's record of proceedings that no  challenge  was  levelled
         against the sponsors in respect of their credibility. The  sponsors
         confirmed that the respondent was placed in their care as a  foster
         child in 2010 and that her  care  was  supervised  by  the  Masindi
         District Welfare Services in Uganda. In their evidence the sponsors
         confirmed that the respondent's biological parents were  identified
         and consulted in relation to both  the  foster  placement  and  the
         Ugandan adoption and  that  they  met  with  the  relevant  Welfare
         Officer and the sponsors' own lawyer. The 1st sponsor explained  in
         his statement that both biological parents were  in  attendance  at
         the High Court hearing when the adoption order was issued and  that
         the High Court judge explained to the biological parents  what  had
         been said by the Welfare Officer and the sponsors' lawyer, and that
         the sponsors had been informed that the biological  parents  agreed
         to the adoption. The  1st  sponsor  had  also  personally  met  the
         biological   father   when   obtaining   the   respondent's   birth
         certificate. The sponsors stated that, for the 10  years  that  the
         respondent lived with them in  Uganda,  neither  biological  parent
         made any contact with her apart from when required  to  attend  the
         Welfare Offices and Court appointments. The  judge  was  rationally
         entitled to attach weight to this evidence in the  absence  of  any
         credibility challenge to the sponsors.

     25. The judge additionally  attached  weight  to  the  email  from  the
         sponsor's lawyer  confirming  that  she  met  and  interviewed  the
         biological parents and that  they  were  present  at  the  adoption
         hearing.  No  challenge  was  raised  by  the  appellant  to   this
         particular evidence and the judge was rationally entitled to accord
         it weight. I note that the documents  issued  by  the  respondent's
         schools  in  Uganda  further  supported  the  her  claim  that  her
         biological parents no longer had ties with  her,  and  I  note  the
         absence  of  any  challenge  in  the   grounds   to   the   judge's
         consideration and application of Boadi v ECO - Ghana  [2002]  UKIAT
         01323.

     26. I  accept  Ms  Saifolahi's  submission  that  the  judge's  overall
         findings were based on a holistic assessment of  all  the  evidence
         before her, and  not,  as  Mr  Avery  submits,  on  an  unwarranted
         assumption that the official documentary was reliable and a failure
         to adequately scrutinise that evidence. Whilst  any  assessment  of
         any application involving children requires anxious scrutiny  given
         a child's inherent vulnerability and  the  legitimate  concerns  of
         child trafficking and exploitation, I am satisfied that  the  judge
         did exercise the requisite degree of scrutiny, that she applied the
         spirit of s.55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
         2009, that she undertook a careful and holistic assessment  of  the
         evidence before her, and that she was rationally entitled  to  find
         that the requirements of paragraph 310 (ix) and (x) were met.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain any error on a point  of
law requiring it to be set aside.

The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is dismissed.


D.Blum                              10 September 2021

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
