
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04561/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st October 2019                  |On 7th January 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                           BIN YAMEEN SHAIK DAWOOD
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Litigant in Person
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, A Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M Butler in respect of a human  rights,  Article  8
    appeal. The Appellant was  originally  represented  by  Messrs  Bhavsar
    Patel Solicitors, but he  was  unrepresented  today.  This  matter  had
    previously been listed before Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor but it
    had to be adjourned.  Judge  Norton-Taylor  having  observed  that  the
    Appellant had a certain command of English but not sufficient to enable
    him to present his case.  An  interpreter  was  required  but  was  not
    available at that hearing. It was  also  noted  that  the  Respondent's
    representative at that hearing was not able to concede that  there  was
    an error of law.

2.    At the hearing before me today, I checked that the Appellant  and  the
    Mauritian Creole interpreter understood each other and I then proceeded
    with the hearing.

3.    Permission to appeal had been  granted  in  this  case  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge EM Simpson.  In doing so she  had  observed  in  summary
    that:

      i) It was materially arguable that there was  an  error  of  law  when
         assessing family life ties of the Appellant with his wife  and  two
         children, more especially with the younger son then still  a  minor
         and whether those ties were genuine and subsisting. The  Respondent
         had not appeared at the hearing  but  had  not  put  in  issue  the
         Appellant's identity. If identity was a matter of judicial  concern
         in the assessment of credibility of the witnesses  at  the  hearing
         then this should have  been  raised  with  the  Appellant  and  his
         Counsel at the hearing. The Appellant was arguably deprived  of  an
         opportunity to address the Judge's concerns;

     ii) The Judge properly alerted the Appellant to prompting his wife when
         giving evidence, but the wife's hesitancy was  just  as  likely  to
         have been nervousness;

    iii) There was a matter of a Robinson obvious issue in  respect  of  the
         "lack of corroborating ... evidence of  place  of  residence".  The
         Appellant's IS96 and Home Office reporting conditions  showing  the
         family address and sight  of  such  documentation  did  not  appear
         fairly to have been raised at the hearing.

4.    In his submissions in respect of the error of law, the Appellant  said
    that he had come to the UK in 2005 and had been here for  the  past  14
    years. He said his children had missed him a lot. He said  he  was  now
    aged 55 and would like to stay happily with his family and his 2  boys.
    He said he did not know why he had not been allowed to stay in the  UK.
    He said he did not have a criminal record and there was "nothing on the
    police file". He pointed to his wife and children who were at the  back
    of the court. He was upset and asked, "What more proof do  you  need?".
    He said they had just moved to a new house and  only  of  his  children
    works. He said his wife was "not that educated' and she was not able to
    find a job. He said I should grant him permission to appeal as  he  did
    not know how long he had to live.

5.     In   her   submissions   Ms   Aboni   said   that   the   Appellant's
    representative's written grounds of appeal were an attempt to  re-argue
    the appeal. She said that the Judge had directed himself  appropriately
    and had given adequate reasons for his findings. The Appellant did  not
    have a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  partner  or  his
    children. The grounds of appeal argued that there was unfairness in the
    hearing in respect of the doubts about the relationship and  the  Judge
    had noted the issues in the Respondent's case and this was  dealt  with
    at [15]. In so far as the documents produced today are concerned, there
    is one in respect of the Court in Mauritius and the change in name  but
    it post-dates the decision of the Judge and is self-serving.   Even  if
    there was an error of law in the Judge's decision because the Judge had
    not put it to the Appellant, it was not material because the Judge  had
    gone on to consider all of the evidence relating to  the  relationships
    and the best interests of the children in reaching his conclusion.  The
    Appellant was prompting the wife and only one  of  the  children  is  a
    minor. The Judge dealt with the evidence before  him.   The  Judge  was
    entitled to consider the evidence in respect of reconciliation with the
    wife. As for the lack of "corroborative" evidence and  whilst  this  is
    not always necessary, there was evidence which could easily  have  bene
    placed before the Tribunal. For example, from the sons but there was no
    statement from them. The Judge was entitled to find  that  the  account
    was fabricated. In respect of s117 adequate reasons were given.

6.    Despite Ms Abon's helpful submissions, I  conclude  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the Judge's decision. The reasons that I  come
    to this decision are as follows.

7.    Firstly, the Judge raised an issue in respect of the marriage  of  the
    Appellant and his wife. The  reason  that  there  were  two  dates  was
    because one was the religious marriage (Nikah) and the  other  was  the
    registration of the marriage. This is relatively common. This issue, if
    raised at the hearing, could have been dealt with by the  Appellant  or
    his wife. This raises issues of fairness at the hearing.

8.    Secondly, the issue in respect of the  names  should  also  have  been
    specifically raised by the Judge at the hearing.  The  same  issues  of
    fairness arise.  In any event though the Appellant's  name  appears  on
    the children's birth certificates. Importantly the Respondent's refusal
    letter accepted that the Appellant was the  father  of  both  children.
    Therefore, it is not clear to what end the  Judge's  finding  left  the
    case.

9.    Thirdly, the  real  issue  in  respect  of  the  case  raised  by  the
    Respondent was the strength, if any, of the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the rest of his family. Whereas the Judge had  very  much
    focused a new strand to the case. Namely whether the Appellant was  the
    same person referred  to  within  the  documentation  and  whether  the
    marriage was itself genuine. Had the Judge focused on the actual issues
    raised by the Respondent he may well have come to a different decision.
    The issues in respect of the Appellant's wife's evidence being affected
    by nervousness is an additional factor, but  not  a  decisive  one.  It
    reflects the difficulties  which  arise  when  the  Respondent  is  not
    represented at a hearing and when the Judge has to attempt to deal with
    issues on  his  own  without  out  the  assistance  of  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer. The Judge's conclusions were tainted by his earlier
    findings.

10.   In my judgment, it is clear that this new focus  of  the  case  should
    have been raised specifically by the Judge  at  the  hearing.  More  so
    since the Respondent was not represented at the hearing. It was  unfair
    for the Judge to make the findings that  he  did  without  clearly  and
    specifically putting the new points to the Appellant, his  witness  and
    his Counsel. Similarly, seeking corroboration was to seek too much.

11.   It is clear that the  foundation  for  the  Judge's  findings  led  to
    adverse credibility  findings.  I  conclude  that  those  findings  are
    unsafe.

12.   As there has not been a fair hearing,  the  appropriate  step  is  for
    there to be re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal. None of the  current
    findings shall stand. It will be a 'de novo' hearing.

NOTICE OF DECISION

There is an error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    decision is set aside.

There will be a re-hearing on all issues at the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed: A Mahmood      Date: 01.10.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

