
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04577/2016


                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th December 2017              |On 14th December 2017              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                Mr Yota Eriya
                        (no AnoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Seelhoff of A Seelhoff Solicitors
For the Respondent :   M Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Yota Eriya date of birth 23 June 1969, is  a  citizen
    of Uganda.  Having considered all the circumstances, I do not  consider
    it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Burnett promulgated on 9th March 2017 whereby the  judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department. The Secretary of  State  had  refused
    the appellant leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  person  that
    had been resident in the UK for over 20 years.

 3.  Leave to appeal was granted by Judge Chamberlain on the 6th  September
    2017.

 4. The grounds of appeal assert that  the  judge  has  given  insufficient
    reasons for going behind a statement contained  in  a  previous  letter
    from the respondent. The  letter  in  question  is  a  letter  dated  9
    December 2014 page  133-137  of  the  appellant's  bundle.  The  letter
    acknowledges that the appellant entered the UK in 1994 and acknowledges
    that the appellant had twenty years residence in  the  UK.  The  letter
    provides :-

    Length of time in the UK accrued for reasons beyond of migrants control
    after the human rights asylum claim has been submitted or refused.

    You entered the UK in June 1994 so have over 20 years residency.  There
    have been no delays by the Home Office in dealing with your asylum  and
    human rights application. You have significantly extended  your  length
    of residence by delaying the Home Office consideration of  your  asylum
    claim not attending Asylum screening interviews during 1994,  and  also
    by not departing the UK after your asylum application had been  refused
    and you had no other outstanding applications for leave.

 5. The case on behalf of the appellant is that the respondent  has  failed
    to give reasons for resiling from that concession. It is also  asserted
    that the judge  has  failed  to  give  valid  reasons  as  to  why  the
    respondent should be  allowed  to  resile  from  that  concession.  The
    appellant's representative seek to assert that there was no reason  for
    that concession not to be maintained. The  representative  argued  that
    the provision in the rules to  allow  an  individual  to  remain  after
    twenty  years  necessarily  meant  that  an  individual  had   remained
    unlawfully by various means and  that  irrespective  of  the  means  of
    remaining an individual by reason of having been  in  the  country  for
    that length of time was given security to stay.

 6. I accept that provided an individual can prove that they have  been  in
    the UK for twenty years, the means by which in most cases that has been
    effected is not material. However the individual has to prove that they
    have resided in the UK for that time. If by reason of  the  evidence  a
    judge is not satisfied that the appellant has  resided  in  the  UK  as
    claimed, then an appellant does not meet the requirements of the Rules.



 7. The issue in the present case is whether  the  respondent  has  resiled
    from the letter of December 2014 and whether the judge  has  considered
    that reason and assessed the evidence before him.

 8.  Subsequent  to  the  letter  from  the  respondent,  the   appellant's
    representatives advanced the appellant's case for having been in the UK
    for twenty years.  In  a  letter  of  3  September  2015  in  order  to
    substantiate that the appellant had not left  the  United  Kingdom  and
    admission was made that the  appellant  had  assumed  the  identity  of
    another. In the letter it is acknowledged that the appellant  had  made
    an asylum claim and that the Asylum decision had  been  served  on  the
    appellant on 16 February 1998. It is acknowledged  that  the  appellant
    was appeal rights exhausted  as  of  6  March  1998.  The  letter  then
    provides:-

    The applicant decided that he  wanted  to  return  home  and  therefore
    submitted flight ticket to the Home  Office  departing  on  16  October
    1998. His claim was therefore noted as withdrawn on the 22 January 2001
    by the Home Office.

    The applicant did not however leave the UK  at  all  and  continued  to
    reside in the UK to date. He began using a photocopy of  an  Indefinite
    Leave to Remain vignette containing  his  photograph  in  the  name  of
    George Kavuma and continued to live in  the  UK.  He  knew  the  person
    George Kavuma was aware that this person had ILR in the UK.

 9. In light of that information the Home Office reviewed their stance with
    regard to  whether  the  appellant  had  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for 20 years. Whereas previously  they  had  accepted  the
    assertion by the appellant the  Home  Office  look  critically  at  the
    evidence presented. The Home Office were entitled to take into  account
    what was said in that letter and were entitled to expect the  appellant
    to prove that he had been resident in the UK for the 20 years.

10. The judge did consider  the  letter,  see  paragraph  30  and  31,  and
    considered  that  there  had  been  no  critical  examination  of   the
    appellant's assertion in the original Home Office  letter  of  December
    2014. The judge considered  the  letter  and  gave  valid  reasons  for
    expecting the appellant to prove that he had been in the United Kingdom
    for 20 years.

11. Having regard to the admissions made by  the  appellant,  that  he  had
    booked a flight to leave in 1998, the judge looked at the evidence  and
    was entitled to conclude that the appellant had failed to prove that he
    had been in the UK for the period of 1998-2000. Taking into account the
    letter and the  evidence  by  the  appellant  the  judge  concluded  in
    paragraph 36 that there was evidence lacking that the appellant was  in
    the United Kingdom for the period 1998- 2000. He was not  satisfied  on
    the appellant's assertion that he was the person using the identity and
    address claimed for that period.

12. The 2nd ground of appeal is that the judge has failed to  consider  the
    evidence in the round. There was an admission by the appellant  through
    his solicitors that he had booked a flight out of the United Kingdom in
    1998. It was therefore for the appellant to prove that he had  been  in
    the United Kingdom for that period of time. Clearly  the  judge  having
    considered all of the evidence was not satisfied that the appellant was
    in the United Kingdom during that period of time. That  was  a  finding
    fact that the judge was entitled to make on the evidence.

13. In the circumstances I find that there is no material error of  law  in
    the decision by the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision


14. I uphold the decision to dismiss the appellant's application.

15. I do not make an anonymity direction




Signed

Date 12th December 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

