
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04768/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 8 January 2019                    |On 25 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           SRINIVAS KRISHNAMURTHY
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Nigel Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Ellis Wilford, Counsel instructed by Advisa
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  the  decision  of
   the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  his
   decision  to  refuse  the  claimant  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under
   paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) on the  basis
   of 10 years' lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

2. The claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.



First-tier Tribunal decision

3. The First-tier Judge  allowed  the  appeal  because  he  found  that  the
   Secretary of State had failed to prove dishonesty by the applicant.   The
   applicant's financial year and the  HMRC  tax  year  differed,  and  some
   figures had been provided net, while others were provided gross.

4. At [37], the First-tier Judge said this:

         "37. I find as a fact that the [claimant] has not sought to deceive
         the [Secretary of State] or HMRC by either overstating his  figures
         to the [Secretary of State] or under-declarations to  HMRC  on  the
         basis of my analysis and findings set out above.


         38.  I now return to the burden of proof.  In light of my  findings
         above, the [Secretary of State] has  failed  to  prove  dishonesty.
         The assertions by the [Secretary of State] are simply not supported
         by the evidence produced to the [Secretary of State].  I find  that
         there has been a misunderstanding of  how  accounting  periods  are
         different from those in  relation  to  figures  provided  for  visa
         applications.  I also find that there is a misunderstanding of  how
         gross profits can be reduced by losses and  then  accountants  have
         then undertaken the tax computations  which  is  where  the  figure
         provided by HMRC comes from."


5. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

6. Permission to appeal was granted in the following rather odd format:

         "2.  The Judge found the [claimant] had not employed  deception  in
         his tax returns and  so  did  not  fall  foul  of  the  eligibility
         requirements.  The Judge analysed the figures and  found  that  the
         differences between the accounting years and those that applied  to
         the [claimant]'s visa applications explained things.


         3.   The grounds argue [that] the Judge's analysis was wrong as the
         figure provided to UKVI did not take account of deductible business
         expenses which placed the figures in  breach  of  the  Rules.   The
         Judge's findings arguably require further consideration.


         4.   The grounds disclose no arguable error of law  and  permission
         to appeal is granted."


                                                            [Emphasis added]


7. The italicised passages  are  plainly  inconsistent  and  it  is  unclear
   whether Judge Parkes intended to grant permission in this appeal.

Rule 24 Reply

8. The claimant's Rule 24 response, received out  of  time  on  10  December
   2018, argued  that  the  First-tier  Judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
   conclusions which he did, having heard from the claimant at  the  hearing
   and found him credible.  The Home Office Presenting  Officer  had  chosen
   not to cross-examine the claimant nor to dispute his factual  account  in
   their submissions.  The claimant contended that the  First-tier  Tribunal
   decision should be upheld.

9. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

10. At the hearing today, Mr Bramble  said  that  the  Presenting  Officer's
   record of proceedings indicated that the Secretary of State had  accepted
   the claimant's evidence unchallenged, and further,  that  the  First-tier
   Judge had given an indication that the appeal  would  be  allowed.     He
   made no further submissions.

11. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier  Judge  was  open  to
   him on that basis.  I therefore dismissed the Secretary of State's appeal
   at the hearing and upheld the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

12. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Date:         11 January 2019                Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


