
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04350/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th February 2019                         |On 7th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                  Mr I.I-S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Turner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  I continue
that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Ghana, appeals with permission against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Welsh) dismissing his appeal
    against the Respondent's decision of 9th  February  2017  refusing  his
    application for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  on  the  basis  of  his
    family/private life.  His partner, Mrs O, is a British  citizen  having
    been naturalised in 2013.

 2. The Appellant entered the UK in September  2003,  having  been  granted
    entry clearance as a visitor with leave valid until  7th  August  2004.
    He has remained in the United Kingdom since this  date.   In  2011,  he
    started  a  relationship  with  Mrs  O  and  they  married  through   a
    traditional wedding in  May  2014  followed  by  a  church  wedding  in
    February 2015.

 3. In summary, the Appellant's claim  is  that  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles preventing him and Mrs O  from  being  able  to  enjoy  their
    private/family life outside the UK. Part of the claim  relates  to  the
    medical evidence  concerning  Mrs  O.  These  factors  are  ones  which
    properly should feature in any Article 8 proportionality assessment.

 4. The FtTJ after hearing evidence from both the Appellant and Mrs O, made
    a finding that both were credible witnesses.  Nevertheless, he went  on
    to dismiss the appeal.

Onward Appeal

 5.  The  grounds  seeking  permission  essentially  challenge  the  FtTJ's
    decision on the basis that he had set out an insufficient  analysis  of
    the evidence which had been put  before  him.   Therefore  insufficient
    weight had been accorded to certain material elements of the  evidence.
    By way of example, it was said that the medical  evidence  put  forward
    relating to Mrs O (who has suffered  multiple  miscarriages),  was  not
    properly considered and importantly, there  was  a  lack  of  reasoning
    concerning the rights of Mrs O in accordance  with  Beoku-Betts  [2008]
    UKHL 39.

 6. Permission to appeal to the UT was granted by the FtT.  Thus the matter
    comes before me to determine whether the decision of the FtTJ discloses
    material error requiring it to be set aside and re-made.

Error of Law

 7. I find I am able to deal with this matter briefly.  Before me Mr Turner
    appeared for the Appellant and Mr Duffy for  the  Respondent.   At  the
    outset of the hearing, Mr Duffy addressed  me  and  indicated  that  he
    accepted that the decision contained material error, in so far  as  the
    main challenge raised in the grounds amounted to a reasons one.

 8. He drew my attention to [16] concerning the medical evidence and to the
    other factors put forward in evidence on the  Appellant's  behalf.   He
    acknowledged that the Article 8 proportionality  assessment  failed  to
    show that a proper consideration of those factors had been  given  when
    assessing the proportionality assessment itself.  In view of Mr Duffy's
    submissions, I did not need to call upon Mr Turner to respond.

 9. Both representatives were of the view that the  appropriate  course  in
    this appeal, would be to set aside the FtTJ's decision  and  remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing in the event that
    I was satisfied that a material error was disclosed.

10. I agree that the challenges in  the  grounds  are  made  out  and  find
    material error in the FtTJ's decision.  The decision is  set  aside  in
    its entirety and thus no findings are preserved.  The  matter  will  be
    reheard in the First-tier Tribunal before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Welsh.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
error such that the decision is set aside in its entirety.   The  matter  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on all issues  by  a
judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Welsh.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     05 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

