
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04248/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 7 October 2019                   |On: 15 October 2019                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               aloysious ntege
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda, born on 10 November 1974. He has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Jones dismissing his appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his human rights claim.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 27 February  2007  with  a
      visit visa valid until 14 August 2007.  On 27 March 2007 he suffered a
      stroke and was admitted to hospital where he  was  treated  for  about
      three months and was diagnosed as being HIV Positive. On 26 June  2007
      he  submitted  an  application  for  leave  to  remain   outside   the
      immigration rules which was refused on 25 September 2007 with no right
      of appeal. He submitted further representations on medical grounds  on
      12 December 2008 and then commenced judicial review proceedings on  17
      June 2014 to challenge the respondent's  lack  of  response  to  those
      representations. The respondent agreed to reconsider  his  immigration
      status and the judicial review claim was  withdrawn  on  20  September
      2014. The appellant was served with a removal notice on  7  July  2015
      and he subsequently, on 27 July 2015,  submitted  further  information
      about his circumstances which was treated by the respondent as a human
      rights claim on the basis of his private life in the UK and  his  ill-
      health. That application was refused by the  respondent  on  4  August
      2015.

   3. In refusing the appellant's application,  the  respondent  noted  that
      there was no evidence of family life for the purposes of  Appendix  FM
      and considered that the appellant  could  not  meet  the  criteria  in
      paragraph 276ADE(1) on the basis of his private life.  The  respondent
      considered  that  there  were  no  very   significant   obstacles   to
      integration in Uganda for the  purposes  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),
      noting that the appellant had a wife and six dependent children living
      in  Uganda.  The  respondent  considered  whether   there   were   any
      exceptional circumstances justifying a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
      immigration rules and concluded that there were  not.  The  respondent
      noted that the appellant had stated that he was HIV Positive  and  was
      still recovering from a subarachnoid  haemorrhage  from  the  arterial
      artery which had caused his stroke  in  2007.  He  had  also  obtained
      medical assistance  in  relation  to  mental  health.  The  respondent
      accepted that the appellant's condition may  be  life-threatening  but
      concluded that the threat to his  life  was  not  immediate  and  that
      treatment for his condition was available in Uganda. There was also no
      reason why his family in Uganda could not provide  him  with  support.
      The respondent did not accept that the appellant's  medical  condition
      reached  the  threshold  for  establishing  an  Article  3  claim   in
      accordance with the test  in  N  v  United  Kingdom  (Application  no.
      26565/05)  [2008]  ECHR.   When   considering   whether   there   were
      compassionate circumstances, the respondent noted that  the  appellant
      had spent significant amounts of time in  the  UK  without  any  legal
      basis of stay and that he had previously admitted  to  having  falsely
      represented his circumstances in order to gain entry clearance to  the
      UK by advising that he had one child in Uganda instead of six.

   4. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was  heard
      on 31 January 2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Coutts.  At  that
      hearing the appellant's evidence was that he was  separated  from  his
      wife and had had no contact with her or his children since  coming  to
      the UK. He  was  suffering  from  depression  and  psychosis  and  was
      receiving medical treatment. He lived alone and had a  carer  visiting
      him three times a week to assist with shopping, cleaning and  cooking.
      He was also assisted by his friend Burhan Osman. The judge  considered
      that the appellant had family in Uganda who could assist him including
      fifteen brothers and ten sisters together with their families and that
      his rights did not engage Article 3 or Article 8.

   5. Judge Coutts decision was  set  aside  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  a
      decision promulgated on 12 February 2018 on the basis that  the  judge
      had failed to consider the appellant's statement to a Dr  Efimba  that
      his wife had abandoned him shortly after he came to the UK because  he
      was unwell and that he had had no contact with his children for  eight
      years, that he did not apply the  test  in  Paposhvili  v.  Belgium  -
      41738/10 (Judgment (Merits  and  Just  Satisfaction)  :  Court  (Grand
      Chamber)) [2016] ECHR 1113 and AM (Zimbabwe) & Anor v The Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 64, and that he did  not
      consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules.

   6. The case was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and was heard  before
      Judge Jones on 20 May 2019. The appellant did not give evidence as  it
      was said that he had difficulty expressing himself, as confirmed in an
      expert report prepared by a  chartered  psychologist.  The  judge  had
      before him a country expert report from Dr Hazel Cameron which he  did
      not admit as he did not consider that she was qualified as  an  expert
      with the requisite expertise. He also  had  medical  reports  from  Dr
      Schwenk, Dr Hillen, Dr Grewal, Dr Efimba and Dr Ahmed  and  a  witness
      statement from the appellant. The judge did not accept the appellant's
      claim  to  have  no  contact  with  his  family  in   Uganda,   noting
      inconsistencies in his evidence in that regard. He considered that the
      appellant had chosen to remain in the UK in order  to  access  medical
      attention and care and not because he was unable to return to  Uganda.
      He considered that the appellant was able to undertake  routine  daily
      tasks of personal  care  and  household  chores  and  that  there  was
      adequate medical treatment available in Uganda. He did not accept that
      the appellant would be destitute if he returned to Uganda  as  he  had
      family there. Judge Jones  did  not  accept  that  the  threshold  for
      Article  3  was  met,  even  if  the  wider  test  in  Paposhvili  was
      considered, and he did not consider that there were  very  significant
      obstacles to integration in Uganda or compelling circumstances outside
      the immigration rules. He concluded that the appellant's removal would
      not be disproportionate and would  not  breach  his  Article  8  human
      rights and he dismissed the appeal.

   7. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      on the following grounds: that the judge's reasons for  excluding  the
      expert report of Dr Cameron were unsustainable and  unjustified;  that
      the judge rejected relevant medical evidence without valid reasons and
      reached conclusions which understated the extent  of  the  appellant's
      medical problems and care needs; and  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
      assessment of the availability of appropriate treatment in Uganda.

   8. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.

   9. The matter then came before me.

  10. Having heard  submissions  from  both  parties  I  have  come  to  the
      conclusion that the judge's decision contains errors of law such  that
      it has to be set aside in its entirety.

  11. Although Mr Clarke sought to defend  the  judge's  findings  about  Dr
      Cameron's lack of expertise in the areas which she  addressed  in  her
      report, he also accepted that it was perhaps unreasonable of the judge
      to refuse to consider the report at all. The  appellant's  grounds  of
      appeal provide various reasons why Dr Cameron's report  ought  not  to
      have been excluded and I am in agreement that the judge's decision  to
      exclude the entire report and give it no consideration whatsoever  was
      not a reasonable or sustainable one in the circumstances.  It  may  be
      that the judge was justified in according less weight to parts of  her
      report than others, based upon her qualifications and academic records
      in the subject matters addressed, but that does not justify  excluding
      the entire report.

  12. Mr Clarke's further submission was that the exclusion  of  the  report
      was in any event not material since the report was predicated upon the
      appellant having no family or other  support  in  Uganda  whereas  the
      judge had properly found that the appellant had a wife,  children  and
      siblings in Uganda. Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the  judge's  adverse
      credibility findings in regard to the  appellant's  family  in  Uganda
      were sustainable. However, I note that the judge's  findings  in  that
      regard were not properly informed. At [38] the judge gave considerable
      weight to the appellant's inconsistent evidence about  the  number  of
      children he had, with reference in particular to the information given
      in Dr Hillen's report, yet paragraph 36 of Dr Hillen's report confirms
      the appellant's account of having six children, four with his wife and
      two with other women. Accordingly the reason given by  Mr  Clarke  for
      his  submission  that  the  exclusion  of  Dr  Cameron's  report   was
      immaterial is flawed and it seems to me that the wholesale refusal  to
      consider the report is a material error of law.

  13. The appellant's grounds also go on to make relevant points  about  the
      judge's assessment of the medical evidence and the care needs  of  the
      appellant and I find merit in the submissions made by Ms  McCarthy  in
      that regard. The judge's assessment of the extensive medical  evidence
      focusses, to a great  extent,  on  the  question  of  the  appellant's
      evidence about his  family  in  Uganda  and  his  receipt  of  medical
      treatment at the expense of the British taxpayer but largely fails  to
      engage with the relevant aspects of the reports. I refer in particular
      to [25] to [27] of his decision in that respect. With  regard  to  the
      appellant's care plan the judge draws negative  conclusions  from  the
      hours of care provided to the appellant without  a  proper  engagement
      with the care required, as the grounds refer at [14](i)]. There is  an
      absence of proper reasoning for the conclusion reached at [34]  as  to
      the appellant's ability to work in  Uganda,  as  referred  to  in  the
      grounds at [14(ii)] and there is no consideration by the judge of  the
      unsuccessful drugs combination previously attempted for the appellant,
      as the grounds refer at [14(iii)].

  14. It seems to me that, as a whole, the judge's decision simply  focusses
      on negative aspects of the evidence without  engaging  in  a  properly
      balanced and rounded assessment of all the evidence. It  may  be  that
      the outcome of such an assessment would lead to the  same  conclusions
      as reached by the judge on the appellant's Article 3 and 8 claims, but
      fairness dictates  that  such  an  outcome  be  reached  by  a  proper
      engagement with the evidence.

  15. For all these reasons I set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
      and remit the matter for consideration afresh.



DECISION

  16. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
      afresh, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
      Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b), before  any  judge
      aside from Judge Jones and Judge Coutts.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 10 October 2019
