
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04039/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 13 September 2019                 |On 18 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between
                                     TD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Muman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant has appealed against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    ('FtT') Judge N Lodge promulgated on 18 June 2019 dismissing his appeal
    on human rights grounds.




 2. The appellant has a British citizen partner and three  British  citizen
    children born in 2008, 2009 and 2012  respectively.   I  have  made  an
    anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  sensitive  matters
    relevant to the appellant's children.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen  of  Albania.   He  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom ('UK') as a minor in 2002 and has remained here ever since.




 4. He has a lengthy history of offending which has resulted  in  sentences
    of imprisonment, including inter alia: 23 weeks imprisonment for  theft
    in 2012; eight months  imprisonment  for  theft  in  2013;  ten  months
    imprisonment  for  a  fraud  related  offence  in  2014;  eight  months
    imprisonment for dangerous driving and driving whilst  disqualified  on
    23 July 2018.




 5. On 31 July 2018 the appellant was served  with  a  decision  to  deport
    letter.  In a decision dated 19 February 2019  the  respondent  refused
    his human rights claim.  The appellant's appeal to the FTT against this
    decision was unsuccessful and he now appeals  with  permission  to  the
    Upper Tribunal ('UT').

Legal framework

 6. S. 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the  2002
    Act') states as follows:

             "Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases   involving
        foreign criminals


             1) The deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
                interest.
             2)  The  more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation
                of the criminal.
             3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C")  who  has  not  been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
                the  public  interest  requires   C's   deportation   unless
                Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.
             4) Exception 1 applies where-
                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                for most of C's life,
                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                Kingdom, and
                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to  be
                deported.
             5) Exception 2 applies where C has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                relationship with a qualifying partner,  or  a  genuine  and
                subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child,
                and the effect of C's deportation on the  partner  or  child
                would be unduly harsh.
             6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to
                a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the  public
                interest  requires  deportation  unless   there   are   very
                compelling circumstances, over and above those described  in
                Exceptions 1 and 2."



 7. S. 117D(2) of the 2002 Act defines a foreign criminal as a person  "(a)
    who is not a British citizen, (b) who has been convicted in the  United
    Kingdom of an offence, and (c) who... (iii) is a persistent offender."




 8. The Immigration Rules, applicable to both courts and tribunals but also
    applicable to the Secretary of State, reflect the contents of the  2002
    Act but in somewhat different form.  However,  the  2002  Act  and  the
    Rules are to be interpreted in a manner consistent with  each  other  -
    see [17] of Chege ("is a persistent offender") [2016]  UKUT  187  (IAC)
    (Andrews J and Southern UTJ).  The Rules  deal  with  "Deportation  and
    Article 8" in the following manner:

             "398. Where a person claims that their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and
                 (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive
                 to the public good and in the public interest because  they
                 have been convicted of an offence for which they have  been
                 sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
                 (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive
                 to the public good and in the public interest because  they
                 have been convicted of an offence for which they have  been
                 sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4  years
                 but at least 12 months; or
                 (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is  conducive
                 to the public good and in the public interest  because,  in
                 the view of the Secretary of  State,  their  offending  has
                 caused serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who
                 shows a particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of
                 State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider   whether
                 paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
                 public interest in deportation will only be  outweighed  by
                 other factors where there are very compelling circumstances
                 over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
             399. This paragraph applies where paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
          applies if -
                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who  is
                 in the UK, and
                       (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                       (ii) the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for
                       at least the 7 years immediately preceding  the  date
                       of the immigration decision; and in either case
                            (a) it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to
                            live in the country to which the person  is  to
                            be deported; and
                            (b) it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to
                            remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                            be deported; or..."
 9. It is to be noted  that  the  question  whether  "the  effect"  of  C's
    deportation would be "unduly harsh" on a qualifying child (s.  117C(5))
    is broken down into  two  parts  in  paragraph  399(ii).   It  is  also
    noteworthy that the phrase "in the view of the Secretary of  State"  in
    paragraph 398(c) of the Rules is omitted from s. 117D(2)(c)(ii).



10. In KO (Nigeria) and others v the SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 (24 October  2018)
    the Supreme Court concluded that the  statutory  consideration  "unduly
    harsh" in s. 117C was confined to focussing  on  the  position  of  the
    child, which did not  involve  a  wider  consideration  of  the  public
    interest in removing  foreign  offenders  and  others.    In  the  only
    judgment Lord Carnwath said this regarding the test of  "unduly  harsh"
    at [23]:

             "One is looking for a degree of harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn by the section itself by  reference  to  the  length  of
             sentence."

11. In SC (Zimbabwe) v the SSHD [2018] 1 WLR 4474; [2018] EWCA Civ 929, the
    Court of Appeal gave consideration to  the  nature  of  the  discretion
    exercised by the Secretary of State. In doing so, it disagreed with its
    own decision in LT (Kosovo) and another v the SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1246
    in which  Laws  LJ  had  suggested  that  the  tribunal  should  afford
    significant weight to the Secretary of State's views and this  remained
    unaffected by Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  In  SC  (Zimbabwe)  McCombe  LJ
    (with whom Lindblom and Leggett LJJ agreed) said this at [19]:

           "The LT case was concerned solely with the application of 398(c)
           of the Rules.  With respect to the short obiter  dictum  in  the
           last sentence of the passage quoted, I do not agree.   It  seems
           to me to be quite clear that once  the  matter  comes  before  a
           tribunal or a court, what has to be applied is  section  117D(c)
           of the Act. The words of that  provision  are  the  words  which
           Parliament has chosen to enact, without more. The three elements
           of that paragraph of the subsection are in clear  terms  and  do
           not require any gloss to be put upon them by  the  reference  to
           the Rules. The view of the Secretary of State  or  indeed  of  a
           judge in sentencing remarks may be of assistance to  a  tribunal
           or court in deciding whether an offence has caused serious  harm
           or whether an offender is a persistent offender, but  I  do  not
           see that the statutory words compel any particular weight to  be
           given to  the  Secretary  of  State's  view  on  either  in  the
           assessment."

Error of law discussion

12. Mr Muman relied upon the three written grounds of  appeal.   I  address
    each ground in turn below.

Ground 1 - definition of persistent offender

13.  Significantly, the FTT recorded at [24] that Mr  Muman  conceded  that
    the appellant fell within the  definition  of  a  persistent  offender.
    Given this it is unsurprising that the FTT did not explore the issue of
    whether the appellant met the definition of a persistent  offender  any
    further.  Having conceded that the appellant is a persistent  offender,
    he fell to be treated as a foreign criminal - see  s.  117D(2)  of  the
    2002 Act.




14. Mr Muman was unable to take me to anything to  support  his  submission
    that it was necessary for  the  FTT  to  also  be  satisfied  that  the
    appellant showed a particular disregard for the law.  Mr Muman did  not
    rely upon or refer to any authority until I invited him to  address  me
    on Chege, which had been submitted  by  Mr  Tan.   As  observed  in  SC
    (supra), it is the statutory wording that must apply.  In any event  in
    this case notwithstanding the FTT's  observations  that  offending  has
    been at the  lower  end  of  the  scale  and  the  appellant  has  been
    cooperating with his probation officer, he is a persistent offender who
    shows a particular disregard for the law.  It is  noteworthy  that  his
    most recent offending in July 2018 was so serious that he was sentenced
    to imprisonment.  In February 2018 he was convicted  of  driving  under
    the  influence  of  a  controlled  drug  and  received   a   12   month
    disqualification.  The appellant continued to drive in breach of  this.
    When these matters were pointed out  to  Mr  Muman  he  was  unable  to
    address them and moved on to his ground 2, to which I now turn.

Ground 2 -failure to address nature of offending

15. Having properly  accepted  the  concession  that  the  appellant  is  a
    persistent offender and therefore  a  foreign  criminal,  the  FTT  was
    obliged to address each of  the  self-contained  provisions  within  s.
    117C.  The FTT completed this task fully albeit with admirable brevity.
     The FTT considered in turn all the possible categories  the  appellant
    could potentially meet, by reference to s.  117C.   The  FTT  addressed
    Exception 2 vis a vis the impact upon the children  before  turning  to
    the impact upon the partner (s.  117C(5)).   The  FTT  then  turned  to
    Exception 1 regarding the appellant's private life (s.  117C(4)  before
    finally addressing whether there were any very compelling circumstances
    for the purposes of s. 117C(6).




16. It matters not that the appellant's offending fell at the lower end  of
    the scale for the purposes of Exceptions 1 and 2 - see KO (supra).   As
    a foreign criminal he could only succeed if he met  the  self-contained
    tests set out within s.117C.  Mr Muman was unable to  explain  why  the
    nature of the appellant's offending was relevant to the  assessment  of
    the Exceptions in s. 117C of the 2002 Act.  Mr Muman made no  reference
    to s. 117C(6).  Although  the  seriousness  of  offending  would  be  a
    relevant  consideration  when  undertaking   this   more   wide-ranging
    assessment, this was not relied upon.  The reason for this is likely to
    be the absence of any evidence of very  compelling  circumstances  over
    and above the Exceptions.  When the FTT addressed this at  [44],  there
    is no reason to consider that it would not have taken into account  all
    the evidence including its own findings at [32].

Ground 3 - approach to the unduly harsh test


17. It is clear from reading the FTT's decision as a whole that  the  judge
    was fully aware of the evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  and  his
    partner.  Their evidence is summarised in considerable detail at [6] to
    [20].   The  FTT  accepted  that  impact  on  the  children  would   be
    "significant" and they would be "very upset", but was entitled to  find
    that  there  was  no  reliable  evidence   that   there   will   be   a
    "psychologically significant impact" upon them.   When the decision  is
    read as a whole, the following is tolerably clear:

          - Although the FTT accepted that  there  would  be  a  significant
            impact on the children, this did  not  reach  the  threshold  of
            unduly harsh.

          - Whilst the children's mother described some of the  difficulties
            she and the children faced when the  appellant  was  imprisoned,
            this was insufficient to meet the unduly harsh test.

          - The FTT was not requiring expert evidence for the  threshold  to
            be met but did not regard the mother's own assessment of  likely
            psychological damage to be reliable.

          - The FTT considered the evidence from the children's  headteacher
            in the form of a letter dated 20 May 2019 in which  there  is  a
            summary of reports and  concerns  regarding  the  children  from
            various sources.  The FTT was entitled to regard this letter  as
            nebulous.  Although this described  various  issues  of  concern
            regarding the children, it also  highlighted  positive  matters.
            In addition, the headteacher did not attribute any of the issues
            of concern to the appellant having  been  'away'  (when  he  was
            imprisoned).   Indeed  the  reference  to   the   eldest   child
            indicating a desire to kill herself seems to have been a  remark
            made in the aftermath of feeling left out by the other girls  in
            her class  and  was  not  directly  related  to  the  appellant.
            Rather, she described being upset that her father had not walked
            her to school but had stayed in bed and that she did not see him
            very often.




18. I do not accept that the FTT applied a test that  was  too  high.   The
    test is a  demanding  one.  The  parents  provided  evidence  that  the
    children would be very upset.  However, most  children  would  be  very
    upset to lose their father to another country.  As KO  emphasises,  one
    is  looking  for  a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what   would
    necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation  of  a
    parent.  Although the parents asserted that there  may  be  significant
    psychological  damage,  the  FTT  was  entitled  to  find  that  to  be
    unreliable.  The letter from the school outlined incidents and concerns
    but in no cogent manner linked these to the appellant's absence.


19. There is no reason to believe that the FTT was unaware of the  guidance
    in KO even though it was not specifically referred  to.   The  FTT  was
    well aware that family life between  the  appellant  and  his  children
    would terminate but was entitled to  find  that  the  effect  upon  the
    children would not reach the high  threshold  required  by  the  unduly
    harsh test.

Conclusion


20. For those reasons the grounds of appeal are not made out.




Notice of decision

     21. The FTT decision does not contain an error of law and I do not  set
         it aside.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Date: 13 September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
