
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04735/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 July 2020                    |On 22 July 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                     G S

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Ms E Rutherford of Counsel instructed by CK
Solicitors

For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


      Background

        1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
           appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria  on  14  January  2020
           against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Phull,
           promulgated on 1 October 2019 following a hearing at  Birmingham
           on 5 August 2019.

        2. The appellant is an Indian national born on 25 December 1982. He
           claims to have entered the UK in April 2003 by lorry from France
           and a subsequent asylum claim made  some  months  later  on  the
           basis of a claimed fear of the police in Punjab was refused.  He
           married a British citizen the very next day. His appeal  against
           the refusal of asylum was  determined  in  his  absence  at  the
           request of his representatives. No supporting evidence  was  put
           forward and no details were provided even though  the  appellant
           had failed to submit  a  SEF.  Unsurprisingly,  the  appeal  was
           dismissed. He then sought leave to remain as the spouse in April
           2004 but in November 2005 notified the respondent that he wished
           to make a voluntary departure. He  was  removed  on  14  January
           2006.   Just  three  days  later  he  made  a  successful  entry
           clearance application and re-entered the UK in February 2006. In
           February 2008 he was granted indefinite leave to remain.

        3. On 15 April 2011 the appellant, with five other co-conspirators,
           was convicted on a guilty plea of kidnapping a young  woman  and
           holding her against her will for two days. The offence  occurred
           in July 2010 shortly before the birth of his second  child  that
           September. On 28 October 2011, he was sentenced  to  two  years'
           imprisonment. He  did  not  appeal  against  his  conviction  or
           sentence. A deportation order was signed on 29 June  2012  after
           the consideration  of  representations.  After  an  unsuccessful
           asylum claim, this time on the basis of a land dispute,  and  an
           unsuccessful  appeal,  he  failed  to  abide  by  his  reporting
           conditions, was  listed  as  an  absconder  and  was  eventually
           apprehended and detained.  He  then  commenced  judicial  review
           proceedings and the removal directions that were in  place  were
           cancelled. The judicial review claim was refused  on  25  August
           2015. The evidence is contrary to whether he was  then  deported
           on 28 August 2015 or whether he  left  voluntarily  but  it  was
           clarified at the start of the hearing that he left  of  his  own
           accord whilst the deportation order was in force.

        4. The appellant was accompanied by his current wife (the sponsor),
           then his girlfriend, with whom he had cohabited  since  November
           2014 after the breakdown of his marriage. She too was married to
           someone else and had a daughter  but  was  experiencing  marital
           problems. Her divorce was finalised in May 2016. The appellant's
           first wife had been a British citizen and they had two  children
           born  in  August  2006  and  September  2010.  His  divorce  was
           finalised on 25 August 2017.The sponsor remained in  India  with
           the appellant until May 2017 (with  a  break  during  which  she
           vacationed in Canada with his parents) and returned pregnant  to
           the UK. Their son was born here on 22 July  2017.  In  September
           2017, the sponsor and child travelled to India and  on  7  March
           2008 the appellant and sponsor underwent  a  religious  marriage
           followed by a civil marriage on 15 March 2008.

        5. On 25 November 2018, his solicitors requested revocation of  the
           deportation order. This was refused on 11 February 2019.

        6.  The  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Phull.
           Following oral evidence from the sponsor  and  submissions  from
           the parties and taking the earlier determination as her starting
           point, she dismissed the appeal. She rejected the claim that the
           sponsor had no family support in the UK,  noting  that  she  had
           told the social worker the exact opposite. The judge found  that
           the sponsor had the support of her family and that her  brother,
           for whom she worked, allowed her to work from home and  to  take
           extended periods of leave. She noted the claims  of  stress  and
           anxiety but found living  with  the  appellant  in  India  would
           alleviate some of that stress and that  she  would  be  able  to
           access treatment for her conditions if required. She found  that
           the child was very young and had spent time in  India  with  the
           sponsor and that both could be expected to continue their family
           life with the appellant by living there or  by  making  extended
           visits as they had been doing. The judge found that the evidence
           did not support the contention that the child had serious health
           issues.  She had regard to the seriousness  of  the  appellant's
           offence and his failure to rebut the  s.72  certificate  in  his
           deportation appeal. She had regard  to  the  OASys  report.  She
           noted that the appellant had shown no remorse or contrition  for
           his crime and that there was no evidence that he had  undertaken
           any  rehabilitation  since.  She  found  that  there   were   no
           compelling circumstances which outweighed the public interest in
           maintaining the deportation order.

        7. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Haria on the basis that the judge had arguably  not  dealt  with
           the issue of the sponsor's ongoing contact  proceedings  through
           the Family Court to have access to a daughter  from  a  previous
           relationship. The other grounds  criticize  the  judge  for  her
           approach to the social worker's report, for reaching a different
           conclusion on the best interests of the child  and  for  finding
           that it would not be unduly harsh to expect him to go to India.

Covid-19 crisis

        8. The appeal was listed for hearing at Birmingham on 20 March 2020
           but due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need  to  take  precautions
           against its spread, the hearing  was  adjourned  and  directions
           were sent to the parties on 30 April 2020. They  were  asked  to
           present any objections to the matter being  dealt  with  on  the
           papers and to make any further submissions on the error  of  law
           issue within certain time limits.

        9. The Tribunal has received written submissions from both parties.
           The respondent does not raise any objections to the matter being
           considered on the papers but the appellant has. I  now  consider
           whether that course of action is appropriate.

       10. In doing so I have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
           Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment  of  Osborn  v
           The Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note
           No 1 2020: Arrangements during the Covid-19 pandemic  (PGN)  and
           the Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction  (PPD).  I  have
           regard to the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of
           the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being  "to
           enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly".
           To this end I have considered that dealing with  a  case  fairly
           and  justly  includes:  dealing  with  it  in  ways   that   are
           proportionate to the importance of the case, the  complexity  of
           the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking
           flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable,
           that  the  parties  are  able  to  participate  fully   in   the
           proceedings; using any special expertise of the  Upper  Tribunal
           effectively; and avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with
           proper consideration of the  issues  (Rule  2(2)  UT  rules  and
           PGN:5).

       11. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and to all the
           evidence before me before deciding how to proceed. The appellant
           maintains that "the lack of interaction with the judge and being
           able to respond to questions and  judicial  comments  about  the
           arguments being put forward means  that  the  parties  lose  the
           opportunity to make oral arguments  that  address  any  judicial
           concerns and this does adversely  affect  the  fairness  of  the
           proceedings to both parties".  I  note  that  there  is  nothing
           specific of concern in his  case  and  that  no  reason  is  put
           forward as to why he specifically requires an  oral  hearing  at
           which he himself would not in any event  be  present  as  he  is
           overseas. I take into account the general  submissions  made  on
           the point but form the view that a full account of the facts are
           set out in the papers, that the arguments for  and  against  the
           appellants have been clearly set out and that the issues  to  be
           decided are straightforward and have been fully addressed in the
           submissions made. There are no matters arising from  the  papers
           which would require clarification and so an oral  hearing  would
           not be needed for that purpose. I have regard to the  importance
           of the matter to  the  appellant  and  consider  that  a  speedy
           determination of this matter is in his best interests and  those
           of his family. I am satisfied that  I  am  able  to  fairly  and
           justly deal with this matter on the papers before me and  I  now
           proceed to do so.

      Submissions

       12. The appellant's submissions prepared by  Counsel  are  dated  15
           April 2020. They argue that when finding that it was not  unduly
           harsh for the appellant's son to relocate to India or for him to
           remain in the UK separated from  his  father  and  that  in  the
           alternative that there were no  very  compelling  circumstances,
           the judge failed to consider relevant evidence. It is maintained
           that there were a number of pieces of evidence that  had  simply
           not been referred to by the judge. For  example,  it  is  stated
           that the judge failed completely to refer in her findings to the
           ongoing family  court  proceedings  in  which  the  sponsor  was
           seeking contact with her daughter although  this  was  noted  at
           paragraph 25 of the determination. It is also  argued  that  the
           judge failed to consider the sponsor's oral evidence on why  she
           could not look to her family in the UK for support. Further,  it
           is argued  that  there  was  evidence,  albeit  not  a  clinical
           assessment, that the child  had  behavioural  problems  and  was
           undergoing assessments  at  the  time  of  the  hearing.  It  is
           maintained that the judge failed to consider evidence  from  the
           sponsor as to the difficulties that  she  and  the  child  faced
           whilst living in India. When concluding  that  the  child  could
           relocate to India, it  is  submitted  that  the  judge  made  no
           reference to the fact that he was a British and  not  an  Indian
           citizen.  In  assessing  whether  there  were  very   compelling
           circumstances over and above those set out in paragraphs 399 and
           399A, it is maintained that the judge  made  reference  only  to
           selective parts of the OASys report which did  not  reflect  the
           overall conclusion that the appellant presented a  low  risk  of
           harm and had a low risk of reconviction.

       13. The second ground argues that the judge  erred  in  law  in  her
           approach  to  the  expert  evidence.  She  had  before  her   an
           independent social worker's report and despite no  challenge  to
           the author's qualifications or expertise, the  judge  reached  a
           different conclusion as to whether the family could continue  to
           be separated. It is submitted that  whilst  the  judge  was  not
           obliged to accept the conclusions of the social worker, she  was
           required to give clear and cogent reasons for rejecting them and
           that she failed to do so. It is submitted that whilst the  judge
           accepted (at paragraph 33) that  it  was  in  the  child's  best
           interests to have input from both parents, she then  found  that
           it was not unduly harsh for him to  live  in  the  UK  with  his
           mother. Further, in reaching this  conclusion  she  appeared  to
           have disregarded the conclusion of the report that  it  appeared
           to be unsettling for the child to remain in the UK  without  his
           father and not ideal for his emotional and physical  health  for
           him to relocate to India. The Tribunal is asked to set aside the
           decision.

       14. The Tribunal is informed  that  the  sponsor's  application  for
           contact with her daughter is ongoing. A final hearing set for 23
           April 2020 was adjourned to a  date  yet  to  be  fixed.  It  is
           submitted that before the decision could fairly be made in  this
           case the Tribunal would need to know the position in respect  of
           the family proceedings and as such a further  hearing  would  be
           required before the case could be justly determined.

       15. A large amount of fresh documentary evidence is attached to  the
           submissions none of which was before the First-tier Tribunal  at
           the date of the hearing. It relates to a second application  for
           contact made on 22 January 2020 by the sponsor in respect of the
           daughter from her previous marriage and to a speech and language
           assessment in respect of the son from her present marriage.

       16. The respondent's submissions, prepared by Mr Avery, are dated 20
           May 2020. They seek to argue that the judge made  no  errors  of
           law and that her determination should be upheld. On the issue of
           support for the sponsor from her family, the  submissions  point
           out that the sponsor's claim that she had no such support was in
           stark contradiction to what she told the social worker who noted
           in her report the close relationship with  the  family  and  the
           support they provided. It was  also  noted  that  the  sponsor's
           father  had  accompanied  her  to  court,  that  she  had  spent
           considerable periods of time with her  in-laws  in  Canada,  and
           that she had support from her brother for  whom  she  worked  in
           that she had been given the flexibility to work  from  home  and
           take leave for extended periods. The submissions argue that  the
           judge took account of the sponsor's evidence with respect to her
           son's behavioural problems and was correct to  note  that  there
           was no clinical evidence to support  this  claim  (at  paragraph
           32). It is maintained that the assertion that the  judge  failed
           to have regard to the full OASys report  was  without  substance
           because the judge gave detailed consideration to the report  and
           the fact that the low risk of reoffending was  not  specifically
           referred  to  was  not  an  indication  that  it  had  not  been
           considered (at paragraph 37).

       17. On the issue of the  social  worker's  report,  the  submissions
           maintain that the judge did take this into account at paragraphs
           28 to 31. She properly concluded that it  would  not  be  unduly
           harsh for this child to live in the  UK  with  his  mother.  The
           submissions point out that the sponsor and the child  had  spent
           considerable time in India with the appellant in  the  past  and
           that on the basis of the evidence this was a finding open to the
           judge to make. The submissions conclude that the grounds  are  a
           disagreement with the judge's findings. It is pointed  out  that
           the  issues  that  were  highlighted  by  the   judge   granting
           permission do not affect the findings of the first-tier tribunal
           that it would not be unduly harsh for the sponsor and the  child
           to remain in the UK. Reliance is placed on NA (Pakistan)  [2016]
           EWCA Civ 662 and PJ (Jamaica)  [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 and  to  the
           finding that the difficulties faced by families remaining in the
           UK are the natural consequence of deportation and did not amount
           to an unduly harsh outcome.  It  is  submitted  that  there  was
           nothing in this case which suggested that a different conclusion
           could have been reached.

       18. The appellant's response to the Secretary of  State  submissions
           were prepared on 27 May 2020. The appellant reiterates that  the
           judge had not considered all the relevant evidence in making her
           findings and that it  cannot  be  assumed  that  she  took  into
           account the ongoing family court proceedings instigated  by  the
           sponsor. The judge had failed to refer to the evidence given  by
           the sponsor as to the actual support she had available from  her
           family. There had also  been  no  attempt  to  engage  with  her
           evidence  regarding  the  difficulties  of  her   son   or   the
           difficulties  that  they  faced  whilst  they  lived  in  India.
           Although the judge had considered the OASys report, she made  no
           reference to the conclusions of the probation service  that  the
           appellant was at low risk. This did not demonstrate  a  balanced
           assessment of that evidence. Whilst it  was  accepted  that  the
           judge had referred to the independent social worker's report  in
           reaching her conclusions, she failed to give adequate reasons as
           to why she reached  a  different  conclusion  and  rejected  the
           report's conclusions.

      The legal framework

       19. Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 states:

              '32.     Automatic deportation

              (1)      In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-

                    (a)      who is not a British citizen,

                    (b)      who is convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
                    offence, and

                    (c)      to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

              (2)      Condition 1 is that the person  is  sentenced  to  a
              period of imprisonment of at least 12 months.

              (3)      Condition 2 is that-

                    (a)      the  offence  is  specified  by  order  of  the
                    Secretary  of  State  under  section  72(4)(a)  of   the
                    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (c.  41)
                    (serious criminal), and

                    (b)       the  person  is  sentenced  to  a  period   of
                    imprisonment.

              (4)       For  the  purpose  of  section   3(5)(a)   of   the
              Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77), the deportation  of  a  foreign
              criminal is conducive to the public good.

              (5)      The Secretary of State must make a deportation order
              in respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).

              (6)      The Secretary of State may not revoke a  deportation
              order made in accordance with subsection (5) unless-

                    (a)      he thinks that an exception  under  section  33
                    applies,

                    (b)      the application for revocation  is  made  while
                    the foreign criminal is outside the United Kingdom, or

                    (c)      section 34(4) applies.

              (7)      Subsection (5) does not create a  private  right  of
              action in respect of consequences of  non-compliance  by  the
              Secretary of State.'

       20. Following amendments by the Immigration Act 2014,  the  relevant
           exceptions for most appeals will be section 33(2) (a  breach  of
           the European Convention on Human Rights or obligations under the
           Refugee Convention) and section 33(4) (a breach of rights  under
           the EU treaties).

       21. Paragraphs 390-392 of the Immigration Rules make  provision  for
           revocation of a deportation order.

              '390.    An application for revocation of a deportation order
              will be considered in the  light  of  all  the  circumstances
              including the following:

                 i) on the grounds on which the order was made;

                ii) any representations made in support of revocation;

               iii)  the  interests  of   the   community,   including   the
                    maintenance of an effective immigration control;

                iv)  the  interests  of   the   applicant,   including   any
                    compassionate circumstances.

              390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State
              will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if
              it does not, it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances
              that the public interest in maintaining the deportation order
              will be outweighed by other factors.

              391.     In the case of the  person  who  has  been  deported
              following conviction for a criminal offence, the continuation
              of the deportation order against  that  person  will  be  the
              proper course:

                 a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
                    person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less
                    than 4 years, unless 10 years  have  elapsed  since  the
                    making of the deportation order, when, if an application
                    for revocation is received, consideration will be  given
                    on a case by case basis to whether the deportation order
                    should be maintained, or

                 b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
                    person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at
                    least four years, at any time,

              Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to
              the Human Rights Convention or the  Convention  and  Protocol
              relating to the  Status  of  Refugees,  or  there  are  other
              exceptional  circumstances  that  mean  the  continuation  is
              outweighed by compelling factors.

              391A.    In other cases, revocation of  the  order  will  not
              normally  be  authorised  unless  the  situation   has   been
              materially altered, either by a change of circumstances since
              the order was made, or by fresh information coming  to  light
              which  was  not  before  the  appellate  authorities  or  the
              Secretary of State. The passage of time since the person  was
              deported may also in  itself  amount  to  such  a  change  of
              circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.

              392.     Revocation of a deportation order does  not  entitle
              the person concerned  to  re-enter  the  United  Kingdom;  it
              renders  him  eligible  to  apply  for  admission  under  the
              Immigration Rules. Application for revocation  of  the  order
              may be made to the Entry Clearance Officer or direct  to  the
              Home Office.'

      Discussion and Conclusions

       22. I have considered all the evidence,  the  determination  of  the
           First-tier Tribunal Judge, the grounds for  permission  and  the
           submissions made by both parties.

       23. This is a case where the appellant was sentenced to  a  term  of
           imprisonment of less than four years. As the  deportation  order
           was made on 29 June 2012 and enforced on 28 August 2015, the ten
           year proscribed period has  not  passed  but  the  rules  permit
           consideration of an application for revocation on a case by case
           basis.

       24. The first ground of complaint against  the  judge  is  that  she
           failed to take the following relevant evidence into account: (1)
           ongoing family court proceedings brought by the sponsor, (2) the
           sponsor's oral evidence as to why she  could  not  look  to  her
           family for support, (3) the sponsor's evidence as to  her  son's
           behavioural problems and that he was undergoing an assessment at
           the time of the hearing, (4) the sponsor's evidence  as  to  the
           difficulties she and the child faced whilst in  India,  (5)  the
           child's British nationality and (6) the OASys report as a whole.



       25. I would note here that 1, 3, 4 and 5 of these alleged  omissions
           (even if they were made out) are rendered otiose by the  judge's
           finding that it would not be unduly harsh for  the  sponsor  and
           child to remain in the UK without the appellant and  for  family
           life to continue at a distance, by way of visits and other forms
           of communication.  Nevertheless, I consider them all.

       26. At the start of the hearing the judge was given a postal receipt
           to show that an application for a contact order had been  filed.
           The date is not recorded in the Record  of  Proceedings  however
           the sponsor's oral evidence was that it had been filed just  the
           week prior  to  the  hearing.  It  appears  that  the  sponsor's
           daughter had lived with her after she  (the  sponsor)  separated
           from her first husband but that she decided to  leave  and  live
           with her father when the  sponsor  began  to  cohabit  with  the
           appellant. They had not seen one another since 2015. I note that
           no application was made for an adjournment to await the  outcome
           of the Family Court proceedings and the sponsor's  daughter  (in
           her mid-teens) still refuses to respond to the sponsor's letters
           and the alleged repeated attempts made by the  sponsor's  sister
           (who lives opposite the girl) to get in touch.

       27. The judge's findings commenced at paragraph 20 and she  referred
           to the sponsor's proceedings with the Family Court at  paragraph
           25. It cannot be argued, as the grounds maintain, that no regard
           was had to this. Given that the judge found that it would not be
           unduly harsh for the sponsor and her child to  live  in  the  UK
           apart from the appellant, the sponsor would  still  be  able  to
           pursue contact with her daughter. Of course, this would also  be
           open to her were she to travel to  India.  Moreover,  given  the
           fact that the sponsor's daughter had refused to have any contact
           with the sponsor since February, the judge was entitled  not  to
           place weight on the proceedings  that  had  been  filed  shortly
           before the appeal hearing. No explanation was provided  for  why
           no application had been made in the three preceding years.

       28. In any event, although the evidence was not before the judge and
           so cannot be seen to impact upon her decision  one  way  or  the
           other, the order  for  contact  was  refused  in  November  2019
           following  the  wishes  of  the  sponsor's   daughter.   Another
           application was filed in late January 2020 but there appears  to
           have been no  change  in  circumstances  since  the  refusal  of
           contact by the last order.

       29. I would note also that the evidence in the  respondent's  bundle
           shows that the  appellant  had  also  made  an  application  for
           contact to  see  the  children  from  his  first  marriage.  The
           application was made  in  2015  just  after  the  appellant  was
           detained for removal. No further information as to  the  outcome
           of that application is available but there is no suggestion that
           the appellant has been in contact with those  children  and  the
           appellant does not rely on his relationship  with  them  in  his
           present case.

       30. With respect to the issue of family support for the sponsor, the
           judge had her evidence in mind (at  27  and  29).  Although  the
           sponsor claimed in oral evidence  that  she  did  not  have  the
           support  of  her  family,  that  they  were  busy   with   other
           commitments and they had not accepted the appellant due  to  his
           past conduct, the judge noted that this was in contradiction  to
           other evidence. For example, she had told the social worker that
           she had a close relationship  with  her  family  and  they  were
           supportive of her. The report refers to this repeatedly  and  at
           section 7 notes: "At present her family live in close  proximity
           to her, her aunt living with her...her family are there to offer
           her  emotional  and  practical  support  should  she  need   it,
           something that would not be available in India"(added emphasis).



       31. Whilst she had adduced evidence from an employer criticising her
           standard of work, it transpired in oral  evidence  that  she  in
           fact worked from home for her brother's cash and carry business.
           It is unclear  whether  this  was  the  same  employer  who  had
           criticized her work. However, the evidence before the judge  was
           that her brother allowed her the  flexibility  of  working  from
           home and she had also clearly been allowed to take substantially
           long holidays and travel to  India  to  be  with  the  appellant
           (whether by her brother or a previous employer). The judge  also
           noted that her father accompanied her to the  hearing  and  that
           she lived with a maternal aunt (at 27  and  29).  She  was  also
           receiving other support from various NHS sources (at 30).

       32. The sponsor's evidence that her family were too busy to help her
           is contradicted by her claim that they helped  her  brother  who
           had recently had a child. No reason has  been  offered  for  why
           they  had  time  to  help  him  but  not  her.  It  is   further
           contradicted by what she told the  social  worker  (above).  Her
           claim that they had never accepted the appellant is contradicted
           by her witness statement of 4 June 2015 in which she states that
           her "entire extended family stands by him. Everyone considers my
           partner a kind person having that special relationship with each
           one of them".

       33. Moreover, great emphasis  is  put  in  several  of  her  witness
           statements to the fact that her family are in  the  UK  and  she
           would not want to be in India without their support.  She refers
           in her statement of 23 July 2019 to being supported in India  by
           family and to the help given to her by her sister who  regularly
           sent her parcels by DHL.  One  of  the  reasons  she  gives  for
           wanting to live in the UK is because her family  is  here.  That
           does not suggest that she is isolated from them. There are  also
           numerous supporting letters from family members in the  evidence
           before the Tribunal all expressing concern for the sponsor. Were
           she to be as isolated as she claims, it is difficult to see  how
           all these individuals would be so aware of her circumstances.

       34. The determination shows that the judge did have  regard  to  the
           evidence from the sponsor but chose to find, nevertheless,  that
           the true picture had not been presented. That was a finding  she
           was entitled to make.

       35. Much is made  of  the  sponsor's  worry  for  her  son's  speech
           development. The  letter  from  the  GP  shows  that  given  her
           worries, the child was referred for a  review/assessment.  There
           is also evidence that he was on a waiting list to see  a  speech
           therapist. I note that his hearing test showed no abnormalities.
           It is maintained that the proposed assessment was not taken into
           account. This is incorrect. The judge had regard to this at  25,
           27, 28, 32 and 33. I note no suggestion was made by Counsel that
           the hearing should be adjourned to  await  the  outcome  of  the
           assessment. Even were it to be found  that  the  child  required
           support for speech development, and  I  note  that  fresh,  post
           hearing  evidence  has  been  adduced  (which  sets  out   daily
           strategies to be applied by the sponsor), this could not  amount
           to a very compelling circumstance given the existing  case  law.
           Nor was there any evidence before the judge that any  assessment
           or therapy, if required, could not be  obtained  in  India.  The
           brief reference to this in the social worker's report relies  on
           a seven year old report on autism which was not produced but and
           which was not referred to in Counsel's  submissions.  Again,  as
           the judge found that it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
           sponsor and her son to remain in the UK  as  an  alternative  to
           relocating to India, this ground does not advance  the  case  to
           any extent.

       36. For the same reason the appellant's case is not assisted by  the
           complaint that the sponsor's evidence on the problems  faced  by
           her and her son in India were not  taken  into  account  by  the
           judge. Additionally, the evidence on this point was vague. It is
           maintained  that  the  sponsor  had  difficulties   during   her
           pregnancy but no further details are  given.  It  is  maintained
           that the child was ill and taken to a doctor several  times  but
           details are not provided and the doctor's letter does  not  give
           any information as to the nature of the  problem.  Nor  does  it
           suggest that remaining in India would have done  the  child  any
           harm. It may be that any initial difficulties would have settled
           with time.

       37. Contrary to what is claimed, the evidence from  various  witness
           statements shows  that  family  support  was  available  to  the
           appellant and the sponsor in India, both  from  his  sister  who
           lives there and with whom they lived on  return,  and  from  his
           parents in Canada and the sponsor's family in the UK.

       38. The grounds also argue that the judge did not  take  account  of
           the child's British nationality. The  judge  was  plainly  aware
           that the child was British. This is recorded in the evidence (at
           13), the submissions (at 17) and in  the  judge's  findings  (at
           21). Given that  the  correct  test  of  "undue  harshness"  was
           applied and in the absence of any particular disadvantages  such
           a young child would face living outside the UK with his parents,
           I cannot see that referring in greater detail to his nationality
           leads to any material errors. It was not suggested that he would
           have  any  immigration  problems  in  India   because   of   his
           nationality. In any event, the judge found  in  the  alternative
           that it would not be unduly harsh for the sponsor and the  child
           to remain in the UK without the appellant.

       39. The final piece of evidence  the  judge  is  said  not  to  have
           considered as a whole is the OASys report. It is maintained that
           the judge did not refer to  the  author's  conclusion  that  the
           appellant presented a low risk of harm and of re-offending.  The
           judge clearly had regard to the report at paragraph  37  of  the
           determination. She highlights several sections of it. It  formed
           part of her assessment and there was no  duty  on  her  to  cite
           every part of it in her determination. Indeed,  given  that  the
           seriousness of the offence itself and the issue of  re-offending
           have no bearing on any assessment of how deportation of a parent
           impacts upon a child (KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53,  the  judge's
           'failure' to refer to the low risk  of  re-offending  is  wholly
           immaterial.

       40. That brings me to the second ground which is a criticism of  the
           judge's approach to the report  of  the  social  worker.  It  is
           maintained that the judge reached a different conclusion to  the
           social worker as to the best interests of the child and that  no
           cogent reasons were given for why she did so.

       41. The judge engaged with the report at paragraphs 26, 27, 28,  29,
           30, 31 and 33. The report was based on a two hour interview with
           the sponsor and  though  it  refers  to  discussions  with  "the
           family" and "talking with them", it would appear that  the  only
           discussion that took place was with the sponsor. The judge noted
           this, observing  that  the  sponsor's  relatives  had  not  been
           interviewed. Rather surprisingly, the  social  worker  does  not
           refer to having seen the sponsor's son or even to have  observed
           his behaviour or any interaction between them so her conclusions
           on the child are based entirely on what the sponsor said and  on
           the general texts that are alluded to towards  the  end  of  the
           report.

       42. The social worker speculates on a two year  old's  inability  to
           speak English or Punjabi and then jumps to the observation  that
           "research has found that language barriers  can  often  lead  to
           feelings  of  threat  to  self  inadequacy".  This  appears   to
           completely disregard the very young age of  the  child  and  the
           fact that were he to have such problems,  those  feelings  would
           exist regardless of where he was. It is also maintained that the
           child would  not  be  culturally  aware  of  his  new  and  very
           different surroundings. This again  disregards  his  very  young
           age,  the  fact  that  due  to  the  sponsor's  lack  of  social
           interaction, the child would have very little awareness  of  the
           world outside his home.

       43. The  conclusion,  unsurprisingly,  was  that  the  child's  best
           interest would be to be with both parents. I say  unsurprisingly
           because that is the conclusion  one  would  reach  in  the  vast
           majority of parent-child  relationships.  The  conclusions  are,
           however, presented in very generalized terns (at section 8). The
           only  specific  conclusions  relating  to  the  child  are   the
           following: "From what I have read and been informed, it  appears
           to be unsettling for S to remain in the UK  without  his  father
           and indeed not ideal for his emotional and physical  health  for
           him to relocate to India" and : "the quality of the relationship
           between S and his father would  be  negatively  affected  should
           they continue to be separated  and  this  is  not  in  S's  best
           interest".

       44. I would note that no reasons have been given for  why  being  in
           India would not be suitable for  his  emotional/physical  health
           given that he would be with both parents and that the  sponsor's
           own evidence in her witness statement was  that  the  child  was
           developing  and  thriving  in  India  with  his  father,   which
           contradicts her evidence  to  the  social  worker  that  he  was
           constantly sick.

       45. The judge accepted that the best interests of the child were  to
           have input from both parents and to  that  extent  she  did  not
           diverge from the social worker's report. It was,  however,  open
           to her, given all the other  evidence,  to  conclude  that  such
           input could be obtained in two ways: either by the  sponsor  and
           child relocating to India or by them staying here and conducting
           family life by way of visits and social media as they have  been
           doing on a daily basis.  The judge then gives  reasons  for  why
           she reached this conclusion. When the determination is read as a
           whole, it cannot be argued, as  the  grounds  maintain,  that  a
           different view was taken from that of the social worker  without
           any cogent reasons being given.

       46. The judge's findings and conclusions must be considered  in  the
           context  of  the  legal  framework  relating  to  revocation  of
           deportation orders. The judgment in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC  53
           clarified that a decision maker must focus on the  key  question
           of whether the effects of the foreign criminal's deportation  on
           a child or partner would exceed the  level  of  harshness  which
           would necessarily be involved for any  child  or  partner  of  a
           foreign criminal facing deportation. Under rule 399,  the  judge
           must consider both whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
           child and/or partner to live in the country to which the foreign
           criminal is to be deported and whether it would be unduly  harsh
           for the child and/or partner to remain in  the  UK  without  the
           foreign criminal.

       47. Applying that guidance, the court in PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]  EWCA
           Civ 1213 (referred to by Mr Avery in  his  written  submissions)
           allowed the respondent's appeal  and  restored  the  deportation
           order against "PG", a father with six British children. It found
           that the impact of PG's deportation did not surpass  the  degree
           of harshness which was necessarily involved for the  partner  or
           child of a foreign criminal who was deported. It  accepted  that
           many parents would be  faced  with  difficulties  pertaining  to
           children and that the foreign criminal parent would  not  be  on
           hand to assist but that such circumstances could not  mean  that
           the effects of deportation are unduly harsh for the  partner  or
           children. Emotional and behavioural fall  out  were  commonplace
           and whilst the court  sympathised  with  the  entirely  innocent
           children involved, it noted  that  Parliament  had  deliberately
           legislated that, for foreign offenders who are sentenced to  one
           to four years, deportation  could  only  be  avoided  where  the
           consequences for the  children  were  "unduly  harsh"  and  that
           decision-makers,  tribunals  and   courts   must   honour   that
           expression of Parliamentary will.

       48. Certain adverse impacts on children, therefore are regarded as a
           necessary price to pay in pursuit  of  the  public  interest  in
           deportation.  The test applies regardless of the nature  of  the
           offence and regardless of whether the individual presents a risk
           of re-offending.

       49. The appellant has been out of the UK for less  than  five  years
           and indeed it was  four  years  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
           Although the deportation order was signed in 2012, and  although
           there is nothing in the wording of paragraph 391(a)  to  require
           the  'prescribed  period'  to  be  spent  outside  the  UK  (the
           appellant spent a lengthy period in the UK after the deportation
           order was signed challenging the decision), as  pointed  out  in
           Smith (paragraph  391(a)  -  revocation  of  deportation  order)
           [2017] UKUT 00166 (IAC) which was included  in  the  appellant's
           bundle, the whole purpose of a deportation order is to exclude a
           person from the UK for a  specified  or  indefinite  period.  "A
           person should not be able to benefit from a clear breach of  the
           order, which undermines  the  effectiveness  of  the  system  of
           immigration control" (at 25). At the date of his application for
           revocation he had been away for just over three years. After his
           departure from the UK  when  all  attempts  at  challenging  the
           decision had failed, he married  the  sponsor  and  they  had  a
           child.  Those  events  took  place  in  the  knowledge  of   the
           deportation order.

       50. There was little evidence before the judge  in  respect  of  the
           appellant's two older children and no reliance was  placed  upon
           their rights in the present appeal. I note in any event  that  a
           previous Tribunal found that the effect of deportation  was  not
           unduly harsh on them.

       51. The judge properly found that the appellant could not succeed in
           showing that the public interest  in  the  continuation  of  the
           deportation order was outweighed  by  very  compelling  factors.
           Whether considered individually  or  collectively,  the  matters
           relied upon by the appellant were  insufficient  to  enable  the
           judge properly to conclude that the effect of  the  decision  to
           refuse revocation of the deportation order would be unduly harsh
           for either his present wife or  their  child.  Accordingly,  the
           judge  acted  correctly  in  dismissing  the  appeal   and   her
           determination contains no errors of law.




           Decision

       52. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  an
           error of law and it is upheld. The appeal is dismissed.

           Anonymity

       53. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not make  an  anonymity  order
           but an order is sought by Counsel in her written submissions. To
           protect the identity of the appellant's child, and  pursuant  to
           Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
           make an anonymity order.

       54. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a  court  directs  otherwise,  no
           reports of these proceedings of any form of publication  thereof
           shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant.  This
           direction applies to, amongst  others,  the  appellant  and  the
           respondent. Any failure to comply with this direction could give
           rise to contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid
           a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant  from  the
           content of the protection claim.

      Signed

      R. Keki?

      Upper Tribunal Judge

      Date: 13 July 2020
