
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04900/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2020                            |On 5 February 2020            |
|Extempore                                     |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                      Muhammad Saifur Rahman Chowdhury
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam instructed by Chancery Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  G  Mitchell  promulgated  on  21  August   2019,
    dismissing his human rights appeal.

 2. The appellant's case is, in summary, that he is entitled  to  leave  to
    remain on the basis of long residence.  The respondent did  not  accept
    that  the  appellant's  residence  was  continuous  or  lawful  as  the
    Secretary of State took the view that the appellant's  residence  after
    30 August 2014 was unlawful.

 3. It is, we consider, sensible to set  out  the  appellant's  immigration
    history at this point as it is a  matter  to  which  we  will  need  to
    return.

 4. There is no dispute that the appellant entered the United Kingdom on 19
    March 2007 and that he subsequently had leave to  remain  in  different
    capacities until 30 August 2014 as is set out in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal from paragraphs [9] to [11].

 5. The applicant made an application received by  the  Home  Office  on  1
    September 2014  for  a  residence  card  pursuant  to  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 for a residence card  as  the
    extended family member of his brother-in-law who was a German  citizen.
    That application was unsuccessful and the appeal against that  decision
    was dismissed by Judge Shand QC in a decision promulgated on  16  March
    2016.  The appellant then applied for permission to appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal, which was refused.  That was renewed and the matter then
    came before Upper Tribunal Judge  Perkins  who  refused  permission  to
    appeal.

 6. The dispute is over the extent to  which  the  appellant  was  lawfully
    present after 30 August 2014. He says that on an analogy  with  section
    3C of the Immigration Act 1971, he ought to be treated as  having  been
    present lawfully, and that to treat him differently from  a  person  in
    his  position  who  had  been  seeking  leave  to   remain   would   be
    disproportionate. The respondent did not accept that.

 7. We pause at this point to note that  there  are  some  disputes  as  to
    whether the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was in time  and  whether
    the applications for permission to appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and then to the Upper Tribunal were within time.  Although it is  clear
    that First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes did note in his decision refusing
    permission in the First-tier that the application was one  day  out  of
    time, Judge Perkins' decision does not make any reference to that.

 8. It is evident that the Counsel for the applicant at paragraph 50 of the
    decision accepted that the appellant  did  not  have  lawful  residence
    after 30 August 2014.  That is not disputed before us.

 9. It is evident also that the judge did  not  accept  the  arguments  put
    forward that there was an unfairness in that, unlike the position of  a
    person who had applied for further leave to remain within time  whereby
    leave  would  have  been  extended  pursuant  to  Section  3C  of   the
    Immigration Act 1971, the applicant  in  this  case  was  disadvantaged
    because under the scheme operated under the EEA Regulations  there  was
    no  equivalent  to  Section  3C  and   thus   it   was   unlawful   and
    disproportionate, bearing in mind the principle of  equivalence  in  EU
    law not to treat the appellant as someone who meets the requirements of
    paragraph 276B.

10. As we have said,  having  set  out  the  arguments  on  this  issue  at
    paragraphs [59] to [61] the judge did not accept them, but  importantly
    in this case the judge found at paragraph 61(b) in light of  his  other
    findings about the history of the appeal's process  to  which  we  have
    already referred, the appellant ceased to have a pending appeal shortly
    after 6 October 2016, long before the tenth anniversary of his  arrival
    in the United Kingdom.  That finding at paragraph  61(d)  reflects  the
    findings of the judge at paragraph 28(f) and (g).

11. In short, the judge found  that,  even  had  section  3C  applied,  the
    appellant's leave to remain had ceased well before  the  appellant  had
    spent ten years in the United  Kingdom  because  he  had  received  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal refusing permission  to  appeal  shortly
    after it had been issued in October 2016.

12. The grounds of appeal are extensive running to eight  separate  grounds
    numbered (a) to (h).  We will turn to these in due course.

13. We turn first to the position in law as regards the differences between
    having leave to remain under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  scheme
    established by the 1971 Act and the position of EU citizens.   This  is
    set out in some detail in AS (Ghana) [2016] EWCA Civ 133.  We  consider
    that it is important to note  what  is  said  there  at  paragraphs  20
    onwards;  for the purposes of this appeal it is sufficient to note  the
    conclusion that the position of those claiming that they had EEA rights
    differs from those seeking leave under the Immigration Rules  and  that
    there is no analogy with Section 3C of the 1971 Act.

14. We note also Aibangbee [2009] EWCA Civ 339 in which the Court of Appeal
    concluded that the rights of residence of  an  extended  family  member
    which is what is contended here arise only when the  relevant  document
    has been issued.

15. A further proposition to which we have regard is that the rights of  an
    extended family member under EU law is  not  to  residence;  the  right
    conferred  by  the  Directive  2004/38  is  for  them  to  have   entry
    facilitated.  The Directive does not  grant  any  further  rights,  for
    example residence on an analogy with family members and we bear in mind
    that the clear distinction drawn  in  Article  3(2)  of  the  Directive
    between  family  members  and  "beneficiaries",  that  being  the  term
    applicable to all those who are described as extended family members in
    the EEA Regulations, is clear and has been  maintained  throughout  the
    jurisprudence of the Court of Justice.

16. We conclude as follows.

17. First, even if the appellant's arguments  with  regard  to  section  3C
    leave, proportionality  and  so  forth  were  maintained,  then  it  is
    difficult to see how he has been treated in any way differently from an
    EU national, assuming that the appearance of equivalency  would  apply.
    That is because, as we have already noted,  the  appellant's  leave  to
    remain extended by 3C, had it applied, would on  unchallenged  findings
    of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal have come to an end in  October
    2016, several months before he had lived in the United Kingdom for  ten
    years.   We  accept  Mr  Aslam's  submissions   that   the   issue   of
    proportionality must also be taken into account and that  is  something
    to which we will turn in due course.

18. If, however, we  are  wrong  about  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    appellant had not reached the ten year point, we do not  consider  that
    this was material.  First, as we have already said, the position  under
    EU law is different.  It is not contended that section 3C  would  apply
    and in light of AS (Ghana) it is difficult to see how it could be  said
    to apply by analogy or otherwise.

19. Second, this is the case of an extended family member.  It is difficult
    to see how any principle of equivalence could arise here because it  is
    difficult to see from the reasons we have given how EU law  is  engaged
    in the first place; without it being  engaged  then  the  principle  of
    equivalence would also not be engaged.

20. Further, we do not consider that the provisions  of  the  principle  of
    equivalence would be applicable here, despite the submissions  set  out
    in Mr Biggs' skeleton argument  put  before  the  First-tier.   In  its
    essence, that argument is that account should have been  taken  of  the
    fact that the appellant was not asked  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    That is correct; but, as we observed during the course  of  submissons,
    that is  a  similar  position  to  many  people  who  apply  under  the
    Immigration Rules for leave to remain and who  then  subsequently  have
    appeals on human rights bases.  Again, they are not required to  leave,
    but it cannot be said that their position  is  that  they  have  lawful
    residence.  In effect the submission made  by  Mr  Biggs  would  be  to
    equate one's position being here  tolerated  and,  for  example,  being
    given temporary leave or now bail under the  Immigration  Act  2016  is
    equivalent to lawful residence: that, we consider, must be wrong.

21. Turning then to the grounds specifically, we do not consider  there  is
    any merit in ground (a).  We consider that there has been in this  case
    a proper assessment of proportionality.  This is a  detailed  decision.
    It is  a human rights appeal and therefore Section 117A and B apply  to
    this case.  It is evident for the reasons we have already given (and as
    was accepted) that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules and that is a matter which the judge was required  to
    take into account.

22. Whilst there are challenges to the issue of proportionality set out  in
    the grounds (b) to (h), we find that these do not have merit.

23. Turning to the issue of the appellant's health we consider that this is
    properly dealt with.  The findings of fact are made in section B of the
    decision and are summarised further on in the  decision  at  paragraphs
    [63] to [65].

24. In any event, it is difficult to see how the level  of  impact  on  the
    appellant's health is  such  that  it  would  have  made  any  material
    difference or could on any  reasonable  view  have  made  any  material
    difference.

25. Further, with regard to ground (d) of which we have not been  addressed
    in any detail, this ground is lacking in any proper detail.   It  fails
    to identify what material should or should not  have  been  taken  into
    account by the judge in assessing what difficulties the appellant would
    have on reintegration.  Nothing is specified in  the  grounds.   Ground
    (f) we also consider does not identify an error of law.  Little  weight
    could be given to the appellant's involvement with  the  community  and
    there is nothing in this  which  we  consider  could  conceivably  have
    affected the outcome in a case, whereas here we  are  dealing  with  an
    appellant who has no family life in the United Kingdom, whose  position
    here on any view was precarious, and who did not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  Ground (g) is also, we consider, unarguable.
     At best the factors of the appellant being  integrated  into  society,
    speaking English or being  financially  independent  are  neutral,  and
    ground (h) is we consider also without merit as it  fails  properly  to
    give any detail of the failure to give reasons referred to.

26. We consider that although some of the reasoning  concerning  Article  8
    may well be brief, it is nonetheless adequate and sustainable.

27. To conclude therefore, we find first that the appellant, even accepting
    his arguments were correct and that  he  had  lawful  presence  in  the
    United Kingdom whilst this appeal was pending, at the very latest  that
    came to an end in October 2016 as found by the judge.  On that basis it
    cannot be argued that he has been treated any  differently  or  to  his
    detriment in comparison with somebody who had  been  holding  leave  to
    remain and had made an in-time application for permission to appeal.

28. Further, in the light of AS (Ghana) and Aibangbee it cannot  be  argued
    that there were any rights which accrued to the appellant and there can
    be no proper analogy between his position and that of somebody who  had
    leave to remain under the Immigration Rules or  under  the  Immigration
    Act.

29. Finally, we do not consider that there was any  error  in  the  judge's
    assessment of proportionality in this case in which he improperly  took
    into account any factors which he should or should not have taken  into
    account, and for these reasons we conclude that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of  law  and
    we uphold it.

30. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 30 January 2020
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



