
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04272/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 April 2017                             |On 14 June 2017               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Gore of Counsel, instructed by Montas
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Judge Fowell given on 30 August 2016 whereby he allowed  the
    present respondent's appeal  against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State that she should not be permitted to remain in this country.   The
    respondent is now some 48 years old, having been born in August 1968 in
    Uganda.  She came to this country first on 7 March 2008,  having  entry
    clearance as a visitor.  That entry was one which  covered  six  months
    and expired at the beginning of August 2008 but she did not  return  to
    Uganda  nor  did  she  take  any  steps  to   obtain   further   leave.
    Accordingly, she simply remained unlawfully until December 2011 when an
    application was submitted relying  on  Articles  3  and  8.   That  was
    refused in July 2012 and she was offered the opportunity in  June  2013
    to claim asylum but for good reason she refused that.  She was given  a
    right of appeal in June 2013 and that appeal was dismissed  in  January
    2014  when  her  appeal  rights  were  exhausted.   She  made   further
    representations in March 2014 and those were  rejected  in  July.   The
    decision giving formal reasons for the refusal to allow her  to  remain
    was given on 12 June 2015 and it was against  that  decision  that  the
    appeal was brought.

2.   The respondent suffered a very unfortunate experience  in  Uganda.   In
    2007 it seems her husband was killed and she was then raped  by,  among
    others, her brother-in-law.  This led to  a  serious  effect  upon  her
    health as might be no surprise, and it was as a result of that and  the
    absence of any real assistance that she said was available  to  her  in
    Uganda that she decided to come to  this  country.   Unfortunately  she
    simply came as a visitor and then overstayed  and  she  has  taken,  or
    tried to take steps notwithstanding that to remain of which this is the
    latest.

3.   Unfortunately, the Home  Office  was  thoroughly  incompetent  in  that
    there was a failure to put before the First-tier Judge any material, in
    particular the previous  decision  of  the  judge  in  2014  which  had
    resulted in the refusal of her appeal at  that  date.   The  First-tier
    Judge was aware of the existence of that appeal because it is  referred
    to in the refusal letter which was the subject of the  appeal,  and  he
    thus recognised that the judge then had taken the view that there  were
    no sufficient obstacles to her removal to Uganda at that  stage.   What
    was particularly relied on, and what changed the matter so far as Judge
    Fowell was concerned, was the medical evidence which was  such  as,  in
    his view, had changed the situation.

4.   Now sadly, quite apart from the effect of rape and the attack  and  the
    loss of her husband, as a result the respondent suffers from HIV and is
    undergoing treatment for that condition.   In  addition,  there  was  a
    psychological report which made clear that she was suffering from  PTSD
    and major  depression  and  was  receiving  individual  trauma  focused
    cognitive behavioural therapy  but  her  mental  health  problems  were
    likely to deteriorate, and seriously deteriorate if  she  was  returned
    and there was, in the view of the  psychologist,  a  risk  of  suicide.
    There is available treatment in Uganda, albeit it may well be  that  it
    is not as satisfactory as that available here and of  course  there  is
    the real concern that if she is returned to Uganda that will  seriously
    affect her mental condition.  Furthermore, as far as HIV  is  concerned
    there is again treatment available there, albeit it may  well  be  that
    free treatment is not  so  generally  available  as  here.   There  is,
    because of the approach to homosexual relations in  Uganda,  a  feeling
    that those suffering from  HIV  are  not  to  be  pitied  but  what  is
    important in this case is that  her  HIV  has  resulted  not  from  any
    homosexual relationship but from the rape by soldiers including,  as  I
    say, her brother-in-law.  She has asserted,  and  the  evidence  before
    Judge Fowell in the absence of any initial material which was  referred
    to in the previous judgment in 2014 was that  she  had  no  family  and
    friends left there, albeit there is reference in the decision letter to
    the fact that there is a branch of the church which  she  is  attending
    and which she is finding to be something she values and  that  sort  of
    support can be maintained.  It is said again  in  the  decision  letter
    that there was a friend whom she named who would be able to  assist  on
    her return and there would be support available.

5.   Judge Fowell in  his  decision  dealt  with  the  Article  3  claim  in
    relation to the medical condition and having referred to  the  relevant
    authority GS (India) and Others v the Secretary of  State  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 40 which made it clear that it would only be in a  rare  case  that
    returning someone to  a  country  with  a  lower  standard  of  medical
    treatment could be said to expose them to a breach of Article 3 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights, and in paragraph 44  Judge  Fowell
    said this:

         "Although I take into account her mental health  problems  and  her
         subjective fear of harm on return they are secondary aspects of the
         matter and cannot fundamentally alter the  position.   It  has  not
         been suggested that mental health facilities cannot be accessed  in
         Uganda and the claim to be an actual risk  of  a  repetition  of  a
         violent or sexual assault has  already  been  the  subject  of  the
         previous appeal.   There  is  no  basis  for  me  to  disturb  that
         conclusion.  The appellant's fear of return however genuine prevent
         her return on Article 3 grounds".


    I think there is a misprint in that last sentence but what  effectively
    he is deciding is that she cannot rely  on  her  medical  situation  to
    support an Article 3 claim.


6.   He then turned to Article 8.  In paragraph 46 he said this:


         "46. There are clearly a number of  immediate  obstacles  over  and
             above registering for HIV treatment.  She has  her  depression
             and PTSD to contend with exacerbated by her fear of harm.  She
             has no immediate source of funds  and  would  have  to  obtain
             employment.  This is difficult at  her  age  and  without  any
             formal education.  She also has on the evidence  available  no
             relatives there who can take her in or crucially any means  of
             obtaining accommodation.


         47.  This is a formidable list of the major features  and  lack  of
             any practical support.  If there were some  accommodation  and
             relative or friend to assist with obtaining the  medical  help
             she  needs  the  situation  would  present  a  very  different
             appearance but that is not the case.  I bear in mind  too  the
             circumstances in which the appellant left Uganda in  the  wake
             of an ordeal which left her homeless and  traumatised  without
             any means of support".


7.   However, as he recognised, many of those features to which he  referred
    had already been considered in previous applications and there  was  no
    suggestion that the appellant's evidence that she had been attacked and
    raped had been challenged and therefore as he recognised it must follow
    that there were no very significant  obstacles  to  her  return.   That
    meant, as again he properly decided, that it  was  only  if  there  was
    fresh material which was not available to and was not considered by the
    previous judge that he could find in her favour and what he  relied  on
    was the medical evidence to which we have already referred.


8.   He also properly cited the relevant parts of the decision of Lady  Hale
    in R (on the application of Razgar) v the  Secretary  of  State  [2004]
    UKHL 27 where she said that  although  the  possibility  could  not  be
    excluded it was not easy to think of a foreign  healthcare  case  which
    could fail under Article 3 but succeed under Article 8, and she went on
    to say that only the most compelling humanitarian  considerations  were
    likely to prevail over the legitimate aims of  immigration  control  or
    public safety.  Lord Justice Laws in GS India  referred  to  the  same,
    saying in paragraph 86 of that case:


         "If the Article 3 claim fails (as  I  would  hold  it  does  here),
         Article 8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
         factual element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm
         and capacity to form and enjoy relationships or a state of  affairs
         having some affinity with the paradigm".


9.   He also cited similar observations in MM Zimbabwe [2012] EWCA Civ  279.
     Mrs Gore has particularly relied on what he says in paragraph 53 which
    is as follows:


         "I also note that the appellant has been  living  with  her  friend
         Helen in the UK for almost all of her stay here.  This  has  proved
         to be a very durable relationship and one which  has  provided  the
         appellant with huge practical and no doubt personal  support.   Her
         depression is of a serious nature involving suicidal  thoughts  and
         would significantly affect her ability to integrate at all even  if
         the bare requirements of food and shelter can be  achieved  and  it
         does not appear likely that they can be.  A fear of harm would also
         have a seriously limiting effect"


    and he concluded in  the  circumstances  that  the  personal  life  and
    circumstances were such  as  took  the  matter  beyond  purely  medical
    factors.  On the other hand, it was  his  view  that  the  new  medical
    information provided the significant change or the additional factor to
    be weighed in the balance which had been referred to in the authorities
    in relation to Article 3 and Article 8 on medical situations.  What  is
    submitted essentially by Mr Melvin is that what the judge has  done  is
    to misuse the medical evidence in the sense that, having  rejected  the
    medical evidence as a proper ground for saying that removal should  not
    take place, he has then used it to support the Article 8 claim and thus
    he has effectively overtaken the decision that it cannot succeed on its
    own.


10.  That his was a compassionate decision there is no doubt.  On the  other
    hand we have to look at the respondent's immigration history, the  fact
    that she has remained here unlawfully and the fact that harsh though it
    be, the medical evidence was insufficient to justify a decision that it
    would be a breach of her human  rights  were  she  to  be  returned  to
    Uganda.  True, that as a result of what she suffered  she  has  serious
    mental problems but there is no doubt  that  there  is,  as  the  judge
    found, treatment available in Uganda.   Equally,  again  as  the  judge
    recognised, there was the previous decision at which there  can  be  no
    doubt that her mental condition, as Dr Green refers to her having  seen
    him since 2011 and in relation to the HIV, was all available.  It is of
    course most unfortunate that the Home Office  failed  to  put  all  the
    material evidence before Judge Fowell and  for  reasons  that  we  have
    already indicated because it was served  far  too  late,  we  have  not
    thought it right to admit it.  But it is  not  in  our  view  essential
    because as we say, it is clear that medical  evidence  was  taken  into
    account, and albeit it maybe that her condition has deteriorated  since
    the previous decision, nevertheless we regret to say that in  our  view
    the judge did indeed not use the  medical  evidence  correctly  because
    essentially it is the medical evidence which in  his  view  tipped  the
    balance in  Article  8  terms  but  that  fails  to  get  over  in  the
    circumstances of this case the decisions, harsh as we say  though  they
    be, which govern the correct approach where it  is  necessary  to  take
    into account the legitimate aims of immigration control and that is the
    position so far as this case is concerned.


11.  We should emphasise that this decision is one  which  depends  entirely
    upon the facts of  this  case  and  cannot  be  taken  as  any  general
    consideration in cases  involving  medical  grounds  for  saying  there
    should be leave to remain  in  this  country.   All  these  cases  will
    inevitably depend upon their own facts and  with  some  regret  we  are
    bound to say we feel that it is necessary to allow this appeal  and  we
    do not think that there is anything to be said for a remittal.

12.  In all the circumstances  our  decision  is  that  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent, as she now is, should be dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 7 June 2017

Mr Justice Collins
