
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/04691/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st October 2019                  |On 9th October 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     DRM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, of Counsel, instructed by Greenland
Lawyers LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Barbados born  in  January  2001.  He
         arrived in the UK on 3rd December  2005  and  remained  here  until
         2011, but then returned to Barbados. He came back to the UK on 14th
         December 2014, and applied to extend his leave on 10th June 2015 on
         Article 8 ECHR grounds.  This  application  was  refused,  and  his
         appeal was dismissed in December 2016, and he became appeal  rights
         exhausted in August 2017.  On  10th  December  2018  the  appellant
         applied for leave to remain on Article 8  ECHR  grounds,  and  that
         application was refused in the decision of 25th February 2018.  His
         appeal against that decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Louveaux in a determination  promulgated  on  the  27th  June
         2019.

      2. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Povey on the 22nd August 2019 on the  basis  that  it  was
         arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law in  failing  to
         have regard to the appellant's age  as  he  was  a  child  when  he
         applied and had just turned 18 years at the time  of  the  hearing,
         and in holding against him his history of involvement  with  social
         services and immigration history as a minor when  he  was  arguably
         under the direction of  his  father  at  that  time.  It  was  also
         arguable that the First-tier Tribunal irrationally found  that  the
         appellant's grandmother would be  a  carer  in  Barbados  when  the
         evidence was that she lived in Jamaica for reasons of ill-health.

      3. The matter came before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
         Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

      4. The grounds of appeal contend firstly that  the  appellant  was  17
         years old at the date of application, and just 18 years old at  the
         date of decision and hearing. In the  decision  the  applicant  was
         viewed as an adult and it was held against him that  he  had  twice
         sought to bypass immigration control and had failed  to  return  to
         Barbados when his first appeal was dismissed with the  result  that
         he had cost the taxpayer money as he required social  care.  It  is
         argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  consider  that  the
         appellant was a minor at the time of these  matters,  and  that  he
         acted  on  his  father's  instructions.  In  accordance  with  Kaur
         (children's best interests / public interest interface) [2017] UKUT
         00014 the Upper Tribunal held that s.117B of the 2002 Act does  not
         prevent a child's age,  vulnerability  and  personal  circumstances
         being considered and these could in principle counter  balance  the
         ascription to give little weight to his private life  developed  in
         times when he was unlawfully or precariously  present  particularly
         as there is a legislative intention to confer on  children  special
         levels of protection. There was also a failure to weigh his  family
         life ties with the UK.

      5. Secondly it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  by
         requiring   documentary   corroboration   that   the    appellant's
         grandmother was unwell, and in failing to understand that the  main
         reason that she could not care for the appellant was that  she  was
         in Jamaica.

      6. Thirdly it is argued that Mr Chester's social work report was given
         little weight because the respondent could not test  the  evidence,
         when this was not a submission the respondent  had  made  and  also
         because the appellant had  ceased  to  be  a  child  since  it  was
         written. However, the family life of a child does not cut off  when
         a child reaches 18 years, and the findings of Mr  Chester  likewise
         did not cease to be relevant, see paragraph 22 of Singh  &  Anor  v
         SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630.

      7. These errors remain relevant  despite  the  previous  determination
         dated December 2016 as there were errors in that  assessment  under
         Article 8 ECHR because that First-tier  Tribunal,  which  gave  its
         determination in 2016, did not have the benefit of the guidance  in
         Kaur.

      8. In a Rule 24 response and in submissions by Mr Avery the respondent
         contends, in summary, that the First-tier Tribunal directed  itself
         properly. The previous decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
         raised the issue of a lack evidence of the grandmother's ill-health
         and so it was reasonable to expect such evidence to be before  this
         First-tier Tribunal. It is argued that the social work  report  was
         not given weight due to the fact that the appellant no longer lived
         in local authority care and was once again with his  father  rather
         than just because the appellant had become an adult.

      9. At the end of the submissions on remaking I  informed  the  parties
         that I found that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  for  the
         reasons which I now set out below in writing. It was agreed that we
         would immediately proceed to remake the appeal with evidence  being
         called as the three key witnesses, the appellant,  his  father  and
         his step-mother were all present,  and  both  representatives  were
         ready to proceed.

Conclusions - Error of Law

     10. The First-tier Tribunal erred by failing to consider the weight  to
         be given to the family life ties the appellant has in the  UK  with
         his father, his step-mother (father's ex  -partner),  and  his  six
         minor half-siblings and his step-siblings with whom he  now  spends
         at least every other weekend, and  which  are  found  to  exist  at
         paragraph 27 of the decision. There is no  prescription  that  only
         limited weight could be given to these ties within  s.117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  There  was  also  a
         failure to consider the case of Kaur (children's best  interests  /
         public interest interface with respect to the  appellant's  private
         life  ties  with  the  UK,  and  to  consider  whether  these  were
         straightforwardly to be only given limited weight as they would  if
         they had been formed by  an  unlawfully  present  adult.  This  was
         particularly relevant where there was evidence  before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal that the appellant had been in social  services  care
         which  would  indicate  a  period,  at  least,   of   vulnerability
         especially as there  are  on-going  social  services  payments  and
         therefore involvement with the appellant.

     11. The report of the social worker Mr  Chester  should  properly  have
         been put in the context of  the  developments  in  the  appellant's
         circumstances, which most importantly involved the change  that  he
         had returned to live with his father but it was not lawful to  give
         it limited weight simply because Mr Chester did not attend to  give
         evidence before the First-tier Tribunal as no further reasoning  is
         given on this point or simply because some things had changed since
         it was written. I find that there was as  a  result  a  failure  to
         properly consider relevant social work evidence in the report of Mr
         Chester, particularly going to  the  issues  that  the  appellant's
         grandmother had ceased caring for him as she was unable to cope and
          why he returned to the UK in 2014, see the report at page  121  of
         the  appellant's  bundle,  and   also   evidence   of   the   close
         relationships he has with his younger siblings and  step-mother  at
         page 120 of the appellant's bundle.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

     12. Prior to the start of the evidence I asked Mr  Balroop  to  clarify
         the basic family structure. The appellant lives with his father, Mr
         MM in one household in Stanmore.  Ms PW, his  step  mother  and  Mr
         MM's ex-wife, lives in another household in Harrow with  her  three
         children T (aged 22) who  is  her  older  daughter  by  a  previous
         relationship, and MY  (aged  10)  and  MN  (aged  8)  who  are  the
         appellant's half siblings. In a third household in Hayes there  are
         Ms D, who is Mr MM's ex-partner prior to PW, who lives in with  her
         children DA (aged 16) and K (aged 14), S (aged 10  years)  who  are
         all the appellant's half siblings and A (aged 7 years)  a  daughter
         of Ms D's from another relationship.  The birth certificates of the
         children are all included in the appellant's bundle, as are British
         citizen passport copies for MY and MN.

     13. The evidence of the appellant from his written and oral evidence in
         summary is as follows.

     14. He was born in Barbados and lived initially with his  mum  and  his
         younger sister who had a different father, but also spent time with
         his paternal grandmother. He left Barbados and was brought  to  the
         UK to join his father and step-mother when he was 4 years  old.  He
         last saw his biological mum and younger half-sister when he  was  4
         years old. He has had no contact with them since that time. He  has
         no idea about the whereabouts of his maternal grandmother.

     15. In 2011 he  returned  to  Barbados  and  lived  with  his  paternal
         grandmother.  He  completed  his  primary  education  and   started
         secondary school. His paternal grandmother is now in  Jamaica,  and
         his father has obtained documents about her in Jamaica. He does not
         have contact with his father's siblings in Barbados, but they  were
         around sometimes when he was  in  Barbados.  He  has  not  been  to
         Barbados since 2014 when he returned to  the  UK  to  be  with  his
         father because his  paternal  grandmother  became  ill  with  heart
         problems and could not cope with  him.  On  return  to  the  UK  he
         reconnected not only with father and siblings  but  also  with  his
         step-mother, Ms PW. He does not have social media contact with  any
         friends from Barbados because he left at a point  when  he  had  no
         phone or access to such media. He was there when he was aged 10  to
         14 years.

     16. In May 2018 he fell out with his father, and because Ms PW did  not
         have any space he was accommodated for a while by Social  Services,
         but he kept up contact with both his father and step-mother and all
         of his step and half siblings during that time. By June 2019 he had
         returned to live with his father.

     17. He currently sees all of his half and step siblings most weeks.  He
         goes to their houses or they come to his/ his  father's  and  sleep
         over for the weekend.  He is the oldest, they look up to him and he
         sometimes takes them out. They see films or do things like going to
         an Arsenal football match or paintballing. He  feels  closest  with
         his brothers DA, K and MN. He babysits for MY  and  MN,  and  knows
         that they would be upset if he was no longer in the  UK.  He  helps
         his step-mum, Ms PW, as she needs a helping hand.

     18. He has two level one BTEC qualifications: the first  in  electrical
         engineering and the second in electrical  installation.  If  he  is
         allowed to remain his plan is to get an engineering  apprenticeship
         and continue to study with this programme. He has never  worked  in
         the UK. The appellant does not think he would cope if he were  sent
         to Barbados because as he would not know how to operate there as he
         is just 18 years old and would not know who to contact  or  how  to
         get a job; his father doesn't want him to go there and  he  has  no
         idea if his father would be able to contact his own  half  siblings
         for help but they are quite young as one is younger  than  him  and
         the others around the same age as him and they now lived with their
         different fathers as their mother, his paternal grandmother,  lives
         in Jamaica.

     19. The evidence of the appellant's father, Mr  MM,  from  his  written
         statement and oral testimony is, in summary, as follows.

     20. He is a British citizen who was born in Jamaica in 1979.  He  works
         as a gas engineer, and is doing a degree in  civil  engineering  at
         the  University  of  West  London.  He  currently  lives  with  the
         appellant, and has 6 other children who all live in the UK.

     21. Mr MM was born in Jamaica and lived in Jamaica until he  was  about
         16 years old when he moved with his Jamaican mother to Barbados  as
         she married a man there. He lived in Barbados for  about  4  years,
         during which time the appellant  was  conceived.  The  relationship
         with the appellant's mother broke down, and he came to  the  UK  in
         August 2000. He returned to Barbados when the appellant was born in
         2001 and stayed for a number of weeks. The appellant's mother could
         not cope with his care so  his  mother,  the  appellant's  paternal
         grandmother, became his main carer but he provided money  and  kept
         in contact to make key decisions. He went again to Barbados  for  a
         couple of weeks in 2005 to collect the appellant and bring  him  to
         live with him in the UK. Initially when he brought the appellant to
         the UK in 2005 he lived briefly with his  then  partner  Ms  D  and
         their son DA, but then shortly after they moved  in  with  his  new
         partner Ms PW, and they cohabited with her  daughter  T  and  their
         daughter MY who was born in 2009 until that relationship  ended  in
         2010. At this point Mr MM took the decision to return A to the care
         of his mother in Barbados as his brother had  died  and  he  needed
         surgery and was finding it  difficult  to  cope.  He  continued  to
         maintain contact with the appellant by phone, and  visited  him  in
         2012 for a couple of weeks when he graduated from  primary  school.
         This was the  last  time  Mr  MM  visited  Barbados.  In  2014  the
         appellant visited the UK, and Mr MM decided that he  should  remain
         here as he received news his mother was unwell and there was no one
         else to care for him in Barbados.

     22. Since his return the appellant has rekindled his relationships with
         his step-mother, Ms PW, T, MY, MN. Mr MM explains  that  he  had  a
         falling out with the appellant which led to the appellant being  in
         social services care for a while, but even when he was in care  the
         appellant still saw all members of the family. He now  has  all  of
         the children around approximately every other weekend  although  it
         changes with their activities. All the children  get  on  well  and
         have no problems between one another. They have holidays, go to the
         cinema and go to football games together. He is also aware that the
         appellant babysits for MY and MN to help Ms PW. He  has  talked  to
         the other children about the possibility of the appellant having to
         go back to  Barbados  and  knows  from  them  that  they  would  be
         devastated. They wanted to attend the Upper Tribunal to  give  that
         evidence but he had said that they had to go to school.

     23. Mr MM's evidence is that the appellant could not return to live  in
         Barbados as there is no one there to care for him and no home owned
         by anyone as the appellant paternal grandmother's place was rented,
         and his paternal grandmother has returned to Jamaica around a  year
         ago where she herself is being cared for by others. He obtained the
         documents about his mother, Mrs VK, from her as the  last  Tribunal
         commented on the lack of evidence about her. In Barbados  he  still
         has his younger half siblings: Y who is 21  years  old,  A  who  is
         about 17 years old and M who is 16 years old. They could not assist
         the appellant as they are children themselves and live  with  their
         fathers. His level of contact with them is to call  them  on  their
         birthdays, and it would not be right for him to ask  them  to  help
         him when they are children and he is a healthy  person  working  in
         the UK. He understands that the appellant's mother  has  remarried,
         and he and the appellant have had no contact at all  for  the  past
         ten years. The appellant could not survive on  his  own  as  he  is
         still a child and cannot make adult decisions.

     24. The evidence of  the  appellant's  step-mother,  Ms  PW,  from  her
         written statement and oral testimony is, in summary as follows.

     25. She is a British citizen born in the  UK,  although  she  lived  in
         Jamaica from the age of 9 to 14 years. She is the biological mother
         of T, and MN and MY with Mr MM. She feels that the appellant is her
         son, and says he was very close to T before he returned to Barbados
         in 2011. Since his returned to the UK in  2014  she  has  rekindled
         this bond, and he frequently takes care of his younger siblings  MY
         and MN with T, and sometimes babysits, collects them from school if
         she is running late and goes to MN's football matches. They also go
         on holiday together to places like Centre Parcs. She had  not  been
         able to take the appellant in when he fell out with his  father  in
         May 2018 because she is a foster carer and had  insufficient  space
         and a female foster child which made it impossible.  She  sees  the
         appellant as part of her family unit. She believes that MN  and  MY
         would be detrimentally affected if he was not allowed to remain  in
         the UK as they don't really remember a time without him and look up
         to him as their older brother.

     26. Mr Avery submitted that he relied upon the  refusal  letter.  Which
         concludes that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the
         private life Immigration Rules as at the point  of  application  he
         was a child who had not been in  the  UK  for  7  years.  Mr  Avery
         submitted that the Immigration Rules cannot  be  currently  met  as
         there would not be very significant obstacles  to  integration  for
         the appellant on his return to Barbados, and his removal  would  be
         not be a disproportionate interference with his family life ties as
         there was nothing exceptional.

     27. The refusal letter disputes that there was family life between  the
         appellant and his father, Ms PW and his half and step  siblings  as
         he was not living with them at the time  of  application  and  also
         pointed to the lack  of  evidence  with  respect  to  his  paternal
         grandmother being unable to continue caring for him as she had done
         between 2010 and 2014.. Mr Avery accepted that  there  was  a  fair
         amount of documentary evidence regarding family life, but commented
         that the expert report was out of date and that the  oral  evidence
         about family life was a bit hazy, as for instance  the  father  had
         described his contact with his children at the weekend but had  not
         mentioned that the appellant had baby-sat MN and MY, which was  the
         evidence of Ms PW. Mr MM had not looked into family connections  in
         Barbados to try to sort something out for the appellant if he  were
         to return. The appellant is an adult with some  qualifications  who
         could try to get work in Barbados, but  his  family  had  not  been
         motivated to help him with this.

     28. Mr Balroop submitted that there would be very significant obstacles
         to integration on return to Barbados for the appellant as he had no
         accommodation and no  family  to  return  to  there.  His  paternal
         grandmother was now unwell  and  living  in  another  country.  His
         uncles and aunts from his father are  children  living  with  their
         fathers. His father could not  go  with  him  as  he  has  6  other
         children from two different mothers in the UK, and  does  not  live
         with either of the mothers. The appellant only  has  level  1  BTEC
         qualifications and no employment experience. He would not  be  able
         to survive,  and  therefore  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  with
         reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration  Rules.  In
         addition, the appeal should  be  allowed  as  it  would  not  be  a
         proportionate interference with  his  family  life  with  his  half
         siblings and  step  siblings.  The  evidence  of  family  life  was
         extensive, and Mr Chester the social worker had concluded it  would
         be emotionally harmful for the appellant to be  required  to  leave
         the UK. His father is able to support him financially in the UK and
         the appellant speaks English. All  of  this  outweighs  the  public
         interest in maintaining immigration  control,  and  so  the  appeal
         should be allowed.

     29. In  addition  to  the  witnesses  who  attended  court  the  bundle
         includes:  letters in support attesting to their close relationship
         from his step-sister T, his half-sister MY, and his half-brother DA
         along with photographs of him with half and step siblings; a letter
         from the Barbados Ethiopian Orthodox  Church  which  confirms  that
         when the appellant was christened in January 2001 he was  presented
         by his paternal grandmother, Mrs VK, who was his guardian  at  that
         point;  a statement from Mrs VK about  her  relationship  with  the
         appellant and the care she provided for him in the  past,  and  her
         ill health together with a medical report from her GP  in  Jamaica;
         and the social work  report  of  Mr  Lawrence  Chester  dated  19th
         November 2018.

     30. The social work report of Mr  Chester  records  that  he  has  been
         qualified as a social worker since 1995, and has  a  MA  in  social
         work awarded in 2015. He has worked in statutory roles and then  as
         an independent social worker. He has worked with  refugee  children
         and an integral part of his work is to assess the best interests of
         children. Mr Chester includes a statement of his duty to the Court.
         I find  it  is  a  report  which  was  written  by  a  person  with
         appropriate expertise and understanding of their duties. The report
         was made following interviews with the appellant, Mr MM and Ms  PW,
         and with sight of the documents from  Harrow  Children's  Services.
         Although the report was written when the appellant was in  care  it
         records that there was on-going contact with Mr MM, Ms PW and T, MN
         and MY even at that time.

     31. It was  the  conclusion  of  Mr  Chester  that  the  appellant  had
         experienced much of his childhood in the UK and had the majority of
         his family here, and that he thinks of himself as  British.  It  is
         recorded that the appellant had had to return to  the  UK  in  2014
         because his grandmother was unable to cope with  him  in  Barbados,
         and then had been abandoned by his father in May 2018, and  had  no
         contact with  his  biological  mother,  and  Mr  Chester  expressed
         concerns that this would negatively impact on  the  appellant,  and
         indeed refers to the fact that there is other  evidence  supporting
         this concern as he had been to see his GP about being depressed and
         upset (the GP  notes  for  January  2016  being  at  p.129  of  the
         appellant's bundle) and there was  a  comment  about  the  worrying
         degree of instability that there had been in the  appellant's  life
         in the Harrow Social Work Assessment.  In  these  circumstances  Mr
         Chester concluded  that  the  attachments  to  the  UK,  which  the
         appellant sees as home, are likely to be all the more important  to
         him. In this context he went on to conclude that it would cause the
         appellant significant emotional harm if he were  removed  from  the
         UK.

Conclusions - Remaking

     32. My starting point is  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Rothwell promulgated on 23rd December 2016. Judge Rothwell
         found that Mr MM had not been a truthful witness as he said he  did
         not know when the appellant returned to Barbados  or  how  long  he
         stayed, and she generally concluded  that  he  was  not  trying  to
         assist the Tribunal by being frank. She also noted that  there  was
         no evidence regarding the paternal grandmother's illness. In  these
         circumstances, noting the very limited evidence before  her,  which
         included a lack of  evidence  about  the  appellant's  private  and
         family life ties in the UK,  Judge Rothwell concluded that she  did
         not accept that the appellant could not return  to  live  with  his
         paternal grandmother as he had done in 2010 and thus dismissed  the
         appeal.

     33. Mr Avery has submitted that the account of  family  life  from  the
         three witnesses was hazy before the Upper Tribunal. I do not  agree
         with that assessment. The family is extensive and  complex  with  a
         total of seven children and three households. There was no evidence
         given which was significantly inconsistent, and some evidence which
         echoed  through  the  three  different  testimonies,  such  as  the
         appellant's regular babysitting role with his younger half siblings
         MY and MN. Mr MM has perhaps learned  from  his  experience  before
         Judge Rothwell and I find that on this  occasion  he  assisted  the
         Upper Tribunal properly and gave truthful testimony as his evidence
         was detailed and heartfelt, particularly when he explained  how  he
         just did not feel it would be right to ask his minor  half-siblings
         in Barbados with whom he has just annual  birthday  greeting  phone
         calls to assist with the care  of  the  appellant  when  he  was  a
         healthy working man; and further Mr MM's  evidence  was  consistent
         with that of Ms PW and the appellant, and with the other supporting
         documentation  -   for   instance   the   appellant's   christening
         certificate  recording  that  he  was  presented  by  his  paternal
         grandmother as his guardian rather than by his mother. I find,  for
         these reasons, that it is correct to treat all of the witnesses  as
         credible.

     34. I turn first to the Article 8  ECHR  appeal  by  reference  to  the
         Immigration Rules at paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  In  SSHD  v  Kamara
         [2016] EWCA Civ 813 at paragraph 14 of the  decision  Lord  Justice
         Sales said as follows: "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad
         evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be
         enough of an insider in terms of  understanding  how  life  in  the
         society in that other country is  carried  on  and  a  capacity  to
         participate in it, so as to have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
         accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that
         society and to build up within a reasonable time a variety of human
         relationships to give substance  to  the  individual's  private  or
         family life."

     35. The appellant is 18 years old, and I find, based on the totality of
         the witness evidence, the social work evidence and the letters from
         three of his siblings, remains part of his  father's  family,  with
         family life relationships of  emotional  and  financial  dependency
         akin to those of a child. He has never worked;  he  has  some  low-
         level qualifications; and he continues to live within  the  network
         of siblings and gains support not just from  his  father  but  also
         from his step-mother Ms PW. He does take his half-siblings  MY  and
         MN out but generally together with his older step-sister, T. He  is
         a person who has suffered a number of  abandonments  in  his  life:
         firstly his birth mother who has played no  material  role  in  his
         life after he was 4 years old; then his  paternal  grandmother  who
         became unable to care for him when he was 14 after being  his  main
         carer for the previous 4 years; and then his father  in  2018  when
         they fell out and he had to seek help from Social  Services.  I  am
         satisfied that his paternal grandmother has  returned  to  Jamaica,
         her country of nationality due to her ill health and lives with her
         siblings given her statement supported by the GP  letter,  and  the
         evidence of the witnesses. I  find,  relying  on  the  social  work
         evidence of Mr Chester and indeed the notes of his GP  consultation
         about his anxiety and  low  mood  in  2016,  that  there  has  been
         instability in the appellant's life which makes him more vulnerable
         than an 18 year old who had experienced a  stable  upbringing,  and
         thus conclude that the family life relationship  and  stability  of
         continuing to live in the UK are more vital to his emotional  well-
         being. It is further clear that  the  appellant  views  himself  as
         British and this country as home, and that this is the  only  place
         he feels he understands.

     36. I also find that the appellant would not have any significant  help
         to  re-establish  himself  in  Barbados.  His  father   has   quite
         reasonably not felt able to ask his very young step-siblings,  with
         whom he has very little historic contact and who are without  their
         own mother, who has returned to Jamaica in the last  year  and  are
         now relying on their own fathers, to assist the appellant given his
         own fortunate circumstances in the UK.  Mr  MM  is  further  not  a
         citizen of that country,  and  only  lived  there  for  four  years
         between the ages of 16 and 20, and has only made three visits there
         since that time, the first being when the  appellant  was  born  in
         2001, the second being in 2005 when he brought him to  the  UK  for
         the first time; and the last being in 2012 when he went to see  the
         appellant and  his  mother.  Mr  MM  also  plainly  has  six  other
         biological children  for  whom  he  must  provide  financially  and
         emotionally in the UK, and could not return to  Barbados  with  the
         appellant to help him.

     37. In these circumstances I find that the  appellant  would  lack  the
         personal maturity and family help  to  be  able  to  establish  the
         necessary human relationship to give substance to his  private  and
         family life in Barbados, and would struggle even to  establish  the
         basics of accommodation and financial support  for  himself.  I  am
         therefore satisfied that the appellant would have very  significant
         obstacles to  integration  if  he  had  to  return  to  country  of
         nationality.

     38. If I am wrong with respect to the Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) and the appeal must  be  looked  at  more  widely  on
         Article 8 ECHR grounds I find the following to weigh in his favour.
         I have already concluded that the appellant has  family  life  ties
         with his father, step-mother and six step and half siblings who are
         all settled lawfully in the UK, and that he has the  emotional  and
         financial dependency on his father and step-mother of  a  minor.  I
         find that it would not be possible for these the  two  families  of
         siblings to relocate to Barbados, a country  of  which  none  is  a
         national and none has lived and given all families have school  age
         children who have lived in the UK for more than  7  years.  I  find
         therefore  that  removal  of  the  appellant  would   fundamentally
         interfere with these family life relationship which  are  based  on
         very regular face to face interactions,  and  that  this  would  be
         highly detrimental to the appellant who still has the emotional and
         financial relationship of a child to his father and step-mother and
         siblings. I find that it is also in the best interest of MN and MY,
         who are both British citizens, that the appellant remains in the UK
         given his regular contact as their caring older brother in light of
         the evidence from both their biological  parents  and  older  step-
         sister as well as the appellant, and that this must  be  a  primary
         consideration. I accept the evidence that they would be  devastated
         if he were not part  of  their  lives.  I  find  that  all  of  the
         appellant's private life ties are also  with  the  UK,  and  whilst
         normally these could not be given more than little weight  as  they
         have been formed whilst  he  has  been  present  without  leave  to
         remain,  for  the  reasons  set  out  above  when  the  appeal  was
         considered under the Immigration Rules regarding his probable grave
         difficulties in forging a private life  in  Barbados  I  find  that
         exceptionally it is appropriate to give weight  to  these  ties.  I
         place reliance on the conclusion of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Kaur
         (children's best interests / public interest interface)  in  taking
         this approach. I also find that the appellant  remains  emotionally
         vulnerable to change due to his unstable upbringing and  experience
         of abandonment which  makes  the  importance  of  his  keeping  his
         private life in the UK greater than it would otherwise have been.

     39. Against the appellant is the fact that weight must be given to  the
         public interest in maintaining  immigration  control  and  removing
         those who do not qualify under the Immigration Rules, if I am wrong
         in my conclusions  that  he  does  so  qualify  with  reference  to
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and the  fact  that  it  appears  that  he
         continues to receive some financial support from Social Services as
         a care leaver so is not financially independent. Ultimately, I find
         that the weighty family life ties and the impact of severing  these
         on the appellant and his British citizen siblings in  the  UK,  and
         the impact on his private life ties that  removal  would  represent
         suffice  to  mean  that   his   removal   is   not   proportionate.





Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
         findings of that Tribunal.

      3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it  on  Article  8
         ECHR human rights grounds.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in light of the appellant's  age
    and potential vulnerability as an 18 year old who has experienced  time
    in social services care.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 2nd October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

