
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04808/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 10 March 2020             |On 14 April 2020                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              ISMAN AIDID AHMED
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Burrett, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

      1. This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department.  For ease of reference, I refer to the parties as  they
         were before the First-tier  Tribunal  even  though,  strictly,  the
         Secretary of State is the  appellant  before  this  Tribunal.   The
         Respondent appeals against a decision of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge
         M P W Harris  promulgated  on  17  October  2019  ("the  Decision")
         allowing the Appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection  grounds
         against the Respondent's decision dated 7  February  2018  refusing
         his human rights claim.  The claim and decision were  made  in  the
         context of the Respondent's decision to  deport  the  Appellant  to
         Somalia or Somaliland.  The Appellant's appeal had previously  been
         allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana on Article 8 grounds but
         dismissed  on  humanitarian  grounds.   Both  parties  successfully
         appealed that decision and the appeal was remitted  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing, culminating in the Decision.

      2. The Appellant is a national of  Somalia  who  came  to  the  UK  in
         October 1997 and claimed asylum.  His claim was refused but he  was
         granted exceptional leave to remain until May 2004 and subsequently
         indefinite leave to remain.  He committed a series of offences  the
         details of which appear at [12]  and  [13]  of  the  Decision.   He
         suffers from medical conditions which are recorded at [46] to  [51]
         of  the  Decision.   The  Judge  accepted  that  certain   of   the
         Appellant's family members are deceased and he has no idea  of  the
         whereabouts of the remainder.  The Judge also accepted that he  has
         no contact with his ex-wife or children.  The Appellant is accepted
         to be a member of the Midgan minority group.  The  Judge  concluded
         that taking all the relevant factors together, the Appellant  would
         "face ...the prospect of living in circumstances falling below that
         which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms in the  manner
         identified in paragraph 408 of MOJ Somalia" ([104] of the Decision)
            The Judge also concluded that it would not be reasonable for the
         Appellant to relocate to Somaliland.

      3. The Respondent appeals on two grounds.  First, she  says  that  the
         Judge in his finding at [104] of the  Decision  to  which  I  refer
         above, has materially misdirected himself by failing to  apply  the
         correct  legal  test.   The  Respondent  refers  to  the  cases  of
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v Said [2016]  EWCA  Civ
         44 ("Said") at [18] and Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         v MS (Somalia) [2019] EWCA Civ 1345 ("MS (Somalia)").  Second,  she
         says that the Judge has  failed  to  point  to  evidence  that  the
         Appellant would be at real risk of harm on return to Somaliland.

      4. Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Holmes on 6  November  2019  in  the  following  terms  so  far  as
         relevant:

             "... 3.  The grounds complain, solely, that the  Judge  failed
             to apply the correct tests.  That complaint is not  made  out:
             the Judge  applied  the  current  country  guidance,  and  the
             decision that he made was open to him on the  evidence  before
             him, and was adequately reasoned.  The Judge correctly  viewed
             the Appellant's circumstances both in the event of  return  to
             Mogadishu, or, to Somaliland  directly  -  but  as  identified
             there  was  no  material  difference  to  his  prospects   for
             supporting himself and accessing the medication he required.

             4.   The grounds disclose no arguable  error  of  law  in  the
             decision as to where the balance of proportionality lay on the
             facts as they were found to be by the Judge."

      5. Permission to appeal was subsequently  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Kekic on 17 January 2020 in the following  terms  so  far  as
         relevant:

             "... 3.  There is arguable  merit  in  the  assertion  in  the
             respondent's  grounds  that  the  judge  arguably  misdirected
             himself in law in relation to the appellant's  entitlement  to
             humanitarian protection following the guidance in Secretary of
             State for the Home Department v MS (Somalia) [2019]  EWCA  Civ
             1345, for the reasons given in both grounds.  Both grounds are
             arguable."

      6. The matter comes before me to  decide  whether  the  Decision  does
         contain any error of law and, if I so conclude, either  to  re-make
         the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
         making.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

    GROUND ONE

      7. The passage in  Said  on  which  the  Respondent  relies  reads  as
         follows:

             "These cases demonstrate that to succeed in resisting  removal
             on article 3 grounds on the  basis  of  suggested  poverty  or
             deprivation on return which are not the responsibility of  the
             receiving country or others in the sense described in para 282
             of Sufi and Elmi, whether or not  the  feared  deprivation  is
             contributed to by a medical condition, the  person  liable  to
             deportation must show circumstances which bring him within the
             approach of the Strasbourg Court in the D and N cases."

      8. Leading on from Said and by reference to  this  Tribunal's  country
         guidance in MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT
         00442 (IAC) (MOJ (Somalia)), the Court of Appeal  in  MS  (Somalia)
         said this:

             "75. In Said v SSHD this Court disapproved of paragraph 408 of
                  the above guidance in so far as it purported to  establish
                  the  circumstances  in  which  removal  to  Somalia  would
                  infringe Article 3. Burnett LJ, with whom the other judges
                  agreed, stated as follows:

                      '26  Paragraph 407(a) to  (e)  are  directed  to  the
                      issue  that  arises  under  article  15(c)   of   the
                      Qualification Directive. Sub-paragraphs (f)  and  (g)
                      establish the role  of  clan  membership  in  today's
                      Mogadishu, and  the  current  absence  of  risk  from
                      belonging to a minority clan. Sub-paragraph  (h)  and
                      paragraph 408 are concerned, in broad terms, with the
                      ability of a returning  Somali  national  to  support
                      himself. The conclusion at the end of  paragraph  408
                      raises the possibility of  a  person's  circumstances
                      falling below what  'is  acceptable  in  humanitarian
                      protection  terms.'  It  is,  with  respect,  unclear
                      whether that is a reference back to the definition of
                      'humanitarian protection' arising from article 15  of
                      the Qualification Directive . These factors do not go
                      to inform any question under article 15(c) . Nor does
                      it chime with article 15(b)  ,  which  draws  on  the
                      language of article 3 of the Convention, because  the
                      fact that a person might be returned to very deprived
                      living conditions, could not (save in extreme  cases)
                      lead to  a  conclusion  that  removal  would  violate
                      article 3 .

                      27   The Luxembourg Court considered  article  15  of
                      the   Qualification   Directive   in    Elgafaji    v
                      Staatssecretaris van Justitie [2009] 1 WLR  2100  and
                      in  particular   whether   article   15(c)   provided
                      protection beyond that afforded by article 3  of  the
                      Convention. The answer was yes,  but  in  passing  it
                      confirmed that article 15(b)  was  a  restatement  of
                      article 3. At para [28] it said:

                           'In that  regard,  while  the  fundamental  right
                           guaranteed under Article 3 of the ECHR forms part
                           of  the  general  principles  of  Community  law,
                           observance of which is ensured by the Court,  and
                           while the case-law of the European Court of Human
                           Rights   is   taken   into    consideration    in
                           interpreting the  scope  of  that  right  in  the
                           Community legal order, it  is,  however,  Article
                           15(b) of  the  Directive  which  corresponds,  in
                           essence, to Article 3 of the ECHR . By  contrast,
                           Article 15(c) of the Directive  is  a  provision,
                           the content of which is different  from  that  of
                           Article 3 of the ECHR, and the interpretation  of
                           which   must,   therefore,   be    carried    out
                           independently,  although  with  due  regard   for
                           fundamental rights, as they are guaranteed  under
                           the ECHR .'

                      28   In  view  of  the  reference  in  the  paragraph
                      immediately preceding para 407 to the UNHCR evidence,
                      the factors in paras 407(h) and  408  are  likely  to
                      have been  introduced  in  connection  with  internal
                      flight or internal relocation arguments, which was  a
                      factor identified in para 1 setting out the scope  of
                      the issues before UTIAC. Whilst they  may  have  some
                      relevance in  a  search  for  whether  a  removal  to
                      Somalia would give rise to a violation of  article  3
                      of the Convention, they cannot  be  understood  as  a
                      surrogate for an examination of the circumstances  to
                      determine whether such a breach  would  occur.  I  am
                      unable to accept that if a Somali national were  able
                      to bring himself within the rubric of  para  408,  he
                      would have established that his  removal  to  Somalia
                      would breach article 3 of  the  Convention.  Such  an
                      approach would be inconsistent with the domestic  and
                      Convention  jurisprudence  which  at  para  34  UTIAC
                      expressly understood itself to be following.'

             76.  By relying upon and applying paragraph  408  of  the  MOJ
                  decision in determining whether there would be a breach of
                  Article 3 ECHR the FTT accordingly applied the wrong legal
                  test, as Said v SSHD makes clear."

      9. In essence, the Respondent's ground one turns on a short point.  It
         is said that, because Judge Harris did not  apply  the  appropriate
         test in D and N, that renders  all  his  findings  in  relation  to
         humanitarian protection unsafe.

     10. In response, Mr Burrett pointed out that, if all the Judge had done
         was to base his conclusions on paragraph [408] of the  decision  in
         MOJ (Somalia), that might be an error of law.  The  criticism  made
         by the Court of Appeal of what is said at [407] and  [408]  of  MOJ
         (Somalia) (which decision  was  not  overturned  by  the  Court  of
         Appeal) is that a person cannot succeed under Article 3 ECHR simply
         because he ticks the boxes in relation to the factors at  [407(h)].
         The issue is whether removal will breach Article 3  ECHR  when  the
         evidence is considered as a whole. In this case, says  Mr  Burrett,
         the Judge considered those factors alongside all others  including,
         of  particular  importance  in  this  case,  the  impact   of   the
         Appellant's minority clan membership and  medical  condition.   The
         issue is whether Article 3 ECHR is breached.

     11. The Judge clearly recognised at  [92]  of  the  Decision  that  the
         burden of establishing an entitlement  to  humanitarian  protection
         lies with an appellant and that the test is whether  the  Appellant
         can "show that there are substantial grounds for believing that  if
         returned to Somalia, he would face a real risk of suffering serious
         harm and is unable or  owing  to  such  risk,  unwilling  to  avail
         himself of the protection of that country."  The Judge also took as
         his starting point that an "ordinary civilian" would face  no  real
         risk of harm.   However, taking into account the evidence that  the
         Appellant has no family or close relatives in Mogadishu, a place he
         left in 1992, and his mental health and minor clan membership,  the
         Judge found at [99] of the Decision that "these  factors  establish
         substantial  grounds  for  believing   the   appellant   would   be
         marginalized both socially and physically in Mogadishu  making  him
         more vulnerable in the manner identified in MOJ Somalia".

     12. The Judge's findings in this regard include what he says  about  Dr
         Hoehne's report as regards both clan membership and the Appellant's
         medical condition at [63] to [83] of the Decision.  In  particular,
         Dr Hoehne opines as recorded at [67] and [69] of the Decision  that
         the  Appellant  would  "face  severe  discrimination"  and  "severe
         exclusion" based on his minority clan status.  As recorded at  [69]
         of the Decision, Dr Hoehne's opinion is that there is "a real  risk
         that the appellant will suffer from life-threatening poverty if  he
         cannot secure extensive and permanent support from family".

     13. In relation to the Appellant's medical condition, having  concluded
         that the Appellant would have to pay for treatment in  Somalia  and
         that facilities in both Somalia and Somaliland are sub-standard, Dr
         Hoehne is recorded as saying the  following  about  the  conditions
         which the Appellant might face on return due to his condition:

             "80. In Somalia and Somaliland (auto-) aggressive persons with
             mental health issues are frequently incarcerated and  chained.
             Among Somali society in general there  is  stigma  related  to
             mental illnesses.  From  his  own  observations  during  field
             research Dr Hoehne is of the view that people who are mentally
             ill are usually perceived as  possessed  by  evil  spirits  or
             bewitched.  Being mentally  unfit  carries  a  connotation  of
             having done something  wrong  in  the  past  and  having  been
             punished by god for that.  See paragraph 66 of the report."

     14. Having found on the evidence that the Appellant would not be  in  a
         position to rely on any financial remittances from others on return
         and that, due to the cost of medical treatment,  he  would  not  be
         able to secure such treatment and therefore would not find work  on
         return, the Judge concluded,  based  on  Dr  Hoehne's  report  that
         "there is a high risk that the appellant as a minority clan  member
         who has no family support on the ground  and  has  been  away  from
         Somalia for the past 27 years, and who has mental  health  problems
         could fall destitute  and  then  end  up  in  an  IDP  camp,  where
         conditions are very poor".   That  finding  chimes  with  paragraph
         (xii) of the headnote in MOJ (Somalia) as follows:

             "... relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a  minority  clan
             with no former links to the city, no access to  funds  and  no
             other form of clan, family or social support is unlikely to be
             realistic as, in the absence of means to establish a home  and
             some form of ongoing financial support there will  be  a  real
             risk of  having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
             accommodation within  an  IDP  camp  where  there  is  a  real
             possibility of having to live in  conditions  that  will  fall
             below acceptable humanitarian standards."

     15. I accept as Mr Burrett submitted,  therefore,  that  the  reasoning
         which lies  behind  the  Judge's  conclusions  that  the  Appellant
         succeeds on humanitarian protection grounds is not simply based  on
         [407] and [408] of MOJ (Somalia) but takes into account all factors
         including the stigma and discrimination which the  Appellant  would
         face on return.

     16. The Respondent has not demonstrated that the Decision contains  any
         error of law based on her ground one.

    GROUND TWO

     17. That then brings me on to the Respondent's ground two  which  reads
         as follows:

             "At para [86] Judge Harris notes:

                  'No doubt in light of the decision in YS and  HA  and  the
                  opinion of Dr Hoehne, the appellant does not argue that in
                  any part of Somalia he is at real risk of serious harm  by
                  reason of being a member of the Midgan minority clan.'

             Judge Harris goes on to consider the report from  Dr  Hoehne's
             and notes and para [114] the discrimination that the Appellant
             may face on return to Somaliland.  However,  it  is  submitted
             that Judge Harris in his findings has failed to point  towards
             evidence to suggest that such level of  discrimination  is  at
             the required level to render the Appellant  at  real  risk  of
             harm even  when  taking  into  consideration  the  Appellant's
             mental health which has not been suggested to be at a critical
             stage."

     18. In light of the preceding discussion under ground one, I  can  deal
         with this ground very shortly.  What is recorded about Dr  Hoehne's
         evidence at [67] and [69] of the Decision relates to  both  Somalia
         and Somaliland.  Similarly, paragraph [80] which I  set  out  above
         relates to both places.

     19. It was also suggested by Mr Whitwell orally (if  I  understood  his
         submission correctly) that it was no part of the  Appellant's  case
         that he would suffer discrimination  based  on  his  minority  clan
         membership.  I reject that submission for two reasons.   First,  Dr
         Hoehne has addressed the relevant circumstances of the  Appellant's
         case as he sees it.  The fact that the Appellant had not  expressly
         raised this as part of his human rights claim is neither  here  nor
         there.  He has not lived in Somalia  or  Somaliland  for  over  two
         decades and might not therefore know  what  the  circumstances  are
         there for members of his clan.  He did in fact raise  this  in  his
         initial asylum claim.  Second, and in any  event,  this  is  not  a
         complaint made within the Respondents' pleaded grounds  of  appeal.
         The Judge was therefore entitled to rely on what was said  at  [49]
         and [50] of Dr Hoehne's report.

     20. Taking ground two as pleaded, therefore, the  Judge  considers  the
         position specifically relating to  Somaliland  from  [105]  of  the
         Decision and it is important to record the starting  point  of  the
         Judge's consideration as follows:

             "105.    That said, a person will not qualify for humanitarian
             protection if in part of the  country  of  return  the  person
             would not face a real risk of suffering harm  and  the  person
             can reasonably be  expected  to  stay  in  that  part  of  the
             country."

             [my emphasis]

     21. It is important to note therefore that  what  the  Judge  is  there
         considering is a  slightly  different  issue,  namely  whether  the
         Appellant can be expected to internally relocate to Somaliland.  It
         is for that reason that, when reaching his conclusions at [119]  of
         the Decision, the Judge says this:

             "119.    Weighing up the matters before me, I find that in the
             particular circumstances of the  appellant  it  would  not  be
             reasonable for him to  relocate  to  Somaliland.   It  is  not
             argued by the respondent that there  is  any  other  place  in
             Somalia to  which  it  is  reasonable  for  the  appellant  to
             relocate."

     22.  Properly  understood  in  that  context,  therefore  the   Judge's
         conclusions contain no error of law based on the reasons  given  at
         [110] to [118] of the Decision.

    CONCLUSION

     23. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that  there  is  no  material
         error of law disclosed by  the  grounds  of  appeal.   I  therefore
         uphold the Decision  with  the  consequence  that  the  Appellant's
         appeal remains allowed.

    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I uphold the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M  P  W  Harris
    promulgated  on  17  October  2019  with  the  consequence   that   the
    Appellant's appeal stands allowed


    Signed   [pic]    Dated: 19 March 2020
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith




