
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04919/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under Rule 34 Without a Hearing       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|At Field House                                |                              |
|                                              |On 19 January 2021            |
|On 11 January 2021                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                      DHRUVLLKUMAR PRAVINKUMAR CHAUHAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the remaking of an appeal against a decision of the  respondent
    made on 8 March 2019 to refused the appellant's applicant for leave  to
    remain on the basis of 10 years' lawful residence.  His appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 July 2019.  That  decision  was  set  aside  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Plimmer for the reasons given  in  her  decision  of  27
    November 2020, a copy of which is annexed to this decision.

 2. As Judge Plimmer noted in her decision [1], the sole issue  is  whether
    the appellant's leave to remain had been curtailed at a point in  2012.
    Having found that the FtT had erred in its approach, she set aside  its
    decision, directing that in light of the agreement of the parties  [8],
    skeleton arguments were to be served prior to the matter  being  listed
    for hearing, but in the hope that a hearing would not be necessary.

 3. In her position paper of 6 December 2020, the respondent explains  that
    enquiries had revealed that two distinct  CID  records  exist  for  the
    appellant which may explain why the curtailment decision  of  2012  was
    not effectively served on the appellant, and why the respondent had not
    followed through on an intent to apprise him of that when he came  back
    into contact.

 4. The respondent concludes:

         "It would therefore be appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to  allow
         [the appellant's] appeal, if it sees fit to do so."

 5. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  Given that no relevant objection to  this
    course of action has been raised, and bearing in  mind  the  overriding
    objective in Rule 2 to enable the Tribunal to deal  with  cases  fairly
    and justly, I am satisfied that in the particular circumstances of this
    case where there has been no objection to a decision being made in  the
    absence of a hearing that it would be right to do so. In reaching  that
    conclusion I have had regard to the decision of Fordham  J  in  JCWI  v
    President of the Upper Tribunal [2020] EWHC 3103.

 6. Having considered all  the  evidence,  I  am  satisfied  that,  as  the
    respondent accepts, the appellant was  not  properly  served  with  the
    curtailment in 2012, and that in consequence, there was no break in the
    continuity of his residence. Bearing in mind that both  parties  accept
    that the sole issue in the appeal was whether the appellant's residence
    had been continuous, I am satisfied that he did.  I am satisfied  also,
    on the evidence, that the other requirements of the  immigration  rules
    were met; there are no submissions to the contrary. It cannot therefore
    be argued that there are any public interest considerations  such  that
    interference with the appellant's article 8 rights is justified, and  I
    allow his appeal on that basis.

 7. Given that the appellant has shown that he  does,  in  fact,  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules, it would be appropriate for  him
    to be granted indefinite leave to remain, not limited leave.



Notice of Decision & Directions

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an
       error of law and I set it aside.

    2. I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.




       Signed                                Date 11 January 2021


       Jeremy K H Rintoul
       Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04919/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 November 2020 via Skype                  |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                     Mr Dhruvllkumar Pravinkumar Chauhan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DECISION AND DIRECTIONS (V)
                             (given ex tempore)

The appellant has appealed against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
('FTT') promulgated on 5 July 2019 in which his human rights appeal was
dismissed.  That appeal turned on one issue, whether or not the appellant's
leave to remain was curtailed at a point in 2012.  If it was curtailed,
then the appellant could not amass the requisite ten years in order to meet
the requirements of paragraph 276 of the Immigration Rules.  If it was not
curtailed, as I understand the respondent's position, he would have amassed
the requisite ten years and his appeal therefore should have been allowed
under Article 8, ECHR.

At the hearing before me Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent accepted
that the FTT made three material errors of law in concluding that the
appellant's leave had been curtailed in 2012.  I do not need to set those
out in any detail because as both parties agreed that the FTT decision
could not stand and needed to be remade.

In my judgment Mr Diwnycz was entirely correct to concede that the FTT
decision discloses three material errors of law.  First, in finding at [13]
that the respondent had served a notice of curtailment by post validly, the
FTT failed to take into account the respondent's own position within her
Case Information Database ('CID') note.  That states this:

"We have attempted to serve a curtailment decision to the migrant.  However
they have been returned as addressee gone away therefore we have served the
decision to file under Section 7(2) of the Immigration (Notices)
Regulations 2003."

That demonstrates that the respondent attempted to serve the said
curtailment notice by post but it was not successful and it was therefore
served to file.  Mr Diwnycz was entirely correct to agree that in those
circumstances the FTT erred in law in finding that there is valid postal
service, whichever legal framework applied.  For the avoidance of doubt, Mr
Jones argued that a particular legal framework applied.  Although his
argument seemed to me at first blush to be persuasive I indicated that this
was a matter to be considered at a later stage.

Second, the FTT's alternative finding that the curtailment notice was
properly served to file [17] and [18] failed to take into account relevant
matters.

              i) In an earlier 2016 FTT decision dealing with whether or not
                 the appellant had been dishonest in sitting an English
                 exam, the appellant was found to be entirely credible.
                 Although the FTT's decision under appeal refers to the 2016
                 decision, Mr Diwnycz agreed, that a previous curtailment
                 may well have been relevant.  We still do not know or there
                 is no evidence as to why there was a curtailment in 2012.

             ii) In a further application for leave to remain on 17 July
                 2013 the respondent granted that application and the
                 appellant was given leave from 15 August 2013 until 16 May
                 2015.  That prima facie indicates that at the time the
                 respondent did not regard the appellant to be an
                 overstayer, otherwise he would not have been able to meet
                 the requirements of the Rules.

These are two matters that one would have expected the FTT to have
addressed before accepting the curtailment in 2012.  Having failed to
address those two matters, the FTT committed an error of law.

Third, the FTT's further alternative finding that the appellant was
subsequently served with a notice of curtailment failed to deal with
evidence that was adduced before it.  That evidence included a witness
statement from the appellant dated 28 May 2019, in which he clearly and
categorically stated that he was never served with any 2012 curtailment
notice.  He was served with one later but he applied to vary his leave and
then appealed against that.  The FTT has not clearly engaged with that
evidence.  That is particularly troubling because in the 2016 FTT decision
that I have referred to this was said about the appellant:

             "We have had the benefit of seeing and assessing him and found
             him to be a credible witness."

It follows that in those three respects the FtT erred in law and Mr Diwnycz
was entirely correct and pragmatic to accept as such.

As to disposal, both parties agreed that this is a decision that can be
remade by way of submissions only, indeed that is what happened in the FtT,
and for that reason I agree it should be remade in the Upper Tribunal
('UT').  Both parties also agreed with the following directions:

          1) The appellant shall file and serve a skeleton argument within
             14 days of today's hearing.

          2) The respondent shall respond to that skeleton argument 14 days
             thereafter in the form of a position statement which sets out
             the respondent's clear position with reasons.

          3) The matter will then be listed before the UT on the first
             available date after 2 December 2020.

I finally observe that there seems to me to be a reasonable prospect for
settlement in this case.  As I observed at the hearing, the resources that
we utilise to have hearings during the pandemic need to be as focussed as
possible.  I appreciate that both parties have resource implications and
concerns of their own but this is a case where early consideration of the
issues by the parties may, and I put it no higher than that, have the
result that a hearing is unnecessary and that hearing slot could be used by
other parties.

I am therefore pleased that Mr Diwnycz has indicated that he is going to
retain ownership of this case as far as he is able to do so and that if
there can be settlement that will take place at an early stage.


Notice of decision

The FTT decision contains an error of law and is set aside.  The decision
will be re-made in the UT.

Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                       Dated: 18 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

