
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04856/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 9 November 2017                |On: 10 November 2017                    |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                          Joyce Olayemi Asungbalaja
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent





Representation

For the Appellant: Mr P.D. Norris, of Lawrence & Co solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr S. Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer

                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The appellant obtained permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 3 February
    2017. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the appellant  had  arrived
    in the UK in  August  1997  but  concluded  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules could not be met,  ostensibly
    because as of the date of the application to the SSHD (treated as being
    20 August 2015) the appellant had spent just over 19 years continuously
    living here (i.e. not 'at least 20 years' as the Rule requires).

 2. Due to the effluxion of time the appellant has now spent over 20  years
    here. Such a change in circumstances could not though  become  relevant
    to the  Tribunal's  assessment  of  whether  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the Rules, even  if  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were to be  set  aside.  Time  stopped  for  the  purposes  of
    consideration of paragraph 276ADE by the Tribunal as at the date of the
    appellant's application to the SSHD.

 3. As a consequence of the aforementioned  matters  Mr  Norris  sought  to
    withdraw the appellant's appeal, indicating that the intention  is  for
    the appellant to make a further application to  the  SSHD  in  reliance
    upon  the  aforementioned  change  of  circumstances.  This  seems   an
    eminently sensible approach to me, and Mr Kotas took  no  objection  to
    such application.

 4. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as a  whole,
    I give such consent to the appellant.

 5. Accordingly, with my consent and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, the appellant's case is  treated
    as "withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal". If necessary,  I
    formally dismiss the instant appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.



Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

Date:  9 November 2017
