
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04857/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st January 2019                          |On 27th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                              mrs samar bereket
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Syria  born  on  10th  July  1993.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance to settle in the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules on the  basis  that
    she sought leave to join her Sponsor in  the  UK  as  a  spouse.   That
    application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer Istanbul on 24th
    January 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal  came  before  Immigration  Judge
    Watson on 10th April 2018 at Taylor House.  The appeal was made on  the
    basis that the Appellant was the spouse of [HA] who  had  been  granted
    refugee status in the UK.  The  Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  on
    human rights grounds on 25th April 2018.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 22nd  May  2018.
    Those grounds contended:-

         "That the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law by failing  to
         take into account relevant evidence, by  making  findings  with  no
         basis in evidence, and  by  failing  to  take  note  of  and  apply
         relevant Home Office policy and by failing to apply  relevant  case
         law.  It was submitted that there was a  procedural  unfairness  in
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowing the Respondent  to  rely  on
         evidence (or the lack thereof)  which  was  in  her  possession  or
         served on the day of the hearing."

 4. The Appellant's application for permission was  refused  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes on 4th June 2018.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were
    lodged on 20th June 2018.

 5. On 19th December  2018  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Ryan  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge O'Ryan gave a very  detailed  and  helpful
    grant of permission.  He noted that it had been argued that in  finding
    at paragraph 14 that there had been no valid  marriage  the  judge  had
    left relevant evidence  out  of  account  this  being  the  Appellant's
    "family  booklet"  seemingly  issued  by  the  Syrian  authorities  and
    recording the details of  the  Appellant's  marriage  to  the  Sponsor.
    Judge O'Ryan considered that this was evidence which arguably may  have
    made a material difference to the approach to be taken  as  to  whether
    the Appellant was validly married.

 6. He further considered that whereas the Respondent's decision  raised  a
    number of queries over the Appellant's satisfaction of the  Immigration
    Rules no point had been taken about whether proxy marriages were  valid
    per se under Syrian law.  For the judge to have found at  paragraph  14
    that the Appellant had not provided "information" that proxy  marriages
    were permitted was, Judge O'Ryan considered, arguably to have raised  a
    matter not put in issue by the Respondent and was  procedurally  unfair
    to the Appellant.  Further it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  not
    provided reasons which were adequate in law for finding  the  newspaper
    article on the subject which suggested that 54% of marriages  in  Syria
    now  proceed  by  way  of  proxy  did  not  represent   the   requisite
    "information".

 7. In granting permission Judge O'Ryan further found that it was  arguable
    that the judge had failed to direct himself in law  as  to  the  likely
    minimum period before residence in a particular country could be deemed
    "habitual" and have failed to make sufficient clear findings of fact as
    to what period or periods the Sponsor actually spent in Turkey.   Judge
    O'Ryan considered that given that the timing of the Sponsor's  presence
    in Turkey was put in issue by the Respondent in the  decision,  he  was
    less confident about  the  merit  of  Ground  5  arguing  that  it  was
    procedurally unfair to allow the Respondent to rely on further evidence
    regarding the documentation process in Turkey  and  for  the  judge  to
    criticise the Sponsor for not providing  independent  evidence  of  his
    presence in Turkey.  However,  he  considered  that  if  it  ultimately
    transpired that the judge had erred in other respects such  as  whether
    the Appellant was validly married to the Respondent then  it  would  be
    arguable that the  judge's  assessment  of  the  Sponsor's  credibility
    overall may have been affected by such a result.

 8. On 25th January 2019 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.

 9. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    legal representative Mr Moran.  Mr Moran  is  extremely  familiar  with
    this matter.  He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is  the
    author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Tufan.

Submission/Discussion

10. Mr Moran sets out in considerable detail his Grounds of Appeal  orally.
    He goes through them again and  he  has  produced  to  me  the  booklet
    entitled in English "family booklet" which he submits was produced  and
    handed to the First-tier Tribunal Judge and he refers to the  photocopy
    within  the  Appellant's  bundle  at  pages  48  to  57   including   a
    translation.  He submits that the judge needed to  take  this  document
    into account and failed to do so.   He  acknowledges  that  it  is  not
    necessary for a judge to recite all evidence that is before him or  her
    when giving a decision but  in  this  instant  case  he  refers  me  to
    paragraph 10 where the  judge  sets  out  in  considerable  detail  the
    documentation that was before him.   He  points  out  that  where  such
    detail is provided it is, he would submit, an error not  to  have  made
    reference to the  family  booklet  particularly  bearing  in  mind  its
    importance.

11. Thereafter he takes  me  to  paragraph  14  of  the  decision  and  the
    conclusion drawn by the judge that the  Appellant  had  not  shown  she
    entered into a valid marriage on 5th May 2015.  He explains to me  that
    the procedure in Syria for marriage consists  of  two  stages,  firstly
    there being a contract made at the court which is acknowledged  by  the
    Ministry of Justice and thereafter it is registered by way of  a  civil
    registrar so consequently to find that  an  Appellant  is  not  validly
    married based on half the documents that is before  the  judge  was  he
    submits an error and that there has been  a  failure  to  look  at  the
    document which affects credibility.  He further submits that  there  is
    no basis for having reached the conclusion that the judge did reach and
    that there is an error in that the judge has failed to engage with  the
    evidence.   He  points  out  that  Judge  O'Ryan  has  gone  into  some
    considerable detail in considering the relevant objective evidence that
    is produced with regard to the making of proxy marriages.

12. He addresses the other issues in some small amount of detail but relies
    predominantly on the error that is caused and the  clouding  that  must
    inevitably take place of the judge's  reasoning  as  a  result  of  the
    failure to consider the family booklet.

13.  I  am  considerably  assisted  in  this  matter  by   the   assistance
    thereinafter given by Mr Tufan who points out that he acknowledges that
    the judge has clearly  failed  to  give  consideration  to  the  family
    document and that  this  is  a  document  of  such  importance  in  its
    materiality that it could have  affected  the  decision  and  therefore
    would, he acknowledges, be material.  In such circumstances he does not
    seek also to challenge the other basis upon which errors of law are put
    forward and he  endorses  the  views  effectively  expressed  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Ryan in granting permission.

The Law

14.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

16. I agree with the submissions made in this case by Mr Moran and endorsed
    by Mr Tufan.  A very considerable amount turns on the validity  of  the
    Appellant's marriage and reliance is substantially placed on the family
    booklet the original of which is  in  the  possession  of  the  Sponsor
    and/or his legal representatives and it is accepted, and has  not  been
    challenged, was presented to the First-tier Tribunal  and  is  produced
    today before me.  There are other arguments put forward  in  particular
    the fact that the judge, it is contended and I agree, may well not have
    taken into account Home Office policy and that the judge has failed  to
    give full and proper consideration to the habitual  residence  question
    and as to where such habitual residence takes place.

17. For all these reasons the decision is unsafe.  It is necessary for  the
    matter to be reheard afresh with none of the findings of fact to stand.
     The Sponsor, who is present, would require an interpreter.  He will be
    required to give evidence.  Mr Moran expresses to me a concern  firstly
    that his client is fee paying and secondly of the delay that  can  take
    place particularly in what would be  a  family  reunion  case  to  this
    appeal being heard.  I note these factors and I bear them  in  mind  in
    giving directions.

Decision/Directions

1.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors
    of law and is set aside with none of the findings of fact to stand.

2.   The following directions shall apply:-

    (1)  That the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at
         Taylor House to be heard on the first available date 21 days  hence
         with an ELH of two hours.

    (2)  That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

    (3)  That the appeal is to be heard before any Judge of the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Watson.

    (4)  That a specific direction is given to the  Designated  Immigration
         Judge at Taylor House to give consideration in the circumstances of
         this matter to expediting the re-hearing of  this  appeal.   It  is
         recorded that the  Upper  Tribunal  has  notified  the  Appellant's
         representative that we are not influential  in  the  re-listing  of
         matters before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  that  we  can  give
         indicative  direction  if  we  consider  that  a  case  should   be
         expedited.

    (5)  That there be leave to either party to file and serve a bundle  of
         such further subjective and/or objective evidence upon  which  they
         seek to rely within fourteen days of receipt of these Directions.

    (6)  That the court believes that the correct language  of  interpreter
         for the restored hearing is  Arabic  (Middle  Eastern)  and  unless
         directed to the contrary an interpreter in this language do  attend
         the  restored  hearing.   In  the  event   that   the   Appellant's
         representatives require an interpreter in a different language they
         must notify the Tribunal within seven days of the receipt of  these
         Directions.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 17th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 17th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

