
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04664/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st January 2019                          |On 27th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               Mr S M D I A j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  30th  December  1975.
    The Appellant made an application on 14th March for indefinite leave to
    remain in the UK on the basis of long residence and on the basis of his
    private life.  The Appellant's immigration history is set out  in  some
    substantial detail in the Notice of  Refusal.   He  first  applied  for
    entry clearance in the UK as a student migrant back in  December  2006.
    His current application was dismissed by Notice of Refusal  dated  17th
    January 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Thew sitting at Taylor House on 21st September 2018.   In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 15th October 2018 the Appellant's
    appeal was allowed.

 3. On 15th October 2018 the Secretary of State served Notice of Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  On 5th  December  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal P J  M  Hollingworth  granted  permission  to  appeal.   Judge
    Hollingworth noted that at paragraph 33 of the decision the  judge  had
    stated that the crux of the Respondent's case was that  that  amendment
    and the responses in interview in the context of the operation  of  the
    self-employed business of the Appellant established  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that the Appellant  was  dishonest  and  had  made  false
    representation  in  his  applications  in   2011   and   2013.    Judge
    Hollingworth considered  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had set out an insufficient analysis and findings in the
    context of the legitimacy of the business conducted by the Appellant in
    dealing with a core issue in the case which the judge had recognised as
    such.

 4. On 25th January 2019  the  Appellant's  solicitors  lodged  a  skeleton
    argument/Rule 24 response to the Ground of Appeal.  That is a  detailed
    document and I have given it full consideration.  It runs  to  some  53
    paragraphs.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note that this is an appeal by Mr J.  For
    the purpose of convenience throughout the appeal process I refer to  Mr
    J hereinafter as the Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.  The Appellant appears by his instructed Counsel  Mr  Nath.
    The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr
    Tufan.  With the consent of both sides I have anonymised this matter.

Submission/Discussion

 6. This is an appeal  where  the  refusal  stems  predominantly  from  the
    conclusion that the Secretary of State was satisfied that the Appellant
    had made false representations in his application  for  leave  made  on
    25th March 2011 and on 4th April 2013.  The appeal that came before the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the Secretary of State  considered
    that within the Appellant's application, the Appellant  had  previously
    given false figures relating to his financial circumstances so  far  as
    they  relate  to  financial  circumstances  from  both  employment  and
    latterly self-employment.  I note as Mr Nath  points  out  to  me  that
    these issues are set out in some considerable  detail  at  paragraph  9
    headed analysis of evidence and conclusions of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision.

 7. As Mr Tufan advises me the grounds are relatively short  and  succinct.
    They note that at paragraph 44  of  the  determination  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant had been careless  rather  than
    dishonest but submit that that finding was contrary to the facts of the
    case.  He submits that the Notice of Refusal had gone into some  detail
    explaining why the Secretary of State did not accept the Appellant  was
    in legitimate employment for most of his time in the UK and found  that
    the Appellant's accounts of his claimed businesses were  not  credible.
    Further he contends that although the Tribunal considered this issue at
    paragraphs 27 to 31  of  the  determination,  the  judge  had  made  no
    findings and that the Tribunal was more concerned about the Appellant's
    tax liability.

 8. Mr Tufan reiterates the Grounds of Appeal submitting that by failing to
    address  the  crucial  issue  of  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  had
    legitimate businesses, the Tribunal had failed to make  findings  on  a
    core element of the  appeal  and  further  without  findings  on  these
    businesses the other subsequent findings were unsustainable.  He  noted
    that the Tribunal went on to make specific findings about the 2011  tax
    return at paragraph 44  of  the  determination  but  submits  that  the
    judge's assessment of carelessness was incomplete without a finding  on
    the wider evidence  as  to  whether  the  Appellant  received  earnings
    through  legitimate  businesses  and  therefore  that  the   Tribunal's
    decision  was  unsafe.   He  finally  submits  that  the  judge  had  a
    requirement to consider whether the Appellant's activities were genuine
    and submits that they were not.

 9. In response Mr Nath starts by taking me to his skeleton  argument.   He
    submits that all the Secretary of State is doing  is  disagreeing  with
    the findings of the judge and that all the  judge  granting  permission
    has done is merely adopt the grounds  contended  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  He submits that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to accept some evidence and reject other  in  the  Appellant's
    findings.

10. He goes on to analyse the decision and assessment made  by  the  judge.
    He notes that at paragraph 37 the judge has systematically gone through
    the figures provided by the Appellant and that it was accepted by  HMRC
    as to what  the  amount  owing  was.   He  thereafter  notes  that  the
    Appellant had provided clear evidence to the Respondent when making his
    applications in 2011 and that that had satisfied the Respondent at that
    stage.  Thereafter  the  judge  goes  on  to  make  findings  that  the
    Appellant had been careless and had not  been  dishonest.   He  submits
    that the crux of the matter is now one of disagreement and  that  there
    is nothing wrong with the reasoning of  the  judge.   There  have  been
    findings made that the Appellant is not dishonest  and  the  judge  has
    addressed this and gone on  to  address  the  issues  relating  to  the
    Appellant's business and documentary evidence at paragraphs 41 and 42.

11. Mr Nath accepts that paragraph 33 sets out what the judge has said with
    regard to his tax obligations but thereafter the judge has gone  on  in
    some detail in the findings she has made at the next ten paragraphs  to
    analyse the financial position in which the Appellant found himself and
    the errors in the tax returns and justified her conclusions.

12. He submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  considered  the  correct
    standard of proof and was correct in finding that the  first  amendment
    made was as a result of an accountant's mistake  and  not  due  to  any
    dishonesty on the Respondent's part.  Further he submits that the judge
    was correct in coming to the conclusion that although the Appellant and
    his customer held the same address, and that that may look  suspicious,
    that did not discharge a legal burden of  dishonesty.   Thereafter  the
    judge made a finding that the Respondent's conduct fell short  of  that
    contemplated by paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules and that  the
    judge was entitled to reach that conclusion.  He asked me to find  that
    the submissions made by the Secretary of State amount to  nothing  more
    than a disagreement and to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

15. This is one of a number of cases that now  comes  before  the  Tribunal
    where a challenge is made under paragraph 322 of the Immigration  Rules
    by the Secretary of State.  The issue before me is whether or  not  the
    judge has materially erred in law.  I find that the judge has not.   It
    is important I give my reasons.  As a starting point this decision  has
    to be looked at as a whole.  This is a  judge  who  has  given  a  very
    detailed and thorough analysis of the evidence.   She  has  started  by
    detailing the appeal and the immigration history and gone  on  to  give
    full consideration as to the basis upon which the reasons  for  refusal
    are maintained.  These are particularly pursuant to paragraphs 276D and
    276ADE and there is reference therein to paragraph 322(1A) and  (2)  to
    the effect that the Secretary of State  had  been  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant  had  made  false  representations   in   two   applications.
    Consequently, the judge was aware of the basis upon which the Secretary
    of  State  had  made  his  findings  and  upon  which  the  appeal  was
    thereinafter based.  This is further emphasised  where  thereafter  the
    judge refers to the relevant Immigration Rules  and  then  goes  on  to
    analyse the evidence and draw conclusions.  That is a substantial task.
     She has looked at the issues  with  regard  to  mistakes  on  the  tax
    returns of the Appellant for the years 2011/12 and  2012/13.   She  has
    analysed the documentation in some detail and at paragraph 33 notes the
    crux of the Respondent's case that the amendment and the  responses  at
    the interview in the  context  of  the  operation  of  a  self-employed
    business allegedly established on a balance of probabilities  that  the
    Appellant was dishonest  and  had  made  false  representation  in  his
    applications made in 2011 and 2013.

16. Thereinafter the judge has gone on to note the burden of proof and  has
    recited quite correctly what that burden of proof is.   From  paragraph
    37 through to paragraph 40 the judge has noted the  evidence  that  was
    produced and has concluded that the Appellant clearly provided evidence
    to the Respondent when making his applications and that  satisfied  the
    Respondent at that stage.  The judge quite rightly accepts that it does
    not follow that the  Appellant  is  not  dishonest  merely  because  of
    evidence he produced at that time.

17. The judge has consequently gone on to make findings having set out  the
    facts and considered the evidence.  I note  that  the  grounds  contend
    that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge are contrary to  the
    accepted facts of the case.   I  do  not  find  such  a  contention  is
    sustainable.  The judge has noted the facts in this case and it is open
    to the judge to make her own findings having considered the evidence in
    the round.  The judge has come to the conclusion and given  reasons  as
    to why she found that the Appellant was not dishonest.  It  is  further
    misleading of the Secretary of State to contend that the judge had  not
    addressed her mind to the genuineness of the  business.   It  is  clear
    from paragraph 40 that the judge has.

18. I consequently am of the view that the Appellant's application  is,  as
    Mr Nath submits, simply an attempt to re-argue the  case.   This  is  a
    judge who has given very careful and full consideration  to  the  facts
    and has set out detailed reasons for the findings that  she  has  made.
    She has not erred in  law  or  in  fact.   In  such  circumstances  the
    decision discloses no material errors of law and the findings are  ones
    which the judge was entitled to make.  For all the  above  reasons  the
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 15th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 15th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

