
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04965/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 March 2021                      |On 23 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                           Ramota Aduke Ogunwomoju
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwu, Solicitor from Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal of  the  appellant  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent on 14 February 2019 refusing her application  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.

 2. As well as Mr Howells' submissions I have the  benefit  of  a  detailed
    written submissions signed by  Mr  David  Clarke,  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer dated 2 September 2020.

 3. This appeal concerns a concession being withdrawn but at  paragraph  45
    of the Decision and Reasons the First-tier Tribunal Judge said:

         "Ultimately I do not consider any difficulties  or  obstacles  that
         the appellant would face on return  amount  to  being  significant.
         The evidence as a whole, and  having  considered  all  the  factors
         together, show that she cannot meet the very significant  obstacles
         test as laid out in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  the  appeal  by
         reference to the Rules must be similarly refused".

 4. This prompted Mr Howells to argue that the appeal had to  be  dismissed
    because there was no challenge to the finding that the appellant  could
    be expected to re-establish herself in Nigeria. However, as I read  the
    decision, the judge was concerned with the  appellant  returning  as  a
    single person, rather than a person in a relationship akin to  marriage
    and  the  findings  relating  to  "very  significant   obstacles"   are
    necessarily linked to the finding  that  the  Appellant  is  not  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage.  It follows that  I  do  not  accept  Mr
    Howells' submission that the appeal has to be dismissed because not all
    relevant points have been challenged.

 5. The appellant had entered the United Kingdom in July  2010  with  entry
    clearance as a visitor.  She remained in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    permission and without contacting the authorities until  17  July  2018
    when she applied for leave to remain on the basis of  her  family  life
    with her partner who is a British citizen.   The  respondent  accepted,
    and  formally  conceded,  that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the appellant and her partner but not  that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles or very significant difficulties  in  the
    way of her continuing her family life outside the United Kingdom.

 6. After hearing the evidence the Presenting  Officer  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal withdrew the concession that  the  appellant  had  established
    that she was in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  and  the  judge
    found that neither a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  had  been
    established nor that there were any insurmountable obstacles in the way
    of resuming any family life outside the United Kingdom.

 7. This was a case where a clear and unequivocal concession was  expressly
    withdrawn at the submission stage.

 8. Although I have referred to  the  Presenting  Officer  withdrawing  the
    concession that is a gloss on the process. It is,  I  find,  trite  law
    that any party who has conceded a matter of fact can  ask  to  withdraw
    the concession at any time. The tribunal must then decide if it  should
    allow the concession to be withdrawn  having  considered  all  relevant
    circumstances. If I may say so, the point was put pithily by  Moses  LJ
    in CD (Jamaica) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 768 at  paragraph  18  where  he
    said:

         "The real question that the tribunal had to determine  was  whether
         all the essential issues in the case could fairly  be  resolved  by
         allowing the concession to be withdrawn or  whether  the  prejudice
         was such, and the damage to the  public  interest  such,  that  the
         Secretary  of  State  should  not  be  allowed  to   withdraw   the
         concession."

 9.  Withdrawing  a  concession  will  almost  always  raise  questions  of
    fairness.  It may be right, for example, to permit the concession to be
    withdrawn but to adjourn for a party to deal with the point. The  party
    withdrawing the concession might have to pay costs. The Tribunal  might
    find the consequences of withdrawing the concession to  be  unfair  and
    not permit the concession to withdrawn.

10. Here the concession was withdrawn because the Presenting Officer  found
    that the evidence about the relationship  had  been  so  unsatisfactory
    that it was unrealistic to maintain the pretence that the parties  were
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

11. It was plainly open to the appellant, who was legally represented,  for
    example to complain about the concession being withdrawn and to ask for
    an adjournment or ask for the case to be decided on the  basis  of  the
    evidence called bearing in mind that  the  appellant  had  not  had  an
    opportunity of calling further evidence to establish  the  relationship
    because he had no reason to see any need to do  that.   It  seems  that
    none of those things were done but the appellant's representative  made
    submissions on the evidence.  There is  nothing  that  comes  close  to
    being unfair about the conduct of the hearing.

12. It does not follow from that that the decision was rational.  There are
    elements of the reasoning which  concern  me  a  little.   The  judge's
    observations at paragraph 33 about the "manifest lack  of  evidence  in
    support of a relationship which is said to have been  ongoing  for  the
    past  four  years"  should  have  been   tempered   expressly   by   an
    acknowledgment that it was not in dispute until  late  in  the  hearing
    that such a relationship existed.   It  follows  that  the  absence  of
    photographs, for example, really should  not  have  been  considered  a
    significant point.

13. However  the  judge  considered  the  oral  evidence.   The  judge  was
    concerned that the parties to the relationship describe  themselves  as
    married when they patently are not but was more concerned  about  gross
    inconsistencies in the evidence.  The appellant  described  herself  as
    the "carer" for her partner.  This was not a  chance  remark.   As  the
    judge explained she referred to herself as the "wife and primary  carer
    of my husband" but the evidence of Mr Bevan was that he  did  not  have
    any care needs  or  require  any  attention  or  supervision  from  the
    appellant.

14. Extraordinarily Mr Bevan had adopted a witness statement  described  by
    the judge as "patently fabricated" and the  grounds  do  not  criticise
    that finding.

15.  The  judge  accepted  some  relationship  between  Mr  Bevan  and  the
    appellant.  They had lived at the same address for some years  and  the
    appellant played some part in the lives of Mr  Bevan's  family  members
    but the judge was entitled to conclude that sharing an address was  not
    cohabitating or being in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

16. The judge was particularly concerned that Mr Bevan  did  not  know  the
    names of any of the appellant's children until he was  able  to  recall
    one of the names; he did not know how often the appellant saw  her  own
    children or grandchildren which the judge saw as an indication that  Mr
    Bevan and the appellant had separate personal lives and the judge found
    it "remarkable" that Mr Bevan thought the appellant had been a carer in
    Nigeria, whereas she claimed to have been an  Immigration  Officer  for
    over twenty years.  Against this evidence the application  to  withdraw
    the concession by the Presenting Officer was plainly sensible  and  the
    judge's decision to reject the claim  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship on the evidence was entirely reasonable.

17. Although in his submissions to me Mr Nwaekwu referred to  the  wish  to
    call further  evidence,  no  evidence  had  been  provided  for  me  to
    consider.  This is important.  There  was  nothing  to  show  that  the
    alleged error complained of was material or that  anything  could  have
    been  done  had  the  appellant  been  on  notice  that   the   claimed
    relationship was not accepted.

18. It is quite clear to me that there has been some  misdirection  in  the
    part  of  the  appellant's  representatives.   Much  was  made  of  the
    underlying principle that a person  who  alleges  must  prove  but  the
    appellant has rather lost sight of the fact  that  it  is  she  who  is
    alleging something; she alleges that she complies with the  Immigration
    Rules and/or is entitled to remain on human rights grounds and she must
    prove her case.  It is completely irrelevant that in applications under
    the EEA Rules it has been shown that the Secretary of State must  prove
    her assertion that a marriage  is  a  marriage  of  convenience.   This
    appeal does not concern a marriage of convenience.  It is said to be  a
    sham arrangement that has been described wrongly.  It is  clear  beyond
    all possible argument that the onus is on the  appellant  to  establish
    her case and any suggestion to the contrary is misconceived.

19. Mr Nwaekwu purported to rely on the decision of this  Tribunal  in  Naz
    (subsisting marriage - standard of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 40 (IAC)
    but I find that submission must be based on a misreading  of  the  case
    which makes it plain that it is  for  the  claimant  to  establish  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules are met or  that  an  immigration
    decision would cause an interference with established family life.

20. In short the judge's findings were plainly permissible on the evidence.
     The potential for unfairness that arises  from  the  withdrawal  of  a
    concession was not fulfilled here.  There was  no  application  at  the
    time for an adjournment, there is no additional evidence before  me  to
    indicate how things could have been done differently  and  the  finding
    that there is not a subsisting and genuine relationship  is  wholly  in
    keeping with the appellant's alleged partner's  apparent  ignorance  of
    her life and circumstances which ignorance was not the  result  of  not
    having notice of the questions but of not knowing much about the person
    with whom he lives.

21. Putting these things together I am satisfied there is no material error
    and I dismiss the appeal.




                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 April 2021                  |


