
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04563/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15th December 2017                 |On 6th February 2018                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                               muhammad ismail
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma of A W S Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 21st  August  1988.
    He first arrived in the UK on 11th May 2011 when he was given leave  to
    enter as a Tier 4 (Student) Migrant until 28th  September  2012.   This
    leave was subsequently extended until 18th November 2014  in  the  same
    capacity, and then as a  spouse  until  9th  February  2016.   On  19th
    January 2016 the Appellant applied for further leave to remain again as
    a spouse.  That application was refused for  the  reasons  given  in  a
    Reasons for Refusal letter dated  20th  January  2016.   The  Appellant
    appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Hagan
    (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 15th February 2017.  He decided to
    allow the appeal for the reasons given in his Decision dated 6th  March
    2017.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision and  on  6th
    September 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so  that  it  should  be  set  aside.   The  Appellant's
    application for leave to remain was refused on the suitability  grounds
    set out in Appendix FM of HC 395.  It was considered that in a previous
    application for  leave  to  remain  made  in  2012  the  Appellant  had
    submitted a fraudulent  TOEIC  certificate  issued  by  ETS.   ETS  had
    identified the certificate as one which had been obtained  fraudulently
    through the use of a proxy.  The Appellant's  current  application  for
    leave to remain was therefore refused under the provisions of paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of HC 395.   The  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules because although he was satisfied that the Respondent
    had discharged the evidential burden of showing that the Appellant  may
    have employed dishonesty in his  previous  application,  he  found  the
    evidence of the Appellant to be  plausible  and  that  it  provided  an
    innocent explanation for the matters relied  upon  by  the  Respondent.
    Therefore  the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Respondent   had
    discharged the burden of proof of showing that deception had been used.
     Further, the Judge considered the right of the Appellant to a  private
    life under Article 8 ECHR outside of the Immigration  Rules  and  found
    the decision  of  the  Respondent  to  refuse  the  application  to  be
    disproportionate.

 3. At the hearing, Mrs Aboni referred to the grounds  of  application  and
    submitted  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in  coming  to  these
    conclusions.  The Judge had failed to attach sufficient weight  to  the
    evidence relied upon by the Respondent at the hearing before  him,  and
    had given  insufficient  reasons  for  his  finding  that  an  innocent
    explanation had been provided by the Appellant.   The  Judge  had  made
    little of the inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence  referred  to
    at paragraph 23 of the Decision.

 4. Mrs Aboni then argued that the Judge had erred in  law  by  considering
    the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights outside of the Immigration Rules.
      The  Judge  had  failed  to  identify  any  compelling  compassionate
    circumstances of the Appellant enabling him to do so.

 5. In response, Mr Sharma referred to his Skeleton Argument and  the  Rule
    24  response  and  argued  that  as  regards  the  decision  under  the
    Immigration Rules, the grounds relied upon by the  Respondent  amounted
    to no more than a disagreement with the decision of the Judge  and  did
    not reveal any material error of law.  Mr Sharma reviewed  the  reasons
    given by the Judge for his decision that the Appellant had provided  an
    innocent explanation given at paragraphs 22  to  27  inclusive  of  the
    Decision and argued that they amounted to sufficient reasons.

 6. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  made  in
    respect of the Immigration Rules which I therefore do not set aside.  I
    find myself in agreement with the submission  of  Mr  Sharma  that  the
    grounds relied upon by the Respondent amount  only  to  a  disagreement
    with the decision of  the  Judge.   As  Mr  Sharma  argued,  the  Judge
    provided a thorough analysis of the relevant evidence in paragraphs  22
    to 27 of the Decision and came to a conclusion that he was entitled  to
    make upon that evidence.  He gave ample reasons for  that  decision  in
    those paragraphs.  I entirely disagree with the submission of Mrs Aboni
    that inadequate reasons were given.  As part of this analysis the Judge
    took into account the evidence of deception produced by the  Respondent
    but ultimately found that the plausible and credible  evidence  of  the
    Appellant discharged the  burden  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  of
    showing that there was an innocent explanation for the  matters  relied
    upon by the Respondent.  The decision of the Judge cannot in any way be
    described as perverse.

 7. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge under the Immigration Rules.  As that decision is  to  stand,
    there is no need for me to consider the  decision  of  the  Judge  made
    under Article 8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date 2nd February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
