
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/04498/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24 April 2018                          |On 1 May 2018                     |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     FN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs of Counsel, instructed by Anthony
                    Ogunfeibo & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born  on  2  August  1989.   She
    appeals the decision of the Secretary  of  State  on  28  January  2016
    refusing her application on 5 November 2015 to remain on  human  rights
    grounds and on the basis of family and private life established in  the
    United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant is married and her partner is a  national  of  the  Congo
    with leave to remain as a refugee until 25 June 2018.  The parties  got
    married on 14 July 2015 and at the time of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision it was accepted that she was pregnant and expecting her  first
    child in March 2016.  Although  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application on the basis  of  eligibility  this  issue  was
    resolved in her favour by the First-tier Judge and that finding has not
    been cross-appealed.

3.   The respondent considered that the appellant's child  when  born  would
    not be a British citizen and  paragraph  EX.1  did  not  apply  in  the
    appellant's case.  She could not make a case under 276ADE on the  basis
    of residency  and  it  was  not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  into  Cameroon.
    The appellant's husband was free to return with the  appellant  to  the
    Cameroon and the couple  could  support  each  other.   There  were  no
    exceptional circumstances in the appellant's  case  and  there  was  no
    basis for a grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.

4.   The appellant appealed the decision and her appeal came before a First-
    tier Judge on 8 December 2017 by which time  the  appellant  had  given
    birth to her son on 8 March 2016.  The judge heard oral  evidence  from
    the appellant and  her  husband.   Both  expressed  concern  about  the
    husband's safety in  Cameroon  due  to  its  proximity  to  Congo.   In
    paragraphs 15 to 17 of his decision the judge had referred to  extracts
    from Huang v Secretary of State [2007] UKHL  11,  MM  (Lebanon)  [2017]
    UKSC 10 and Agyarko v Secretary of State [2017] UKSC 11.  In  paragraph
    31 of his decision the judge stated as follows:

         "31. I have given very careful consideration  to  the  written  and
             oral evidence of the Appellant and her husband, as well as the
             submissions of both parties' representatives.  I remind myself
             that the burden of proof is upon the  Appellant  to  establish
             upon a balance of probabilities that, in the  first  instance,
             her application is one which can succeed under the Immigration
             Rules and if so, as this is a deemed human  rights  appeal,  I
             can conclude that the decision to refuse the application would
             be disproportionate to  the  Respondent's  legitimate  aim  of
             maintaining  effective  immigration  control  and  allow   the
             appeal.  In the event that I find that  the  Appellant  cannot
             succeed under the Rules, it remains for her to show that there
             are circumstances of an exceptional nature which would warrant
             separate consideration of her Article  8  rights  outside  the
             Rules.  I am reminded by the Supreme Court in  their  decision
             in MM (Lebanon), that this is a two stage  approach  and  that
             the Appellant's circumstances must first be  considered  under
             the Rules."


5.   The judge then turned to consider the welfare of the appellant's  child
    and considered that as the appellant had not worked since her child was
    born she was clearly his primary carer.  He attended nursery school for
    lengthy periods of time from 8am until 6pm on  three  days  each  week.
    Given the child's age the judge found that his best interests lay  with
    being at least with one of  his  parents  and  preferably  his  primary
    carer, his mother.  If the appellant were to be  returned  to  Cameroon
    taking the child with her he was young enough  to  adapt  (particularly
    where his mother speaks the language of that country  and  is  entirely
    familiar with its customs and culture and  has  family  members  living
    there.  "For those reasons I find as a primary  conclusion  that  there
    would be no adverse consequences for the child if the appellant  is  to
    be removed to Cameroon."

6.   It was agreed between the parties  that  the  appellant  did  meet  the
    eligibility requirements for leave to remain despite what had been said
    in the respondent's decision and the  judge  then  turned  to  consider
    whether there were insurmountable obstacles preventing the  appellant's
    partner from joining her in Cameroon.  The determination  concludes  as
    follows:

         "35. In this respect, the Appellant's  partner  is  a  national  of
             Congo, a country which shares  a  border  with  Cameroon.  The
             Appellant's husband is a refugee from Congo and contends  that
             he would not be capable of returning  with  the  Appellant  to
             Cameroon because he fears that as his country and Cameroon are
             co-operative that there is  a  possibility  that  he  will  be
             abducted and returned to Congo where  he  is  likely  to  face
             persecutory ill-treatment. It is for that reason that  he  has
             not contemplated moving to Cameroon and has made no enquiry as
             to whether or not it would be possible for  him  to  join  his
             wife and child in that country and live in the  Bamenda  area,
             which is to the north of Cameroon, and many  hours  away  from
             the border with his country Congo.


         36.  I have noted the issues raised by the Appellant's husband  and
             why it is he believes he cannot live in  Cameroon.   The  fact
             remains, however, he has adduced no evidence whatsoever  which
             would inform me that he has any  well-founded  fear  from  the
             Cameroon authorities.  It  has  been  open  to  him,  and  the
             Appellant, to adduce evidence which would support this claimed
             fear, but none has  been  forthcoming.   He  agreed  with  the
             Respondent's representative in cross examination that  he  had
             no evidence of anyone looking for him in Cameroon and that  he
             was not of interest to the Cameroon authorities.   Given  that
             information, I find that the reason which he has advanced  for
             not  living  in  Cameroon  with  the  Appellant  is   one   of
             convenience and does not  arise  from  any  genuine  or  well-
             founded fear that may arise in Cameroon.  In this respect,  my
             findings are reinforced by the significant distance  that  the
             Appellant's family reside in the north of  Cameroon  from  the
             border with Congo in the southeast of that  country.   I  find
             that the claimed fear is not a feature  which  I  should  take
             into account on a balance of probabilities  as  sufficient  to
             show that this represents  an  insurmountable  obstacle  which
             would prevent family life continuing in Cameroon.


         37.  Both the Appellant and her husband have provided  evidence  of
             significant qualifications that they  already  hold.   In  the
             case of the Appellant she holds Banking qualifications and, in
             the case of her husband, he  is  highly  skilled  in  Computer
             Networking and Cyber Security, having recently been awarded  a
             Bachelor of Science degree in that capacity.  He  stated  that
             in the United Kingdom he would expect to receive a  salary  of
             at least �32,000 and is hopeful of  gaining  employment  here.
             He has not contemplated looking for  employment  in  Cameroon,
             firstly because he hopes to secure work in the United Kingdom,
             and secondly because he does not envisage living in Cameroon.


         38.  I find that both the Appellant and her husband  have  provided
             evidence which shows that they have  significant  life  skills
             and have adapted to a foreign  country,  the  United  Kingdom,
             where they have been able to make  their  lives  together.   I
             find that there is no evidence which  would  establish,  on  a
             balance of probabilities, that the Appellant's husband  is  at
             risk or that he would find difficulty in  securing  employment
             with the skills that he has acquired in the United Kingdom.  I
             find these are further reasons why there is no  insurmountable
             obstacle preventing the Appellant and her husband joining  the
             Appellant's father in what she described as  a  house  with  a
             large sleeping area which  can  comfortably  accommodate  both
             her, her husband and child.  Therefore, for those  reasons,  I
             find that the requirements of EX.1 are not met  and  that  the
             refusal of the application under the ten year partner route of
             the Appellant's Article 8 rights to respect family life as the
             decision is entirely in accordance with the Rules.


         39.   In  considering  the  Appellant's  family  life  outside  the
             Immigration Rules, I  find  that  she  and  her  husband  have
             advanced no matters of an exceptional nature, other than  what
             hey  have  sought  to  rely  upon  as   grounds   representing
             insurmountable obstacles to enable the application to  succeed
             under the Rules.  It is not necessary for  me  to  repeat  the
             reasons which I have set out above concerning the  absence  of
             insurmountable obstacles preventing family life continuing  in
             Cameroon.  I find that there is nothing exceptional about  the
             Appellant, her husband and child's family  life  which  cannot
             transfer to Cameroon where it can continue and develop.  As  I
             have already indicated, it is possible for both the  Appellant
             and her husband to settle in that country with the support  of
             the Appellant's family and where they would be able to  obtain
             employment with the skills they have developed both  in  their
             own countries of origin and whilst in the United  Kingdom.   I
             find, therefore that there is nothing exceptional which  would
             warrant separate consideration of the Appellant's family  life
             outside the Immigration Rules and that the decision to  refuse
             the application is entirely proportionate to  this  aspect  of
             the Respondent's obligation under Article 8.


         40.  With regard to the Appellant's private  life,  this  has  been
             considered under the terms  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  and,  in
             particular, the requirements of sub-paragraph (vi).   In  this
             respect, it is for the Appellant to show that there  are  very
             significant  obstacles  which  prevent  her  integration  into
             Cameroon.  Having carefully considered the  evidence,  I  find
             that the Appellant was entirely  candid  and  frank  when  she
             explained that she still  has  her  father  and  other  family
             members living in Cameroon and that it would be  possible  for
             her to reside  with  her  father  in  what  she  described  as
             accommodation which has a large sleeping area.  This  was  not
             something which she said would  no  longer  be  available.   I
             therefore find,  as  a  fact  that  the  Appellant  will  have
             accommodation and support available to her  in  Cameroon,  the
             country in which she has spent the vast majority of  her  life
             and where she  is  familiar  with  the  customs,  culture  and
             language.  Moreover, I  find  that  it  is  possible  for  her
             husband and child to safely relocate to live  there  with  her
             and that there is nothing,  other  than  choice,  which  would
             prevent the Appellant's husband from doing so.   I  find  that
             the best interests of the Appellant's child will be served  by
             him remaining with his parents and, if his father chooses  not
             to leave the United Kingdom at the present time, there  is  no
             reason  why  the  child  cannot  live  in  Cameroon  with  the
             Appellant and his father visit him there,  because  he  has  a
             travel document which permits him to travel  to  any  country,
             other than Congo.  Based upon those reasons, I find  that  the
             Appellant has failed  discharge  the  burden  of  proof  under
             paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  that   the   refusal   of   her
             application on private life grounds  under  the  Rules  cannot
             amount to a breach of her Article 8 rights.


         41.  In considering whether  there  are  exceptional  circumstances
             relevant to her private life, I would  reiterate  the  reasons
             which I have set out above both in relation to her private and
             family life.  I have considered the provisions of Section 117A-
             117B of the 2002 Act and whether or not it is  in  the  public
             interest for the Appellant to be  removed  to  Cameroon.   The
             evidence discloses that she  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
             October 2014 and that, by April 2015, the course she had  been
             taking had ceased as the college where  she  had  studied  had
             lost its licence.  As the Respondent has properly pointed  out
             in the decision letter, the Appellant had made no  attempt  to
             find another college, but set about plans  to  marry  in  July
             2015.  It is clear that her focus was  upon  establishing  her
             family because she soon became pregnant and her child was born
             in March 2016.  Whilst I accept that, at the present time, the
             Appellant speaks the English language and, to  a  degree,  has
             integrated into society in this country, it is clear that  she
             and her husband are only able to subsist with recourse to  the
             public funds in the form of Tax  Credits  and  student  loans.
             All of this informs  me  that  the  Respondent's  decision  to
             refuse the Appellant's application is an  entirely  reasonable
             and  proportionate  response  to  her  circumstances  and  the
             decision to refuse her application cannot amount to  a  breach
             of her Article 8 rights.  It is for these  reasons  I  dismiss
             her appeal."

7.   Grounds of appeal were settled by Counsel, who argued  that  the  judge
    had misdirected himself in paragraph 38 in stating  "I  find  that  the
    refusal cannot amount to a breach of the appellant's Article  8  rights
    to respect family life as the decision is entirely in  accordance  with
    the Rules."  There had not been a proper balancing exercise.

8.   The judge had only relied on the issue of public funds in paragraph  41
    of his decision as tax credits and student loans were not public  funds
    as defined at paragraph 6 of the Immigration  Rules.   In  relation  to
    child tax credits  and  child  benefits,  paragraph  6A  of  the  Rules
    provided:

         "For the purpose of these Rules, a person (P) is not to be regarded
         as having (or potentially having) recourse to public  funds  merely
         because P is (or will be) reliant in whole or  in  part  on  public
         funds provided to P's sponsor unless, as a result of  P's  presence
         in the United Kingdom, the sponsor is (or  would  be)  entitled  to
         increased or additional public funds (save where  such  entitlement
         to increased or additional public funds is by virtue of P  and  the
         sponsor's joint  entitlement  to  benefits  under  the  Regulations
         referred to in paragraph 6B)."

9.   The judge had not considered the disruption caused to  the  appellant's
    family if she were removed from UK.  In considering the best  interests
    of the child it was plain that the judge had  erred  in  finding  there
    would be no adverse consequences for the child -  there  must  be  some
    adverse consequences, not least because the child  would  be  separated
    from his father.  It was wrong to  state  that  no  evidence  had  been
    produced about the appellant's husband's fears on return - the  parties
    had been consistent  in  their  evidence  about  their  fears  and  the
    appellant's partner had been accepted to be a credible witness  at  his
    asylum hearing.  There was an issue about the subjective fear of living
    in Cameroon.  The appellant's husband  would  be  fearful  in  Cameroon
    because of the good relationship with Congo and the  proximity  of  the
    two countries.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 28 February 2018.

10.  Counsel submitted that the judge had erred in paragraph 31  in  finding
    that there was a need to show that  there  were  circumstances  "of  an
    exceptional nature which would warrant separate  consideration  of  the
    appellant's Article 8  rights  outside  the  Rules"  and  paragraph  38
    wrongly stated: "I find that the refusal cannot amount to a  breach  of
    the appellant's Article 8 rights to respect family life as the decision
    is entirely in accordance with  the  Rules."   The  Rules  were  not  a
    complete code.  A balance sheet approach should be  adopted  -  Counsel
    referred to Hesham Ali v Secretary of State [2016] UKSC 60.

11.  Counsel also relied on her point  regarding  the  appellant's  finances
    not amounting to public funds, given what was said in  paragraph  5  of
    the appellant's husband's witness statement where he had said:

         "As it happens the school lost its licence and my spouse eventually
         had to stop schooling given that she was unable to  change  schools
         and obtain a Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  (CAS)  number
         from another school.  This devastated my spouse but as  it  happens
         we were so involved in our relationship that before she knew it she
         was expecting our baby and had something else to concentrate on."


12.  Counsel referred to the  determination  of  the  appellant's  husband's
    asylum appeal - the judge had  found  the  core  of  his  claim  to  be
    credible in paragraph 62 of the determination.  He had been  trying  to
    help by telling the truth.   His  fear  was  based  on  persecution  on
    account of his religion  -  the  appellant's  claim  is  summarised  in
    paragraphs 11 and  12  of  the  determination  in  the  asylum  appeal.
    Paragraphs 35 and 36 had given inadequate consideration to the issues.

13.  Mr Nath submitted in relation to the first ground that  the  judge  was
    setting the scene in paragraph 31 of the  decision  and  had  not  been
    considering exceptional circumstances  prematurely.   The  case  of  MM
    (Lebanon) advocated a two stage approach and what was said in paragraph
    38 needed to be seen in the light  of  paragraph  31.   The  judge  had
    already dealt with the Article 8 issues and if there was  an  error  in
    the calculation of public funds in paragraph 41 it was not material  in
    the circumstances.  It was open to the judge to find  in  paragraph  40
    that the family could live in Cameroon safely.

14.  He had dealt with the question of the appellant's  husband's  fears  on
    return properly in paragraphs 35 and 36 of the decision.

15.  Counsel reiterated her complaint about paragraph 38  -  the  judge  had
    not factored in at all the private and family life of  the  parties  in
    the United Kingdom.  The sponsor was on a route to  settlement.   There
    had been an error in relation to public funds.  The  appeal  should  be
    remitted for a fresh hearing.

16.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the judge's decision if there was
    an error of law in it.

17.  As I have mentioned, the judge set out extracts and  summaries  of  the
    relevant authorities in paragraph 15 of his decision.  He refers  to  a
    two stage approach in paragraph 31.  I agree with Mr Nath that what  is
    said in paragraph 38 needs to be seen in the context of what the  judge
    had set out in paragraph 31.  The last sentence of paragraph  38  might
    have been infelicitously worded but I am not satisfied that  the  judge
    erred in his overall approach to the consideration of  the  appellant's
    case outside  the  Rules.   The  judge  had  considered  the  issue  of
    insurmountable obstacles and had not found it necessary to repeat  them
    in paragraph 39 of  his  decision.   In  relation  to  the  appellant's
    husband's fears on return, in  my  view,  the  judge  dealt  with  this
    properly in paragraphs 35 and 36 of the decision, which I have set  out
    above.  As he puts it, the reason advanced was "one of convenience" and
    I do not find it arguable that the judge  overlooked  the  issue  of  a
    subjective fear arising in Cameroon.  The use  of  the  word  "genuine"
    clearly indicated that the judge was not satisfied that the appellant's
    husband had a subjective fear of return to Cameroon.  I do not find the
    judge's acceptance in paragraph 41 of what the respondent had  said  in
    the decision letter  demonstrates  a  failure  properly  to  take  into
    account the totality of the evidence before him.

18.  The central conclusions of the judge in relation to  Article  8  inside
    and outside the Rules were reached  prior  to  the  judge  taking  into
    account Section 117A - 117B in paragraph 41 of his  decision.   If  the
    judge was referring to public funds as  defined  it  may  be  that  his
    comments were otiose but I am not satisfied that in the overall context
    of the determination there was any material flaw in his approach.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons I had given this appeal is dismissed  and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Judge stands.

Anonymity Direction

The First-tier Judge made an anonymity order, which continues.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.





Signed                                  Date 30 April 2018


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
