
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04934/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 March 2018                              |On 5 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                          OMOTUNDE OMOLOWO OMOWANLE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Bustani, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 14 November 1937,
    making him 80 years of age. He entered  the  UK  as  a  visitor  on  14
    December 2005 and has remained here ever since as an overstayer. He was
    encountered and served with a notice of liability to  removal  in  2007
    but he did not leave. On 7 September 2015 he made  an  application  for
    leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds,  citing  his  private  life
    established during his lengthy residence in the UK and his family  life
    with his daughter, Ms Oluwadamilola Ayotope Omowanile, who is a British
    citizen born on 24 June 1972. In his application form,  he  claimed  to
    qualify under the parent route.

 2. The respondent refused the application on 10 February 2016. The refusal
    letter  pointed  out  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the   eligibility
    requirements of the rules as a parent because his daughter was over 18.
    For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules,  it  was  not
    accepted there would be very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's
    reintegration in Nigeria. He had spent 68 years there before coming  to
    the UK. The fact the appellant had a daughter  in  the  UK,  supportive
    friends in the UK and some medical conditions were  not  considered  to
    warrant a grant of leave outside the rules. With regard to his claim to
    have no family to support him in Nigeria, when he  was  interviewed  at
    the police station in December 2007 he said he had one child in the  UK
    and four  other  children.  The  medication  he  was  taking  would  be
    available in Nigeria.

 3. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  lodging  short,
    generic grounds of appeal. The appeal was heard at Taylor House  on  13
    June 2017 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S J Clarke. He heard oral
    evidence from the appellant and his daughter.  He  made  the  following
    findings:

     . The appellant's wife had entered the UK and appeared to live with him
       in the UK;

     . However, she was not a party to the proceedings;

     . She may require kidney dialysis three times a week;

     . The appellant plays a significant role in the upbringing  of  his  9-
       year old granddaughter, who is a British citizen;

     . He takes her to school and collects  her  from  school,  as  well  as
       afterschool clubs;

     . He makes food for her and looks after her until his daughter  returns
       from work;

     . The child has no contact with her father;

     . It was in the best interests of the child for  the  appellant  to  be
       able to continue to look after her because  there  is  a  close  bond
       between them;

     . The  appellant's  daughter  would,  in  practice,  be  able  to  make
       alternative arrangements for childcare, as many people have to do;

     . The appellant had remained in the UK unlawfully since his visit  visa
       expired in 2006 and it was appropriate to draw an  adverse  inference
       from the delay in seeking to regularise his situation;

     . Despite his age  and  his  suffering  from  hypertension  and  kidney
       disease, the appellant was fit enough to  look  after  a  9-year  old
       child and take her to school on foot;

     . Appropriate  treatment  would  be  available  for  the  appellant  in
       Nigeria;

     . The appellant has two children living  in  Nigeria  and  he  was  fit
       enough to make the journey to the nearest town from  the  village  to
       obtain medical treatment;

     . The appellant's daughter could remit money to him even if she had  to
       pay for childcare after the appellant had left; and

     . The appellant could attend church in Nigeria.

 4. The judge then reached the following conclusions on the law:

     . The weight to be given to the appellant's private life was reduced by
       the fact he had remained unlawfully;

     . Weighing in favour of the appellant were his age, the length  of  his
       residence in the UK, his medical needs and  the  fact  his  wife  was
       living with him in the UK, albeit unlawfully;

     . The strongest matter weighing in his favour was the likely impact  on
       his granddaughter; but

     . The appellant's removal was nonetheless proportionate.

 5. It is not clear from the decision whether  the  appellant  pursued  his
    appeal under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  or  not.  However,  the  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal only argued that the judge  erred  in  his
    approach to article 8 outside the rules. The grounds  pointed  out  the
    judge had not taken a structured approach as provided in Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  P
    J M Hollingworth  because  it  was  arguable  the  judge  had  attached
    insufficient  weight  to  the  fact  the  father  of  the   appellant's
    granddaughter played no part in her life and there  was  a  close  bond
    between the appellant and the child.  It  was  arguable  the  appellant
    could fall within section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002[1]. It was arguable the judge had taken too restrictive
    a view of the public interest.

 7. The respondent has not filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal.

 8. I heard submissions from the representatives on  the  question  whether
    the Judge made a material error of law in his decision.

 9. Ms Bustani adopted the issue raised for the first time in the grant  of
    permission to appeal. She acknowledged that, in  order  to  succeed  in
    showing the appellant could rely on section 117B(6) of  the  2002  Act,
    she would have to show he enjoyed  a  parental  relationship  with  his
    granddaughter. She argued that the facts of the case showed that  there
    was a parental relationship and she relied on the guidance provided  by
    the Upper Tribunal in R (on the application of RK) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department (s.117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR [2016]
    UKUT 00031 (IAC). It is helpful to set out that guidance here:

    "42. Whether a person is in a  "parental  relationship"  with  a  child
         must, necessarily, depend on the individual circumstances.    Those
         circumstances will include what role they actually play  in  caring
         for and making decisions in relation to the child.  That is  likely
         to be a most significant factor.  However,  it  will  also  include
         whether that relationship arises because of their legal obligations
         as a parent or in lieu of a parent under a  court  order  or  other
         legal obligation.  I  accept  that  it  is  not  necessary  for  an
         individual to have "parental responsibility" in law  for  there  to
         exist a "parental relationship," although whether or  not  that  is
         the case will be a relevant factor.  What is important is that  the
         individual can establish that they have taken on the  role  that  a
         "parent" usually plays in the life of their child.

    43.  I agree  with  Mr  Mandalia's  formulation  that,  in  effect,  an
         individual must "step into the shoes  of  a  parent"  in  order  to
         establish a "parental  relationship".    If  the  role  they  play,
         whether as a relative or friend of  the  family,  is  as  a  caring
         relative or friend but not so as to take on the role  of  a  parent
         then it cannot be said that they  have  a  "parental  relationship"
         with the child.  It is perhaps obvious to state that  "carers"  are
         not per se "parents."  A child may have carers who do not step into
         the shoes of their parents but look after the  child  for  specific
         periods of time (for example whilst the parents  are  at  work)  or
         even longer term (for example  where  the  parents  are  travelling
         abroad for a  holiday  or  family  visit).   Those  carers  may  be
         professionally employed; they may be  relatives;  or  they  may  be
         friends.  In all those cases, it may properly be said that there is
         an element of dependency between the child and his or  her  carers.
         However, that alone would not, in  my  judgment,  give  rise  to  a
         "parental relationship."

    44.  If a non-biological parent ("third  party")  caring  for  a  child
         claims such a relationship, its existence will depend upon all  the
         circumstances including whether or not there  are  others  (usually
         the biologically parents) who have such  a  relationship  with  the
         child also. It is unlikely, in my judgment, that a person  will  be
         able to establish they have taken on the role of a parent when  the
         biological parents continue to be involved in the child's  life  as
         the child's parents as in a case such  as  the  present  where  the
         children and parents continue to live and function  together  as  a
         family.  It will be difficult, if not impossible,  to  say  that  a
         third party has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent."

10. The facts in that case were that a grandmother, who lived with her son,
    daughter-in-law and grandchildren, was challenging a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State that she did not have a parental  relationship  with
    the children. The Upper Tribunal found on the facts of the  case  there
    was no irrationality or unlawfulness in the decision and dismissed  the
    application for judicial review.

11. Ms Bustani said the key test was whether  the  appellant  had  "stepped
    into the shoes" of his granddaughter's absent father.  She  pointed  to
    the appellant's daughter's  witness  statement  describes  the  actions
    which her father took in looking after his granddaughter and  also  the
    close bond between them. She is a single mother and a full-time  social
    worker. She often works late plus she has a second  job  as  a  nursing
    assistant. She says that removing  the  appellant  would  have  a  very
    negative impact on her daughter.

12. Ms Bustani argued the judge's assessment was inadequately reasoned.  He
    had not considered the psychological impact on  the  child.  The  judge
    should have made a finding under section 117B(6).

13.  I  asked  whether  the  point  that  the  appellant  had  a   parental
    relationship so as to fall  within  section  117B(6)  had  been  argued
    before the judge. Ms Bustani could not help me with that.

14. Mr Avery argued the decision was adequate. The  relationship  described
    was that of a grandparent  and  his  granddaughter  and  nothing  more.
    Section 117B(6) had not  been  argued,  even  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal. It was not  an  obvious  point  which  the  judge
    should have taken up.

15. Ms Bustani replied. I asked why  the  appellant's  wife  had  not  been
    referred to. I asked whether it was contended that the appellant had  a
    parental relationship with the child but the grandmother  did  not.  Ms
    Bustani repeated that the  evidence  showed  there  was  a  close  bond
    between the appellant and the child.

16. I reserved my decision as to whether the judge's  decision  contains  a
    material error of law. Having done so, I have concluded it does not and
    the decision shall stand. My reasons are as follows.

17. Firstly, it is clear that the issue of  whether  the  appellant  has  a
    parental relationship with his granddaughter so as to bring him  within
    section 117B(6) was never raised in the First-tier Tribunal. It was not
    argued by counsel and the evidence did  not  make  any  explicit  claim
    about it. There was no reason for the judge to have  considered  it  of
    his own motion.

18. Secondly, had he done so, I am not satisfied he would have found  there
    is a parental relationship in this case.  Whilst  I  accept  the  judge
    noted the child's father plays no role in her life and there is a close
    bond between the appellant  and  her,  the  thrust  of  the  daughter's
    evidence was that her father helped her out with child care because she
    was a single parent and she worked long hours. This is not the same  as
    stepping into the shoes of a parent.  There  was  no  evidence  of  the
    appellant making decisions in relation to the child. Nor had  he  taken
    on any legal obligation towards her. The latter was considered to be  a
    relevant factor in RK even though parental  responsibility  has  to  be
    distinguished from a parental relationship.

19. Furthermore, it is clear that the position of the appellant's wife  has
    deliberately been left out of  the  equation.  The  appellant  and  his
    daughter did not provide a complete picture to the judge of the make-up
    of the household.

20. Thirdly, it is clear that the judge had at the forefront  of  his  mind
    the factors relied on by  the  appellant,  including  the  strong  bond
    between the appellant and his granddaughter and the impact  on  her  of
    removal. It was not incumbent on  the  judge  to  speculate  about  the
    "psychological impact" on her.

21. In sum, the decision is brief but adequately reasoned as to the  issues
    which were before the judge.

22. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the  appeal  shall  stand
    and the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and his decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 27 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
-----------------------
[1] In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
interest does not require the person's removal where-
(a)the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
qualifying child, and
(b)it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
Kingdom.


