
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/04400/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15 December 2017                   |On 23 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                   thi [b]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T D H Hodson, instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  No
application was made for a direction to this Tribunal and one is not
necessary.  I have however anonymised the name of the minor child involved
in the appeal.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Plumptre promulgated on 3 July 2017  ("the  Decision")  dismissing  her
    appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 29 January 2016 refusing
    her leave to remain as the (single) parent of a British citizen  child.



 2. The Appellant is a national of  Vietnam.   She  entered  the  UK  as  a
    student on 1 March 2013.  Her leave was extended until  27  July  2015.
    Thereafter she overstayed.  Her child, H, was born on [ ] 2015.  She is
    estranged from the  child's  father  who  is  a  British  citizen.   He
    currently has no contact with H.

 3. The Respondent did not accept that  H's  father  is  the  man  who  the
    Appellant named as his father because, by the time of  H's  birth,  she
    had moved in with another man who it appears is not a British  citizen.
    The Appellant has not produced any DNA evidence as to the paternity  of
    H but the Judge accepted the Appellant's evidence that  H's  father  is
    the man she named and that H is British, based  in  particular  on  the
    fact that the Appellant produced a British passport in H's name.

 4. However, the Judge went on to consider the position under  Appendix  FM
    to the Immigration Rules applying in particular EX.1 and found that  it
    would be reasonable to expect the Appellant and H to leave the  UK  and
    therefore that the Appellant could not succeed.

 5. The Appellant raises three grounds of appeal. First, she says that  the
    Judge has become confused as to the provisions of EX.1 and  appears  to
    have adopted the test relevant  to  whether  a  partner  of  a  British
    citizen  can  be  removed  (i.e.  whether  there  are   "insurmountable
    obstacles" to the relationship continuing abroad).  Second, it is  said
    that the Judge has failed to take into account certain of the  evidence
    when assessing H's best interests, in particular that H  is  a  British
    citizen and that the Appellant would like H to have  contact  with  his
    natural father and that he would lose that opportunity if the Appellant
    and H returned to Vietnam. Third, it is said that the judge  failed  to
    take into account the ECJ case of Zambrano.

 6. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Frances on 14  September
    2017 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in law in finding that it  was
         reasonable to expect the British citizen child  to  leave  the  UK.
         The Appellant was his primary carer and  the  child  could  not  be
         compelled to leave the UK".

 7. The matter comes before me to decide whether the  Decision  contains  a
    material error of law and if so to remake the  Decision  or  remit  the
    appeal for rehearing to the First-tier Tribunal.





Decision and reasons

 8. At the outset of the hearing Mr Wilding who appears for  the  Secretary
    of State conceded that there is indeed an error of law in the  Decision
    at [30] which I set out below.  He accepts that, in light of that error
    of law, the appropriate course is to set aside the Decision.   He  also
    accepts that in light of the Secretary of State's policy  and  what  is
    said in the Tribunal case of SF  &  Others  (Guidance;  post-2014  Act)
    Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC) ("SF") it is appropriate for this  appeal
    to be allowed.

 9. At [30] of the Decision, Judge Plumptre said this:

         "I accept that the child lives with his  primary  sole  carer,  his
         mother, but find that the requirements of paragraph EX.1(c) are not
         met insofar as that although the child [H] is a British citizen,  I
         find that it would be reasonable to expect this child to leave  the
         UK with his mother who is of Vietnamese origin and given that he is
         of a very young age and has not started school  and  could  readily
         adapt to life in Vietnam with his maternal grandparents  and  given
         that both his natural parents are of Vietnamese origin.  Further  I
         find he would have the opportunity to form a relationship with  his
         maternal grandparents in Vietnam."

10. Mr Wilding also appeared before the Tribunal in SF.  As he pointed  out
    to the Tribunal in that case, the  Secretary  of  State  has  a  policy
    contained  within  the  Immigration  Directorate   Instruction   Family
    Migration, Appendix FM, Edition  August  2015.   The  section  of  that
    policy relevant to the circumstances in  SF  and  this  case  reads  as
    follows:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano.

         .....

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.  It may, however,  be
         appropriate to refuse to grant  leave  where  the  conduct  of  the
         parent or primary carer gives rise to consideration of such  weight
         as to justify separation, if the child could  otherwise  stay  with
         another parent or alternative primary carer in the  UK  or  in  the
         EU."

11. As I have already pointed out, in  this  case,  the  Appellant  is  the
    single parent of H and H is not currently in contact with  his  father.
    There is therefore no question of the child being  able  to  stay  with
    another parent.   This  is  a  post-Immigration  Act  2014  appeal  and
    therefore the question for me  is  whether  the  Respondent's  decision
    breaches the Appellant's human rights and not whether that decision  is
    in accordance with the  law.   As  the  Tribunal  pointed  out  in  SF,
    however, the fact that the Secretary of State has a policy which  would
    be breached in the event that the Appellant were forced  to  leave  the
    EU, the appropriate course is to allow the appeal.  I therefore  follow
    that course for the reasons expressed in SF which I  gratefully  adopt.



12. In short summary, it would not be reasonable to expect H to  leave  the
    UK.  The Appellant therefore meets paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM as H's
    parent and is entitled to succeed.

Notice of Decision
I am satisfied that the Decision  contains  material  errors  of  law.   The
Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre promulgated on  3  July  2017
is set aside.
I re-make the decision.  I allow the appeal on human rights grounds for  the
reasons given above.





Signed[pic]                         Dated:   19 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


