








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04282/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Manchester                           |                                     |
|On 12th June 2019                    |On 17th June 2019                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                     VJ

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Barrett, instructed by Sabz Solicitors LLP

For the Respondent:    Mr McVitie, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A J  Parker  promulgated  on  the  21st  February  2019,
    whereby the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision
    of the respondent to refuse the appellant's claims based on  Article  8
    of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. As the proceedings  concern  the  interests  and  rights  of
    children I consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Welsh on 15th April 2019. Thus the case appeared  before
    me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

         "The grounds assert, inter alia, that the judge erred in failing to
         consider and apply section 117B (6) of the Nationality  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002. In my view, this  point  is  arguable.  It  is
         unclear whether the judge directed his mind to  the  correct  legal
         test ..."

 5. In the decision at paragraphs 25 to 31 the judge has set  out  in  full
    the provisions of section 117B of the 2002 Act and considered  specific
    aspects of the section. Subsection (6) contains provisions relating  to
    the relationship of a parent to children and the criteria to be applied
    as to whether or not the public interest requires  the  removal  of  an
    individual who has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
    a qualifying child.

 6.  In paragraph 31 of the decision the judge has  found  that  there  are
    qualifying  children.  The  children  of  the  appellant  are   British
    citizens. Thereafter in paragraph 33 the judge has indicated  that  the
    appellant meets all the requirements, ostensibly  of  the  Rules,  with
    regard to suitability and eligibility including the immigration  status
    of the appellant, save and except for the requirement  with  regard  to
    relationship. It was for the judge to make a finding as to  whether  or
    not there was a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  between
    the appellant and the qualifying children. That was relevant both  with
    regard to Section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act  but  also  with  regard  to
    Appendix FM. EX.1.

 7. Thereafter taking account of the best interests  of  the  children,  in
    accordance with section 55 of the Borders Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 and of section 117B of the 2002 Act, the judge was required to
    determine whether or not it was reasonable to expect  the  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom. The best interests of the children should  be
    considered as a primary consideration in assessing  the  facts  of  the
    case.

 8. It was accepted that the children were British citizens. The  case  law
    and consequent policy of the  Home  Office  indicate  that  it  is  not
    reasonable for British citizen children to be  expected  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

 9. The issue was  therefore  whether  or  not  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the children. The judge has  made
    reference to the fact that the appellant had in the past applied for  a
    contact order/family arrangement order but that since that date he  and
    his spouse had reconciled and were now living together. It was for  the
    judge to consider whether or not  in  the  circumstances  there  was  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship between the appellant  and
    the children. It does not appear to  me  that  the  judge  has  made  a
    finding  on  whether  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship with the children and whether in the  light  of  that  the
    best interests of  the  children  are  being  served  by  removing  the
    appellant.

10. The failure to properly assess the relationship of the appellant to the
    children I find constitutes a material error of law.

11. I asked the respective representatives in light of that what the proper
    course would be. Whilst Mr Barrett on behalf of the appellant indicated
    that he would ask that the appeal be determined on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before the Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  McVitie  indicated  that  the
    proper course would be for the matter to be remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for proper findings of fact to be made in respect of  the
    relationship of the appellant to his children.

12. Taking account of all the circumstances I find that the  proper  course
    is for this matter to be remitted back to  the  first-tier  for  proper
    findings of fact to be made in respect of the  best  interests  of  the
    children and in respect of the relationship of  the  appellant  to  his
    children.  I remit the case for a  hearing  afresh  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal

    Notice of Decision

13. I allow the appeal to the extent that it is remitted back to the first-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 13th June 2019






Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed                                                   Date 2nd July 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



