
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04628/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision given in court              |
|On 4 May 2017                         |On 10 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


Before
                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN
Between
                                 Omar Guebli
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Tanya Murshed (counsel instructed by Abbey Law, St
Albans)
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     This is an appeal from Judge Bernard Andonian, sitting at Taylor  House
    on 31 August 2016 by someone born  in  Algeria  in  1988.  In  2012  he
    arrived on a visit visa and overstayed.  The following year he met  his
    wife, who is a British citizen, and on 8 April 2015 he made  his  first
    private and family life application, which was  refused  the  following
    month.  The day after that, on  16  May  2015,  he  married  his  wife,
    apparently in a civil ceremony, and on 26 May made his  second  private
    and family life application which was refused on 14 August.

 2. Various grounds were given for that refusal, none of which  I  need  to
    consider, except for the way in which the judge's decision  dealt  with
    the  partner  route  under  Appendix  FM  to   the   Rules,   paragraph
    RLTRP1.1(d).  That for other reasons could only be  satisfied  by  this
    appellant if paragraph EX.1 also applies.  That was considered  by  the
    decision maker who looked at it  on  the  basis  of  whether  paragraph
    EX.1(a) applied.

 3.  That  paragraph  refers  to  a  'genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship' with a child, which this appellant and his wife  did  not
    have; however there was  no  consideration  by  the  decision-maker  of
    paragraph EX.1(b), as to  whether  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner who  is  in  the  UK  and  is  a
    British citizen, which his wife was.  It is not too surprising  in  the
    circumstances that the very experienced judge should not  himself  have
    dealt with EX1(b) either, though it must be said that  this  point  had
    been taken in detailed grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4.  In  the  circumstances  the  parties  are  agreed  that  there  is  no
    alternative to the appeal being allowed with a direction  for  a  fresh
    hearing before another judge.  It may well be that the  answer  to  the
    EX.1 point either makes unnecessary,  or  disposes  of  any  article  8
    claim; but that will be something for the judge to consider.

Appeal
Direction for  fresh  hearing  in  First-tier  Tribunal,  not  before  Judge
    Andonian
                               [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)

