
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04162/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th June 2019                    |On 17th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           mr Yeshpaul Dinesh Rai
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N. Wilkins (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Cruthers, promulgated on 25th February 2019,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 31st October  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Guyana,  and  was  born  on  27th
    December 1988.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 23rd January 2018, refusing him leave to remain in the UK on  the
    basis of his Article 8 rights.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he arrived in  the  UK  on
    6th December 2004, as a 14 year  old,  with  his  parents  and  younger
    sister, [RR].  His older sister, [R], had already been in the UK  since
    2002 and now has indefinite leave to remain.  His mother, on the  other
    hand, still has an outstanding human rights claim, in an appeal that is
    pending before the Tribunal on 26th July  2019.   His  younger  sister,
    [RR], however, has now been granted leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
    Article 8.  The Appellant claims that since he arrived in the UK  as  a
    child, and has been here for almost half his  life,  he  has  a  strong
    claim to remain  in  this  country,  together  with  his  other  family
    members, on the basis of Article 8.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant could not succeed.  This  is  because
    paragraph 276ADE(1) would be of no assistance to him.  He had not spent
    seven years of his life as a child under 18 years in this country.   He
    had not spent at least half his life continuously, between the ages  of
    18 and 25 in this country.  Most importantly, he had not been  in  this
    country for twenty years.  Against that background, the  Appellant  had
    known, since the time that he became appeal rights exhausted  in  2006,
    that he had no right to remain in this country, and ought to have  left
    (see paragraph 69).  He did not do so.  Instead, he went on to  develop
    further private life rights, getting an education, making friends,  and
    integrating into British society, but in circumstances where the public
    interests still remain  in  his  removal,  because  of  the  importance
    attached to immigration control.  Significantly, the Appellant was  not
    able to  point  to  there  being  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    relocation to Guyana.  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law in failing
    to have regard to the fact that the Appellant had actually entered  the
    UK in 2004 when he was a child of only 14 or 15 years,  and  under  the
    control of his parents, and that it was after that year that  he  spent
    half his life in the UK, and all his adult life in this  country.   The
    failure of the  judge  to  factor  this  particular  history  into  the
    proportionality assessment amounted to an error of  law.   Second,  the
    judge did not treat the element of display on the part of the Secretary
    of State in removing the Appellant, during  which  time  the  Appellant
    developed further Article 8 rights, to be a factor  that  went  in  his
    favour.  Instead, the judge took the view that very often people in the
    situation prolonged their stay in this country by making appeals before
    the Authorities.  Finally, it was said that the Secretary of State  had
    engaged in inconsistent decision making,  which  the  judge  failed  to
    properly factor into his decision making, because the Appellant's older
    sister and aunt and uncle had been granted  leave  to  remain  in  this
    country under the legacy system.

 6. On 10th May 2019 a Rule 24 response was entered  by  the  Secretary  of
    State to the effect that the Appellant's sister in the UK  was  granted
    indefinite leave, but she had arrived in  2002,  which  was  two  years
    before the  Appellant  was  granted  ILR,  and  she  was  only  granted
    permission to stay on the basis of the  legacy  system,  and  this  was
    exceptionally outside the Rules.  The Appellant had lived in the UK for
    over fourteen years, arriving as a child of approximately 15,  and  the
    judge had made sustainable findings that the Appellant had only resided
    with precarious immigration status throughout that period of time.   He
    had made good use  of  his  presence  in  this  country  and  this  was
    something that he could draw upon after return to  Guyana.   There  was
    nothing here that suggested that the public interest in removal  should
    not take precedence.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 11th June 2019, Miss Wilkins, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant emphasised the fact that there was case law  to
    the effect that if a person entered as a child, then this was something
    that had to be considered in terms of the evaluation of the  length  of
    stay in this country, and the judge had failed to do  so.   Second,  it
    was simply not the case that  the  Appellant  had  himself  engaged  in
    delay, over a six year period, when the Appellant was reporting to  the
    Authorities, and he was  not  being  removed.   What  that  meant,  she
    submitted, was that the House of Lords decision in EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]
    UKHL 41 would come into effect.

 8. In that case, Lord Bingham had stated that a delay is  not  necessarily
    irrelevant to the decision because

         "The applicant may during the period of any  delay  develop  closer
         personal  and  social  ties  and  establish  deeper  roots  in  the
         community than he could have shown earlier.  The longer the  period
         of delay, the likelier this is to be true.  To the extent  that  it
         is true, the Appellant's claim under Article 8 will necessarily  be
         strengthened" (see paragraph 14).

 9. Lord Bingham had also gone on to say that if a person  is  not  removed
    then he "may well be imbued with a sense  of  impermanence"  (paragraph
    15).  Lord Bingham had also stated that delay would  be  relevant  also
    "in reducing the weight otherwise to be accorded to the requirements of
    firm and fair immigration control, if the delay  is  shown  to  be  the
    result  of  a  dysfunctional   system   which   yields   unpredictable,
    inconsistent and unfair outcomes" (paragraph 16).




10. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that there was actually  no  error  of
    law in the determination at all and that  this  amounted  simply  to  a
    disagreement  with  the  judge's  decision.   He  drew  the  Tribunal's
    attention to the decision in SH (Iran) [2014] EWCA Civ 1469, where  the
    Court of Appeal had explained how different results may be  reached  in
    different decisions with respect to different individuals even if  they
    belong to the same family.  The relatives who had been granted leave to
    remain had succeeded on the basis of the legacy system.


11. The Court of Appeal explained that

         "There is no separate legacy  'policy'.   There  is  no  basis  for
         relying on delay as, in itself, a ground  for  obtaining  leave  to
         remain.  There is in  the  ordinary  case  no  relevant  legitimate
         expectation, other  than  that  the  case  will  be  considered  on
         applicable law and  policy  at  the  time  the  decision  is  made"
         (paragraph 65).

12. Mr Bates submitted that this was indeed the case here.   The  Appellant
    had no legitimate expectation, just  because  his  relatives  had  been
    granted leave to remain, that he would also be  granted  leave  at  any
    earlier point in time.  His only legitimate expectation was  to  having
    the applicable law and policy at the  time  applied  to  him.   Second,
    insofar as the Appellant's entry into  this  country  as  a  child  was
    concerned, the judge was not oblivious to this.  He  had  indeed  taken
    into account the fact that the Appellant had come at the age of  around
    15 but he had not been able to succeed under the Immigration Rules, and
    he could not succeed under freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence  either
    because,

         "There  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the   Appellant
         returning, and any private life  that  he  had  built  up  in  this
         country 'has been precarious' such that 'the Appellant  should  not
         have harboured any legitimate expectation that he would be  allowed
         to remain in the UK indefinitely'" (paragraphs 77).

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

14. First, there is the question of the Appellant having arrived as  a  boy
    of little more than 14 years, with his  parents.   As  such,  there  is
    established case law to the effect that it is important to take account
    of this as a key fact, namely, that the Appellant arrived as  a  minor,
    when he had no choice about where he travelled or lived,  even  if  his
    arrival in this country was "precarious" in the circumstances.  It  was
    in these circumstances that he  developed  a  special  quality  to  the
    private life that he later had, culminating in the final years  of  his
    schooling.  It is important, therefore, to distinguish the  child  from
    the adult in the case of a foreign national arriving  independently  of
    his parents.  This particular quality  to  a  child  is  recognised  in
    European jurisprudence in the case of Maslov v.  Austria  [2009]  INLR.
    It has also been recognised domestically by the UK Supreme Court in the
    case of (Hesham Ali [2016]  UKSC  60),  where  the  Supreme  Court  (at
    paragraph 26) affirmed this as a matter of relevance  in  the  decision
    making process.

15. Second, there was the question of delay.   The  judge  was  faced  with
    reliance upon the House of Lords decision in EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL
    41, but concluded that "I do not give a great deal of weight  to  those
    delays".  The reference to the "delays" was a  reference  to  the  fact
    that the Appellant had become appeal  rights  exhausted  in  2006,  but
    continued to remain in this country.  What was overlooked by the  judge
    was the fact that the Appellant was reporting to the Authorities  on  a
    regular basis and crucially not engaging in  any  further  attempts  to
    prolong his stay in this country.  To that extent, the judge was  wrong
    to have stated that,

         "It is obvious that delays by the  Respondent  generally  arise  in
         part because non-British nationals do not accept judicial and  Home
         Office decisions but  instead  remain  in  the  UK  and  swamp  the
         Respondent's officers with  further  (unfounded)  leave  to  remain
         applications" (paragraph 69).

16. There was, of course, in this case no evidence at  all  that  the  Home
    Office was being swamped with further unfounded applications for  leave
    to remain by this Appellant.  Had this observation not  been  made,  it
    would have most likely have led the judge to take a different  view  of
    the Article 8 rights that the Appellant subsequently developed.




17. The judge goes on to consider these (at paragraph 74) when he  observes
    that,

         "I would agree that the Appellant seems to have 'made the  most  of
         what [he] found in the UK.  [He has] studied hard, made friends and
         [considers that he has] integrated to British  society'  (paragraph
         20 of his first  statement).   But  all  that  is  nowhere  near  a
         sufficient basis to establish a disproportionate breach of  Article
         8 here, (even taken cumulatively  with  the  other  points  in  the
         Appellant's favour).  Apart from anything else,  countless  foreign
         students make the most of opportunities in the UK every year"  (see
         paragraph 74).

18. Instead, because the judge misconstrued the situation (at paragraph 69)
    in observing  that  "it  is  obvious  that  delays  by  the  Respondent
    genuinely arise in part because non-British  nationals  do  not  accept
    judicial and Home Office decisions", when that was not  the  case,  the
    correct approach to a delay occasioned by the Secretary of State in not
    removing a person, which in this case amounted to a significant  period
    of six years, was not adopted by the judge, because during those years,
    the Appellant

         "... was in his formative years, and developed  Article  8  rights,
         which he otherwise would not have done, and it is  this  particular
         aspect that would have imbued him "with a sense  of  impermanence",
         leaving  aside  any  question  of  whether  he  had  a   legitimate
         expectation to do so in the first place."

19. The plain fact here is that the Appellant did not have any  outstanding
    applications for the period of approximately six  years  from  2008  to
    2014.  In 2006, when he became appeal rights exhausted, he was a  minor
    of 17 years of age.  He was not in a position to take the  decision  to
    leave this country.  He could not be criticised for remaining here.  It
    was for the Secretary of State to remove him.  Yet he did  not  do  so.
    He failed then to comply with the terms of a  consent  order  that  was
    made on 10th July  2015  to  reconsider  the  Appellant's  case.   This
    delayed matters for a further two years, during which time  again,  the
    Appellant developed further Article 8 rights.  The plain fact  here  is
    that the delay to the most part is attributable to the inaction of  the
    Respondent.



Remaking the Decision

20. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  Both Mr Bates and Miss Wilkins agreed at the end of the hearing
    that there would not be any oral evidence were I to make a  finding  of
    an error of law, and it was a matter of record that  since  the  appeal
    before the judge below, the Appellant's younger sister, [RR],  had  now
    also been granted leave to remain on  the  basis  of  Article  8.   The
    Appellant's mother, had an outstanding appeal before  the  Tribunal  on
    26th July 2019.  These were matters of  record,  and  this  aside,  the
    evidence remained as it was before the judge below.  This being  so,  I
    have remade the decision in the circumstances as they stand before me.

21. I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have set  out  above.
    Had the judge  approached  the  matter  from  the  perspective  of  the
    Appellant having entered the UK as  a  minor,  during  which  time  the
    special quality to the private life that he  developed,  especially  in
    the final years of his schooling, was distinct to what would have  been
    the case had he entered as an adult, and bearing in mind that when  the
    Appellant became appeal rights exhausted in 2006,  he  had  no  further
    applications to make which unnecessarily prolonged  his  stay  in  this
    country, it is plain that the time that the Appellant has  remained  in
    this country after 2006 is entirely to  be  put  at  the  Secretary  of
    State's door.

22. Indeed, a consent order of 10th July 2015 to reconsider the Appellant's
    case was not followed through for another two years,  adding  yet  more
    time to the Appellant's stay in this country.  This being the case, the
    conclusion by the judge below that, "but all that  is  nowhere  near  a
    sufficient basis to establish a disproportionate breach  of  Article  8
    here (even taken cumulatively with the other points in the  Appellant's
    favour)", cannot stand, and I conclude that  taken  cumulatively,  what
    one has is indeed a sufficient basis to  establish  a  disproportionate
    breach of the Appellant's Article 8 rights, who has now been in the  UK
    for all of his adult life, and for half the period of his life as such,
    having entered as a child of no more than 14.

23. The Appellant has no family left  in  Guyana.   His  grandparents  have
    passed away.  He has not lived in Guyana since he was 15 years of  age.
    He has never worked there.  Both of these facts mean that he will  find
    it very difficult to find housing and employment in order to  meet  his
    essential living needs.  He has very limited private  life  in  Guyana.
    Against the background of these findings, I conclude that  there  would
    be "very significant obstacles" to his being  able  to  integrate  into
    life in Guyana (see Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, where it was  explained
    that the concept of "'integration'  is  one  which  'is  a  broad  one'
    because it is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or sustain
    life while living in the other country".

24. Instead, the term "integration" is one which

         "Calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there" (paragraph 14).

25. I am not satisfied that this would  indeed  be  the  Appellant's  happy
    circumstance if he was to  be  returned  to  Guyana.   This  appeal  is
    allowed for the reasons I have given above.

Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I remake the decision.  I allow  this
    appeal.

27. No anonymity direction is made.

28. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019

