
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04031/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On the 1st August 2019 On the 16th August 2019

Before:
                           DISTRICT JUDGE MCGINTY
                  SITTING AS A DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

Between:
                              MR JARNAIL SINGH
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O'Brien (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS
   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Hussain promulgated on the 9th April 2019, following  a
      hearing at Hatton Cross on the 18th March 2019.


   2. The Appellant is a national of India who was born  on  the  15th  June
      1959.  He had initially come to the United Kingdom on a  visitor  visa
      valid from the 15th July 2002 until the 15th January 2003. On the  4th
      March 2003 he made an application for Leave to Remain on the basis  of
      work permit employment, which was refused with a right  to  appeal  on
      the 1st October 2003.  On the 11th November 2016 he was served with  a
      notice to an overstayer.  On  the  28th  July  2017  he  submitted  an
      application for Leave to Remain on the basis of his family and private
      life in the United Kingdom,  and  in  particular  in  respect  of  his
      claimed relationship with [RD].  However, that application was refused
      by the Secretary of State on the 24th January  2018,  and  his  appeal
      against that refusal was heard by Judge Hussain at Hatton Cross on the
      18th March 2019.


   3.  In refusing the Appellant's appeal, Judge Hussain found  that  whilst
      the Appellant and  his  claimed  partner  were  members  of  the  same
      household, there did not exist between them  a  relationship  akin  to
      marriage.  At the appeal hearing before Judge Hussain,  there  was  no
      Home Office Presenting Officer present, and therefore the Judge  asked
      the Appellant's barrister  to  explore  with  the  Appellant  and  his
      claimed partner Miss [D] issues concerning their life  together.   The
      Judge heard from the Appellant and Miss [D], and also heard from  Miss
      [D]'s son, [PD] who adopted his statement as evidence-in-chief and was
      not asked any questions.  In rejecting the Appellant's account that he
      was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with Miss [D], the  Judge
      noted that in two statements previously written by the  Appellant  and
      sponsor in support of a former application to the Home Office, it  was
      said that they had known each other for "many years, and we have  been
      good friends" when in fact the Appellant's claimed partner was in fact
      his sister-in-law, following his  brother's  marriage  in  1977.   The
      Judge found that concealment of that issue  was  not  consistent  with
      someone who was being truthful.  The Judge accepted that the Appellant
      had been a member of the sponsor's  household  since  arrival  in  the
      country in 2002, but found that  there  were  inconsistencies  in  the
      evidence of the Appellant and the  sponsor  regarding  when  they  had
      first been intimate, and when they had last been  intimate.   He  also
      concluded that it was highly unlikely that the Appellant  and  sponsor
      would have formed a relationship in March 2015 so soon after the death
      of the Appellant's brother in January 2015.


   4. The Judge further noted that the Appellant's partner's  son  had  also
      given evidence at paragraph 28 and adopted as a witness statement  and
      found that whereas the witness claimed that the  Appellant  lived  the
      majority of time in the house of his father, the Appellant's  evidence
      indicated that he had lived there all the time he  had  been  in  this
      country.  The Judge stated in paragraph 6, "the  witness  claimed  'my
      mum was living on her own until the  Appellant  moved  in  with  her'.
      This is contrary to the impression given to  me  which  was  that  the
      Appellant and his partner were living in the  same  household  through
      the former's residence in this country" and that  "no  impression  was
      given by  the  Appellant  or  his  sponsor  that  the  Appellant  from
      somewhere else moved in to live with his partner when  he  formed  his
      relationship in March 2015".

   5. The Judge  therefore  concluded  that  this  was  not  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship and that the Appellant's  Human  Rights  would
      not be breached as a result of the Respondent's decision.

   6. The Appellant seeks to rely upon six grounds of  appeal,  as  set  out
      within the documentation of the 6th June 2019.  Although permission to
      appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  on
      the 10th May 2019, who considered that the grounds amounted to no more
      than disagreement with the  findings  of  the  Judge,  permission  was
      granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman on the 26th June  2019.
      She found that the  grounds  did  raise  arguable  errors  of  law  in
      particular the first two grounds which related to the alleged  failure
      of the Judge to take into  consideration  the  clinical  psychological
      report of Dr Rozmin Halari given its potentially corroborative  impact
      on the assessment of whether  or  not  the  relationship  between  the
      Appellant and the sponsor was genuine and  subsisting.   However,  she
      found that all grounds could be argued.


   7. I am most grateful to Mr Melvin for having produced a  Rule  24  Reply
      dated the 31st July 2019, in which it was accepted that the First-tier
      Tribunal had not considered the  psychological  report  and  not  made
      findings on that report, but argued that even if as  claimed  the  61-
      year-old sponsor was practically  and  emotionally  reliant  upon  the
      Appellant that did not show that  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
      subsisting.  It is said that the expert relied upon what  the  sponsor
      had told her at the meeting in January 2019 on which  the  report  was
      based and that for an expert to compile a  report  of  that  kind  the
      expert would be expected to individually assess  both  parties  to  be
      able to form any opinion as  to  whether  or  not  they  were  happily
      married or in a very closing loving relationship.  It is  argued  that
      the Judge has fully assessed the core issue as to whether or not there
      was a genuine and subsisting relationship and the Judge considered the
      evidence given by the Appellant and the sponsor and the sponsor's  son
      and made findings that were open to him and that the Judge found  that
      the sponsor's evidence was evasive and inconsistent and that the son's
      evidence was contrary to the sponsor's evidence of when  she  and  the
      Appellant began living together.


   8. Within the first ground of  appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  Judge's
      findings that the Appellant and sponsor were  not  in  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship was flawed by reason of the Judge's failure to
      consider the expert psychological report from Dr Halari dated the 14th
      January 2019, which is said to make  clear  both  the  extent  of  the
      sponsor's practical reliance upon the Appellant but also the extent of
      her emotional and psychological reliance upon him and the  devastating
      potential consequences for her mental health including  potentially  a
      second suicide attempt should she be separated from him.  It is argued
      that the Appellant's Skeleton Argument  had  raised  that  the  report
      showed the depth of their relationship and the Judge had not addressed
      that report at all in his reasoning. It is argued that at paragraph 26
      Judge Hussain had  said  that  there  was  "an  absence  of  objective
      evidence to support" the  claimed  relationship  suggesting  that  the
      report had been disregarded in its entirety.

   9.  In the second ground of appeal it is argued that Dr Halari  had  also
      mentioned at paragraph 9 of the report that the sponsor had said  that
      she had been diagnosed with a  migraine  condition  and  that  it  was
      affecting her memory and that the sponsor's own statement had referred
      to  ongoing  specialist  medical  attention  being  required  for  her
      migraines.  It is argued that the Judge had not taken account  of  the
      concerns raised regarding  the  sponsor's  memory  and  the  potential
      impact upon her evidence when considering any alleged  inconsistencies
      in the evidence.

  10.  In the third ground of appeal it is argued that the  Judge's  overall
      approach was flawed and unfair and that whereas at the start the Judge
      had indicated that  he  required  to  hear  some  evidence  about  the
      parties' living arrangements and relationship  he  had  not  otherwise
      raised particular concerns and  had  not  put  to  the  Appellant  and
      sponsor concerns regarding exactly when their relationship  had  begun
      or when they had last been intimate.  It was further argued  that  the
      Judge had not put to the Appellant and sponsor the matters  raised  by
      the Judge at paragraph 25 of  the  decision  when  finding  there  was
      deliberate concealment of the fact that the Appellant  had  known  his
      sponsor since his brother's marriage in 1977 and that his partner  was
      in fact his sister-in-law, as this  had  not  been  mentioned  in  two
      previous statements wherein it was simply said  that  they  had  known
      each other "for many years and we have  been  good  friends".   It  is
      argued that there is no contradiction between those than being brother
      and sister-in-law  and  being  good  friends  and  if  the  Judge  was
      concerned about that matter he could and should have  raised  it  with
      them at the hearing.  It is further argued that it was unfair for  the
      Judge had  not  raised  concerns  regarding  the  relationship  having
      started so soon after the death of the Appellant's brother in  January
      2015.


  11.  In the fourth ground of appeal it is argued that the Judge  erred  in
      his assessment of the evidence of [PD] at paragraph  28  when  stating
      that "whereas this  witness  claimed  that  the  Appellant  lived  the
      majority of time in the house of his father, the Appellant's  evidence
      indicated that he had lived there all of the time he has been in  this
      country".  It is argued that the evidence  of  the  two  witnesses  is
      entirely consistent.

  12. In the fifth ground of appeal it is argued that the Judge should  have
      taken account of the evidence given by both the Appellant and sponsor,
      with the sponsor's evidence being given after the Appellant's evidence
      and without her hearing the same,  that  sexual  intercourse  was  not
      frequent between them because of the sponsor's ill health.

  13. It was further argued in ground 6 that the Judge having  rejected  the
      genuineness of the relationship failed to go on  to  consider  whether
      there was nevertheless a family life  or  strong  private  life  as  a
      result of the sponsor's reliance upon the Appellant as demonstrated by
      the report of Dr Halari before reaching a final conclusion on  Article
      8.


   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality
  14. As stated within the Rule  24  Reply,  the  Secretary  of  State  does
      concede that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  not  considered  the
      psychological report within his Judgment and not made findings on that
      report.  However, it is argued that there was  no  material  error  in
      that regard as evidence showing that the sponsor was  practically  and
      emotionally reliant on the Appellant did not show the relationship was
      genuine and subsisting and that in order for the expert to  have  gone
      beyond that and considered  whether  or  not  they  were  in  a  happy
      marriage or in a close loving relationship and  friendship  as  stated
      within that  report,  the  expert  should  have  spoken  to  both  the
      Appellant and the sponsor, not simply the sponsor.  Mr  Melvin  argued
      that no weight whatsoever should  be  attached  to  the  psychological
      report.


  15. Although Mr Melvin sought to argue that  in  writing  the  report,  Dr
      Halari purely based his diagnosis  and  findings  on  the  information
      provided to him  by  the  sponsor,  the  medical  expert  was  clearly
      exercising his own professional judgement in assessing the information
      provided, and was not simply repeating it.   In  addition,  Dr  Halari
      noted how the sponsor had started to shake, cry and  become  a  little
      hysterical when talking about the possibility of the Appellant leaving
      the United Kingdom and how she had said that she would not be able  to
      cope without Mr Singh.  She described him as being "part of my life, I
      don't want to be without him.  There is no life for me".  He noted how
      she said she would become suicidal and depressed if he were  to  leave
      and how she had been very distressed, tearful  and  upset  during  the
      assessment.  Dr Halari opined that Miss [D] was displaying  signs  and
      symptoms of low mood which may progress into  clinical  depression  if
      she had separated from Mr Singh, as that  would  cause  disruption  to
      their family unit.  He opined that were the Appellant to  be  removed,
      this would lead to a further deterioration in the sponsor's mental and
      physical health and that there would be a significant deterioration in
      her mental state if Mr Singh were to be removed.


  16. Although as Mr Melvin stated, the expert may have gone beyond his role
      in finding that Miss [D]  and  Mr  Singh  had  a  very  close,  loving
      relationship and friendship at paragraph 72, and that they were  in  a
      genuine relationship at paragraph 62,  that  does  not  mean  that  no
      weight at all should have been attached to the  psychological  report.
      The expert was able to opine as to  the  sponsor's  current  state  of
      health mentally, and the effect upon her of  the  Appellant's  removal
      from the United Kingdom, and her level of dependency upon  him.   This
      is evidence which is relevant to the question as to whether or not the
      couple are in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  or,  where  they
      simply live in the same household.  This is evidence which should have
      been considered by the Judge in the round, when  deciding  whether  or
      not the Appellant and his sponsor were in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship or simply living in the same  household.   It  cannot  be
      said that the decision would necessarily be the same, had that  report
      been taken  into  account  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  when
      considering that issue.  I do therefore find that there is a  material
      error of law in the failure of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  take
      account of the evidence of Dr Halari.


  17. Although in ground 2 it is argued that the sponsor had told Dr  Halari
      that her memory was being affected by her migraines, it is argued that
      the Judge  failed  to  consider  that  issue,  when  the  question  of
      migraines had also been raised in her statement, I  am  not  satisfied
      that that ground reveals a material error of law, given  that  it  was
      simply her assertion to Dr Halari that that was the case  and  in  the
      absence of any other supporting medical evidence.

  18. In respect of the other grounds of appeal the Judge has to  put  every
      inconsistency between the sponsor and the Appellant in respect of when
      they first started having a sexual relationship  and  when  they  were
      last intimate to them.  The evidence in that regard  was  inconsistent
      and the Judge was entitled to rely upon that inconsistency.   However,
      in respect of the Judge's finding that there had been  concealment  in
      respect of the two statements written by the Appellant and the sponsor
      in respect of a previous application to the Home Office when they said
      that they had known each other for "many years, and we have been  good
      friends" when in fact they were brother  and  sister-in-law  following
      the Appellant's brother's marriage in 1977, has  not  been  adequately
      explained.  The fact that two people  are  brother  and  sister-in-law
      does not prevent them from being good friends.

  19. Further, if the Judge was to  find  that  the  true  nature  of  their
      previous relationship in terms of being brother and sister-in-law  had
      been  concealed,  by  means  of  that  previous  statement,  that  was
      something that should in fairness have been put to  them  when  giving
      their evidence by the Judge, as  that  was  not  an  issue  previously
      raised by the Secretary of State.  Further, as it  was  not  a  matter
      previously raised, the Judge should have in fairness raised  with  the
      Appellant and sponsor his concerns that they would not have  formed  a
      relationship so soon after the death of  the  Appellant's  brother  in
      January 2015.


  20. I am further not satisfied that the Judge's findings at  paragraph  28
      regarding the purported inconsistency between [PD] and  the  Appellant
      regarding how long the Appellant  had  lived  at  [52  -  ]  has  been
      adequately explained.  Although the  Judge  stated  that  Mr  [D]  had
      claimed the Appellant had lived the majority of time in the house with
      his father, the Appellant's evidence indicates that he had lived there
      all the time he had  been  in  this  country,  and  that  further  the
      evidence in the statement of Mr [D] that "my mum was living on her own
      until the Appellant moved in with her" was contrary to the  impression
      given to him that the Appellant and his partner  were  living  in  the
      same household throughout the former's residence in this  country.  In
      the Appellant's statement dated the 10th March 2019 at paragraph 6 the
      Appellant has stated

           "6.   ... I have lived with my late brother and [R] at [52  -  ]
           for most of the 15 years that I have been in the UK.  However  I
           only started living with [R] in  her  home  as  her  partner  in
           February/March 2015.


           7.    For short periods of time I have lived with my sister [RT]
           and for short periods of time I have lived at the Sikh Temple as
           I am a practising devout Sikh.  I spent most of my time  in  the
           UK volunteering at the local Sikh Temple and giving to the local
           community and practising my faith".



  21. In his witness statement [PD] at paragraph 5 had stated that "over the
      last 15 years I confirm  my  uncle  has  lived  at  this  address  the
      majority of time he has been in the  UK".   He  also  stated  in  that
      paragraph that he knew that his uncle also  had  stayed  at  the  Sikh
      Temple for several days or weeks and that on other occasions had  been
      living with [RT].  Although at paragraph 2 Mr [D] had said that "I can
      confirm that in February or March Jarnail moved in  to  live  with  my
      mother" and at paragraph 6 said that "my mum was  living  on  her  own
      until the Appellant moved in with her", no questions were asked of  Mr
      [D] to clarify the position as set out within paragraphs 2, 5 and 6 of
      his statement.


  22. The Appellant's own witness statement seems to  me  to  be  consistent
      with what was said at paragraph 5 of Mr [D]'s statement,  and  it  has
      not been explained by the First-tier Tribunal Judge as to how  or  why
      he formed the impression that the Appellant's own evidence was that he
      and his partner had been living in the same household  throughout  the
      Appellant's residence in the United Kingdom.


  23. Grounds 5 and 6, in light of my findings above, do not add anything to
      the appeal, and do not reveal material errors of law.


  24. However, for the reasons set out above, I do find that the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge did  materially  err  in  not  taking  account  of  the
      psychological report when considering the question as  to  whether  or
      not the Appellant and the sponsor were in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship, and  that  the  Judge  further  procedurally  erred,  in
      failing to put several of his concerns to the parties,  that  had  not
      previously been raised as a reason for  refusal,  in  respect  of  the
      question of  them  having  "concealed"  the  nature  of  the  previous
      relationship as brother and sister-in-law, and as to the  rapidity  of
      the development of their  relationship  following  the  death  of  the
      Appellant's brother in January 2015.


  25. Given that in my judgement, the assessment of the credibility  of  the
      Appellant and the sponsor needs to be undertaken afresh, I  find  that
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain be  set  aside,  and
      the case be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  re-hearing.
      Although Mr O'Brien asked me to preserve the finding at  paragraph  30
      that if the Judge accepted that the Appellant and sponsor  were  in  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship,  he  would  have  concluded  that
      there were insurmountable obstacles to them being able to enjoy family
      life outside of the United Kingdom having  regard  to  the  voluminous
      evidence including an expert report on the current situation in India,
      although there was no  cross-appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  as
      indicated by Mr O'Brien, there has not been a  full  consideration  of
      those issues by the Judge, as they were not actually findings made  by
      him.

  26. In my judgement it is important that as credibility is an  issue,  all
      of  the  evidence  should  be  considered,  and  all  of  the  matters
      reassessed.  I therefore do not preserve any findings of fact, and the
      matter is to be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  re-
      hearing de novo before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
      tier Tribunal Judge M.B. Hussain.

Notice of Decision
The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside in its  entirety.   The  matter  is  remitted
back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing  before  any  First-tier
Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge M.B. Hussain.

No application was made for anonymity before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor
before me, and therefore I make no Order in respect of anonymity.


Signed

D J McGinty
District Judge McGinty
sitting as a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge     Dated 1st August 2019

