
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04583/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 September 2019               |On 27 September 2019               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan


                                   Between

                                 Richard [Y]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipi, Counsel instructed by Devine solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who entered the UK in August 2011
       as a visitor and thereafter overstayed.

    2. In 2016 he married his  wife,  a  citizen  of  Ghana  with  permanent
       residence in the UK as a former spouse of an EEA national  exercising
       Treaty rights.

    3. In January 2018 the appellant was convicted on 2 counts of possession
       of an ID card with intent and sentenced to 10 months imprisonment.

    4. The appellant and his wife are undertaking IVF therapy in respect  of
       which they have already incurred considerable expense.

    5. On 10 December 2018 the appellant applied for leave to remain in  the
       UK on the basis of his private and family life. The  application  was
       refused on suitability grounds under S-LTR 1.6 (presence  in  the  UK
       not conducive to the public good) and because it was  not  considered
       that there were insurmountable obstacles to his relationship with his
       wife continuing in Ghana.

    6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  where  his  appeal
       was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Fitzgibbon  QC.  In  a
       decision promulgated on 24 May 2019, the judge dismissed the  appeal.
       The appellant is now appealing against that decision.



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    7. The judge considered the circumstances  surrounding  the  appellant's
       conviction in 2018 and reached the conclusion  that  the  appellant's
       offence was not sufficiently serious for him to fall  foul  of  S-LTR
       1.6.

    8. The judge then considered paragraph EX.1 of appendix FM  and  whether
       there would be insurmountable obstacles to family life with his  wife
       continuing in Ghana. The judge stated at paragraph 24 of the decision
       that it was difficult to identify any features of the  evidence  that
       could amount to very significant obstacles. He then, at paragraphs 25
       and 26, considered the implications of relocation to  Ghana  for  the
       IVF treatment. The judge  recognised  that  the  treatment  might  be
       affected, and that  this  might  cause  stress  and  anguish  to  the
       appellant  and  his  wife,  but  found  that  the  availability   and
       affordability of IVF treatment was not capable of generating a  human
       rights claim.

    9. The judge stated  that  there  were  not  additional  or  exceptional
       features of the case  that  called  for  an  assessment  outside  the
       immigration rules.

   10. Under a subheading "Chickwamba", the judge stated  that  it  was  not
       inevitable that the appellant would succeed in  a  fresh  application
       for leave to enter as a spouse made from abroad  and  concluded  that
       this was not a good reason for allowing the appeal.



Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

   11. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge erred by failing  to  have
       regard to the significant expenditure the appellant and his wife have
       already incurred in respect of IVF treatment and that the  investment
       would be lost if required to relocate to Ghana.  It  is  also  argued
       that the availability or affordability of IVF treatment is capable of
       engaging human rights claims and that the judge fell  into  error  by
       declining to assess the claim outside the immigration  rules.  It  is
       also argued that the judge applied the wrong test when he stated that
       it was not "inevitable" that an application from outside the UK would
       succeed.

   12. Mr Pipi submitted that the judge failed to  take  into  consideration
       the cost of IVF and that the evidence showed that the  appellant  and
       his wife would not be able to afford IVF treatment in Ghana  as  they
       would no longer be able to earn sufficient income or  obtain  credit.
       He argued that this was a clear interference with their family life.

   13. He also argued  that  the  judge  fell  into  error  by  looking  for
       exceptional features to consider a freestanding article  8  analysis.
       He argued that if a proper analysis had been carried  out  the  judge
       would  have  taken  into  consideration  factors  weighing   in   the
       appellant's  favour,  such  as  his  ability  to  speak  English  and
       financial independence.

   14. Mr Pipi drew my attention to a document that had  been  submitted  to
       the First-tier Tribunal setting out how the appellant would  be  able
       to meet the financial requirements under appendix FM were he to  make
       an application for entry clearance as a spouse from  Ghana.  He  also
       took me  to  the  numerous  financial  documents  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal bundle and argued that the judge erred by failing to  engage
       with this evidence which, on the  balance  of  probabilities,  showed
       that the appellant would be successful  when  making  an  application
       from abroad.

   15. Ms Everett characterised the grounds as a mere disagreement. She  did
       not  accept  that  the  evidence  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal
       established that the appellant would succeed in an  application  from
       abroad. She noted that even if the evidence established he would meet
       the  financial  requirements,  that  did  not  mean  all  the   other
       requirements would necessarily be satisfied.



Analysis

   16. EX.2 of appendix FM defines insurmountable obstacles as:

           'very significant difficulties  which  would  be  faced  by  the
           applicant or their  partner  in  continuing  their  family  life
           together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would
           entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or   their
           partner.'

   17. The judge was undoubtedly entitled to find that  this  threshold  was
       not met. Losing the opportunity to undertake IVF  treatment,  however
       upsetting this might be to the appellant and  his  wife,  is  not  an
       obstacle to the relationship continuing. Nor is the  fact  that  they
       will have wasted a considerable amount of  money.  The  inability  to
       access IVF treatment, although clearly of  great  importance  to  the
       appellant  and  his  wife,  does  not  create  an  obstacle  to   the
       relationship continuing. It was therefore open to the judge  to  find
       that the appellant's evidence about IVF, taken at  its  highest,  was
       not sufficient to meet the test under EX.1(b) as defined in EX.2.

   18. That said, I agree with Mr Pipi that the judge  fell  into  error  by
       failing to consider article 8 ECHR  outside  the  immigration  rules.
       This  was  an  appeal  under  section  84(1)(c)  of  the  Nationality
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) and it  was  necessary
       for the judge to consider article 8 ECHR,  not  merely  appendix  FM.
       However, the error was not material because, on any legitimate  view,
       this was not an appeal that could succeed under article 8.

   19. The appellant's relationship with his wife was established at a  time
       when he was in the UK unlawfully and therefore  it  could  only  have
       been given little weight (section 117B (4) and (5) of the 2002  Act).
       Mr Pipi argued that, following Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for  the
       Home Department [2018] UKSC 58, more  than  little  weight  could  be
       given to the relationship. In Rhuppiah it was  explained  that  where
       there are particularly strong features of a private life  the  little
       weight provision can be overridden. However, there are no features of
       the appellant's private or family  life  that  have  been  identified
       which could  conceivably  warrant  a  departure  from  the  statutory
       provision that the relationship must be given little weight.

   20. In an article 8 proportionality assessment, on the  appellant's  side
       of the scales, weight would be given to the significance to  him  and
       his wife of the IVF treatment and the length of time he has spent  in
       the UK. But these factors could not, on any legitimate view, outweigh
       the public interest in removal given that the appellant  has  engaged
       in criminal activity and his relationship with his wife (which is the
       cornerstone of his private and family life claim) can only  be  given
       little weight. Therefore,  although  I  accept  the  judge  erred  by
       confining his analysis of article 8 to the  insurmountable  obstacles
       test in appendix FM, I am satisfied that this error was not material.



   21. I now turn to consider paragraph 30 of the decision where, under  the
       subheading Chikwamba, the judge stated that it was  "not  inevitable"
       that the appellant would succeed in a fresh application from abroad.

   22. In order to substantiate that he would succeed in an application from
       outside the UK the appellant submitted multiple bank statements and a
       detailed table  showing  how  the  bank  statements  demonstrate  the
       financial requirements under appendix FM would be satisfied. There is
       no consideration of this evidence in the decision. I  agree  with  Mr
       Pipi that the failure to engage with  this  evidence  amounts  to  an
       error of law.

       I consider the error material because, given the  disruption  to  the
       IVF treatment temporary separation would cause, I accept that if  the
       appellant would, on the  balance  of  probabilities,  be  certain  to
       succeed in an application for  entry  clearance  as  a  partner  from
       Ghana, expecting  him  to  leave  the  UK  solely  to  make  such  an
       application would not be in the public interest. As stated in Agyarko
       and Ikuga, R (on the applications of) v Secretary of  State  for  the
       Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 at 51:

           "51.  Whether the applicant is  in  the  UK  unlawfully,  or  is
           entitled to remain in the  UK  only  temporarily,  however,  the
           significance of this consideration depends on what  the  outcome
           of immigration control might otherwise be. For  example,  if  an
           applicant would otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign
           criminal, then the weight of the public interest in his  or  her
           removal will generally be very considerable. If,  on  the  other
           hand, an applicant - even if residing in the UK unlawfully - was
           otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter, at least  if  an
           application were made from outside the UK, then there  might  be
           no  public  interest  in  his  or  her  removal.  The  point  is
           illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba v  Secretary  of  State
           for the Home Department." (Emphasis added)

   23. At the hearing, I stated that I intended to remake  the  decision  in
       respect of whether, on the balance of  probabilities,  the  appellant
       was certain to be granted leave to enter if he  made  an  application
       for entry clearance as a spouse from Ghana.  Both  parties  confirmed
       they had no objection to me remaking the decision on the basis of the
       documents before the First-tier Tribunal.

   24. I have considered the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
       accept that it is likely  the  appellant  would  meet  the  financial
       requirements for entry clearance as  a  partner  under  appendix  FM.
       However,  meeting  the  financial  requirements  is  not  enough;  an
       appellant must also not fall for refusal under any of the grounds  in
       section S - EC: suitability - entry clearance. S-EC  1.4(c)  provides
       that:

           'the exclusion of the applicant from the UK is conducive to  the
           public good because they have been convicted of an  offence  for
           which they have been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of
           less than 12 months, unless a period of 5 years has passed since
           the end of the sentence'

   25.  Given  the  appellant's  conviction  and  sentence  to   10   months
       imprisonment in January 2018, it is likely the appellant  would  fall
       for refusal under S-EC 1.4(c). Therefore, this is not a case where it
       can be said the  appellant  would  succeed  in  an  application  from
       outside the UK.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands apart from the assessment  of
whether the appellant would succeed in an application  for  entry  clearance
from abroad at paragraph 30 of the decision, which is set  aside.  I  remake
that part of the decision and reach the same conclusion  as  the  First-tier
Tribunal. I therefore dismiss the appeal.


|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge        |Dated:   26 September 2019         |
|Sheridan                           |                                   |

