
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04677/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21 April 2017                         |On 5 May 2017                       |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DUPTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                       MRS THAVAYOGANAYAKI KURUMOORTHY
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge SJ Clarke sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  24
    August 2016) dismissing her appeal on the papers against  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant her  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds on account of  her  suffering  from  dementia  and
    being dependent upon her nephew and niece in the  United  Kingdom,  who
    are  British  citizens.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that the appellant  requires
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date  of  birth  is  18
    December 1939.  She came to the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  on  12
    October 2014.  The day  before  the  expiry  of  her  visit  visa,  her
    solicitors applied on 9 April 2015 on her behalf for leave to remain on
    the ground that there had been a serious change in her health condition
    since she had been in the UK, with the consequence that she was  unable
    to return to Sri Lanka.

 3. In their covering letter, they said  that  the  appellant  had  a  good
    immigration record.  She had been  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  three
    previous visits, and had always returned back to Sri  Lanka.   Although
    she became a widow in August 2013, she was  an  independent  lady  with
    sufficient funds and accommodation in Sri  Lanka  provided  by  her  UK
    sponsors, and she had had no medical concerns before coming to the  UK.



 4. A few months after  her  arrival,  her  family  noticed  that  she  had
    developed confusion and memory loss, with loss of balance when walking.
     She had resorted to using a wheelchair as she was unable to walk.  She
    had been unable to do anything herself, and had become  dependent  upon
    her family.  A private GP and a  consultant  had  examined  her  a  few
    times, and she had undergone a brain scan. In a letter dated 8 December
    2014 a Consultant Neurologist  had  diagnosed  her  as  suffering  from
    incurable dementia.

 5. She had developed a private and family life in the UK with  her  nephew
    and other family members here.  She had no children of  her  own.   Her
    only family was in the UK.  Her removal from  the  UK  would  adversely
    impact on her health in a manner that would  significantly  affect  her
    moral and physical integrity, and it would be a violation of her rights
    under Article 8.

 6. On 13 August 2015 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for  refusing
    the appellant's application.  She did not qualify for leave  to  remain
    on family or private life grounds under the Rules.   Consideration  had
    been given as to whether there were exceptional  circumstances  in  her
    case.  Her  condition  was  not  life-threatening.   According  to  the
    Country Information of Sri  Lanka,  treatment  for  her  condition  was
    available there.  Although it was accepted that the healthcare  systems
    in the United Kingdom and Sri Lanka were  unlikely  to  be  equivalent,
    this does not mean that her case is exceptional, and  so  she  was  not
    entitled to remain here.  Suitable medical treatment was available  for
    her in her country of origin.







The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant asked for her appeal to be dealt with on the papers.  The
    appellant's solicitors compiled a bundle of documents for the  hearing.
    This contained a witness statement  from  the  appellant's  nephew  and
    sponsor; a letter from Dr Arulnanthy; a letter from  Bart's  NHS  Trust
    dated 7 March 2016; a hospital Emergency Department  discharge  summary
    dated 23 January 2016; and  a  further  hospital  Emergency  Department
    discharge summary dated 11 July 2016.

 8. In his subsequent  decision,  the  Judge  noted  the  contents  of  the
    nephew's witness statement which set out the difficulties  which  faced
    the appellant.  She was immobile,  required  24-hour  care,  could  not
    carry out any basic functions for herself, suffered dementia,  and  did
    not recognise familiar faces.  He stated  that  she  had  no  close  or
    distant relatives in Sri Lanka, being now a childless widow. The  Judge
    commented: "However, the nephew did not provide any supporting evidence
    of this."

 9. At paragraphs [9] and [10], the Judge referred to the letter  dated  18
    August 2916 from  the  private  GP,  Dr  Arulnanthy,  and  the  medical
    evidence emanating from the hospital.  The Judge observed in  paragraph
    [10} that she had been discharged from hospital on two  occasions,  and
    there was no record of  any  follow-up  following  her  discharge  from
    hospital in July 2016. He continued:

        [12]  The GP writes that the appellant is not fit to fly, but  there
             is no basis for  why  he  reaches  this  assessment  and  what
             diagnostic tools are used to conclude that she could not  fly.
             There is no mention from a consultant as to her not being able
             to fly, or being fit to fly.  Accordingly, in the  absence  of
             any properly reasoned conclusion by the GP, or any  supporting
             conclusion by the Hospital Consultant, I do not find that  the
             appellant is not fit to fly.

        [13]  I ask myself whether  there  are  any  exceptional  compelling
             circumstances in this case.  However, the  appellant  presents
             as an elderly woman who has medical needs, but it is not shown
             that she would not be able to access medical treatment in  Sri
             Lanka.  She suffers dementia, and her nephew writes  that  she
             had  difficulty   recognising   faces.    There   is   nothing
             exceptional  in  her  state,  she  has  no   imminent   death.
             Accordingly, I do not go on and consider Article 8 outside the
             Rules.

        [14]  Section 117B must be considered by me.  The appellant  appears
             not to speak English, and has had reason  to  access  the  NHS
             services ... The appellant submitted  an  in-time  application
             for leave to enter.  The appellant only had  precarious  leave
             in the UK, and the public interest lies in her removal.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

10. The application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    settled by the appellant's solicitors.  It is only necessary  to  refer
    to Ground 4, as this is the only ground upon which  the  appellant  was
    granted permission.  Ground 4 was that the Judge applied the wrong test
    in paragraph [13] of his decision, namely that the  appellant  was  not
    facing imminent death.  This was not the correct proportionality  test.
    The appellant would face a degrading  treatment,  due  to  her  medical
    condition, on return to Sri Lanka.  The appellant qualified  under  the
    Immigration Rules on dependency grounds.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

11. On 18 January 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  granted  permission
    to appeal as it was arguable that the Tribunal materially erred in  law
    by - (i) failing to have regard to the medical reports of Dr Arulnanthy
    (dated 18 August 2016) and Dr Shantikumar (dated 11 October 2016); (ii)
    failing to consider whether it is proportionate (and thus in breach  of
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention) to require the  appellant  to
    regularise her immigration status as an adult dependant relative  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules in the light of - a) the  evidence
    referred to in (i) (above) concerning her current state of  health  and
    consequent inability to perform everyday tasks without  personal  care,
    and b) the fact that leave to remain on this basis can only be  granted
    if the initial application is made from "outside the United Kingdom" (a
    combined  effect  of  ECDR.1.1  and  E-ILRDR.1.2);  (iii)  applying  an
    inappropriate test of imminent death to the  question  of  whether  the
    potential operation of Article 8 (as opposed to Article 3) of the Human
    Rights Convention is engaged.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

12. In advance of the hearing before me to determine whether  an  error  of
    law was made out, the appellant's solicitors wrote to the  Tribunal  on
    11 April 2017 to say that their client was not in a position to  attend
    Court due to her deteriorating medical condition.  They were  enclosing
    their letter to the HOPO with the  latest  medical  report.   They  had
    instructions for the hearing to proceed on the papers  only,  and  they
    relied on the grounds upon which permission was granted.

13. The report annexed to their letter was a  report  from  Dr  Shantikumar
    dated 28 March 2017.  He said  that  his  patient  was  suffering  from
    severe dementia which had continued to deteriorate since he had written
    his last report in October 2016.

14. Mr Melvin, for the Secretary of State, submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    given adequate reasons for dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  on  the
    evidence that was before him.

Discussion

15. The first arguable error identified by Judge Kelly  is  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failing to have regard  to  two  medical  reports.   The
    medical report of Dr Shantikumar dated 11 October 2016  is  not  before
    me, and it was also not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  This  is
    because Dr Shantikumar's report was not generated until a  month  after
    the Judge's decision was promulgated.  As the report was not relied  on
    by way of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, it was not an error on the
    part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge not to take it into account.

16. The report of Dr Arulnanthy dated 18 August 2016 was before the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, but the point taken in the permission  application
    is a curious one.  It is argued that the Judge ignored this report, and
    instead only gave weight to an earlier medical report  of  March  2016.
    The Judge clearly did not ignore Dr Arulnanthy's report  of  18  August
    2016, as he specifically comments on the report in paragraphs  [9]  and
    [12], noting that it is the most recent medical report.

17. The real issue is whether it was open to the Judge not  to  accept  the
    assessment by the GP that the appellant was not fit to fly.  I consider
    that it was open to the Judge to make  this  finding  for  the  reasons
    which he gave. This is underlined by the fact that efforts  have  since
    been made to provide more cogent medical evidence for  the  proposition
    that the  appellant  is  unfit  to  fly.   In  his  latest  report,  Dr
    Shantikumar says as follows:  "She is not fit to sit,  stand,  transfer
    or walk, even with assistance. This would deem her unfit for a  journey
    of any duration, and any form of transport that requires her to sit up.
     Her inability to communicate would further complicate the issue.   Due
    to her generalised frailty, she would be at very high risk, if required
    to take a flight."

18. Dr Shantikumar indicates that his earlier report of October 2016 was to
    the same effect, except that the appellant's condition has deteriorated
    even further since October 2016.  Of particular significance is that Dr
    Shantikumar says that the appellant has completely  lost  any  residual
    sitting balance.  In contrast, Dr Arulnanthy did not say  this  in  his
    report. So it was reasonable for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to infer
    that the appellant would be able to sit on a seat in the aircraft,  and
    that she could be moved in and out of the aircraft on a wheelchair.

19. The eligibility requirements for entry clearance as an adult  dependant
    relative  set  out  in  Section  E-ECDR  of  Appendix  FM  include  the
    following:

         2.4  The applicant  ...  must  as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or
            disability require long term personal care to perform  everyday
            tasks.

         2.5  The applicant ... must be unable, even with the practical  and
            financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level  of
            care in the country where they are living, because - a)  it  is
            not available and there is no person in that  country  who  can
            reasonably provide it; or b) it is not affordable.

20. It was not part of the appellant's evidence that the requirements of E-
    ECDR.2.5 were met.  If they  had  been  met,  it  is  likely  that  the
    appellant's solicitors would have applied for  leave  to  remain  under
    Appendix FM, while at the same time inviting the Home Office  to  waive
    the requirement of the appellant returning to Sri Lanka to  seek  entry
    clearance in this  capacity  -  on  the  ground  that  her  health  had
    significantly deteriorated since her arrival in the UK.

21. Since it was not, and is not, the appellant's case that she  meets  the
    criteria for a grant of entry clearance as an adult dependant relative,
    the Judge did not err in law in not asking himself whether it would  be
    disproportionate to require the appellant to return  to  Sri  Lanka  in
    order to apply for entry clearance in this capacity.

22. It is a relevant  consideration  that  the  appellant  was  not  facing
    imminent death, following N -v- UK.  Nonetheless,  in  suggesting  that
    this resolved the question of whether Article 8 was engaged, the  Judge
    was clearly in error.  However,  I  do  not  consider  this  error  was
    material, as the Judge went on to address  proportionality.   Moreover,
    in the light of his sustainable findings of fact on the limited medical
    evidence that was before him, no viable  case  on  health  grounds  was
    disclosed under Article 8 ECHR any more than  it  was  disclosed  under
    Article 3 ECHR.  Not only was  there  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
    sponsor could not pay for the appellant to have round-the-clock care in
    Sri Lanka, but the Judge also commented on the  absence  of  supporting
    evidence for the claim that the appellant had no family in Sri Lanka.

23. For the above reasons, I find that no error of law is made  out.   This
    is probably academic, as I do not consider that there  is  a  realistic
    prospect of the Home Office seeking to remove the appellant.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date 4 May 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge















