


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/04125/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 February 2019                 |On 18th February 2019              |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MUHAMMAD SALMAN
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant      Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A A Khan (counsel) instructed by Thompson & Co,
                    solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J   Robertson,   promulgated   on
19/11/2018 which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 11/09/1983 and is a national  of  Pakistan.  On
23/01/2018 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application  for
leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge J Robertson ("the Judge") allowed the appeal against the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 15/12/2018 Judge  O'Callaghan
granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      2. The grounds assert that  the  Judge  erred  by  making  a  material
      misdirection in absolving the appellant of any blame in  discrepancies
      arising as to his tax return. Reliance is placed upon the recent Upper
      Tribunal decision of R(on the application of Khan) v SSHD [2018]  UKUT
      00384(IAC), which though promulgated on 3 May 2018 was  only  reported
      on 16 November 2018.


      3. The decision in Khan was reported after the oral  hearing  in  this
      matter but prior to the  promulgation  of  the  Judge's  decision  and
      reasons.


      4. Though I have sympathy for the Judge in the circumstances  of  this
      appeal, it is arguable that the Judge has not followed the  steps  now
      identified as applicable by the Upper Tribunal in Khan.  Whether  such
      arguable failings are material on the particular facts of this  appeal
      will be a matter upon which the Upper Tribunal will no doubt expect to
      be addressed by the respondent.

The Hearing

5. For the respondent, Mr Duffy moved the grounds  of  appeal.  He  told  me
that the Judge placed too  much  weight  on  the  fact  that  HMRC  did  not
penalise the appellant for incorrect tax returns. He argued that  HMRC  will
not impose penalties on people who  report  themselves  for  an  understated
income tax return and then offer payment. He told me that the question  that
the  Judge  should  have  determined  is  whether  or  not   the   appellant
deliberately underreported earnings to HMRC for financial benefit.  He  told
me that the Judge's findings are unsafe and relied on Khan [2018]  UKUT  384
(IAC). He asked me to set the decision aside and  remit  this  case  to  the
First-tier Tribunal.

6. (a) For the appellant, Mr Khan took  me  through  the  decision  in  Khan
[2018] UKUT 384 (IAC) and told me that  the  Judge's  decision  follows  the
guidance given there. He told me that between [10] and [12] of  the  Judge's
decision the Judge follows the guidance in Khan [2018] UKUT  384  (IAC).  He
told me that even though the Judge does not  refer  to  Khan,  the  guidance
given there is clearly followed. He told me that the Secretary of  State  is
simply trying to relitigate this case. He asked me  to  dismiss  the  appeal
and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. The Judge's decision was promulgated on 19 November  2018.  The  decision
in Khan [2018] UKUT 384 (IAC) was promulgated on 3 May 2018,  but  was  only
reported on 16 November 2018.

8. R (on the application  of  Khan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Dishonesty, tax return,  paragraph  322(5))  [2018]  UKUT  00384
(IAC) held that (1) Where there has been a  significant  difference  between
the income claimed in a previous application for leave  to  remain  and  the
income declared to HMRC, the Secretary of  State  is  entitled  to  draw  an
inference that the Applicant has been deceitful or dishonest  and  therefore
he should be refused ILR within paragraph 322(5) of the  Immigration  Rules.
Such an inference could be expected where there is no plausible  explanation
for the discrepancy; (2) Where an Applicant has presented evidence  to  show
that, despite the prima facie inference, he was not in  fact  dishonest  but
only  careless,  then  the  Secretary  of  State  must  decide  whether  the
explanation and evidence is sufficient, in her view, to displace  the  prima
facie inference of deceit/dishonesty; (3) In approaching  that  fact-finding
task, the Secretary of  State  should  remind  herself  that,  although  the
standard of proof is the "balance of probability", a finding that  a  person
has been deceitful and dishonest in relation to his  tax  affairs  with  the
consequence that he is denied settlement in this country is a  very  serious
finding with serious consequences; (4) For an Applicant simply to blame  his
or her accountant for an "error" in relation to the  historical  tax  return
will not be the end of the matter, given that the accountant will or  should
have asked the tax payer to confirm that the  return  was  accurate  and  to
have signed the tax return. Furthermore, the Applicant will  have  known  of
his or her earnings and will have expected  to  pay  tax  thereon.   If  the
Applicant does not take  steps  within  a  reasonable  time  to  remedy  the
situation, the Secretary of State may be  entitled  to  conclude  that  this
failure justifies a conclusion that there has  been  deceit  or  dishonesty;
(5) When considering whether or not the Applicant  is  dishonest  or  merely
careless the Secretary of  State  should  consider  the  following  matters,
inter alia, as well as the extent to which they are  evidenced  (as  opposed
to asserted):

      (i) Whether the  explanation  for  the  error  by  the  accountant  is
plausible;
      (ii) Whether the documentation which can  be  assumed  to  exist  (for
      example, correspondence between the Applicant and  his  accountant  at
      the time of the tax return) has been disclosed or there is a plausible
      explanation for why it is missing;
      (iii) Why the Applicant did not realise that an error  had  been  made
      because his liability  to  pay  tax  was  less  than  he  should  have
      expected;
      (iv) Whether, at any stage, the Applicant has taken  steps  to  remedy
      the situation and,  if  so,  when  those  steps  were  taken  and  the
      explanation for any significant delay.

9. At [9] the Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  changed  accountants.  The
appellant's new accountants completed a  five-year  review  in  2015,  which
disclosed errors in his income tax returns between 2011 and  2013.  At  [11]
the Judge finds that is not enough to blame the accountant,  but  says  that
she accepts the appellant's evidence. The Judge emphasises  that  HMRC  have
not imposed civil penalties.

10. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

11.  The degree of enquiry required by the guidance given in  headnote  four
in the rubric to Khan has not been followed. The Judge's findings cannot  be
reconciled with the guidance that blaming an accountant is not  the  end  of
the matter. Enquiry into the appellant's state  of  knowledge,  particularly
why the appellant believes that having earned  a  significant  income  their
liability to income tax is negligible, is missing from the decision.

12.  There are  differences  between  declared  income  and  actual  taxable
income which one might expect to be obvious to the  appellant.  The  Judge's
fact-finding exercise is incomplete because there is  no  enquiry  into  the
appellant's  state  of  knowledge  about  the  ability  to  repeatedly  earn
significant sums of money which do not  attract  liability  to  income  tax.
There is an absence of fact-finding about  the  timing  of  the  realisation
that accounting errors had been made. There is an  absence  of  fact-finding
about the figures provided to the accountants. There is an absence of  fact-
finding about who signed the tax returns.

13.  Because the  fact-finding  exercise  is  incomplete,  and  because  the
guidance given in Khan has not been followed, the  decision  is  tainted  by
material error of law. I set it aside. I consider whether I  can  substitute
my own decision. The material error of law in the  decision  relates  to  an
inadequacy of fact finding. I cannot substitute  my  own  decision.  Further
fact-finding exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

      (a)   the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that
      party's case to be put to and considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal;
      or


      (b)   the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
      necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is
      such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it  is
      appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

16. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Birmingham  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge J Robertson.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

18. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 19  November  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.





Signed
              Date 13 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle







