
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04920/2018
                                                               HU/06221/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2019                       |On 10 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mohammad Momtazul kabir
                            mst jannatul ferdous
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by City Heights
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Secretary of State against the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian  ("the  judge"),  promulgated  on  3
    October 2018, in which he allowed the appeals of Mr Kabir  ("the  first
    Claimant") and his wife, Mrs  Ferdous,  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 31 January 2018, which in turn had refused their human
    rights claims.

 2. The first Claimant has been in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  number  of
    years.  During this period, he had been granted successive  periods  of
    limited leave to remain.  By an application made on 22  September  2015
    he sought indefinite leave to  remain  under  paragraph  245CD  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules").  This application was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on the sole ground that  it  was  alleged  that  the
    first Claimant had used deception previously in his dealings  with  the
    Secretary  of  State  and/or  HMRC.    This   allegation   related   to
    discrepancies in stated earnings.

 3. Following this, on 18 January 2016, the  first  Claimant  made  another
    application for indefinite leave to remain  under  the  same  route  as
    before. On 8 September 2016, this  application  his  was  varied,  with
    leave now being sought under the ten years' continuous lawful residence
    route, pursuant to paragraph 276B of the Rules.

 4. In refusing the application, the Secretary of State concluded that  the
    first Claimant had not in fact had the requisite ten years'  continuous
    lawful residence, as his leave to  remain  had  expired  prior  to  him
    making the application on 18 January 2018. In  addition,  the  earnings
    discrepancies mentioned above were relied on once more and para  322(5)
    of the Rules was invoked against him.



The judge's decision

 5. At paragraphs 59-60 of his decision, the judge concluded that the first
    Claimant  had  accrued  the  necessary  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom and found that he  therefore  satisfied
    all the requirements of paragraph 276B of the Rules.

 6. For the purposes of my error of law decision, it is the conclusions  on
    the second issue which are of greatest significance.  Having considered
    what was clearly a good deal of  evidence  put  forward  by  the  first
    Claimant in respect of misconduct by accountants acting on  his  behalf
    in the past, the judge found that the discrepancies identified  by  the
    Secretary of State had not occurred as a result of  any  dishonesty  on
    the first Claimant's part, but out of  carelessness  only.   The  judge
    found all of the relevant evidence to be  reliable,  and  in  light  of
    these conclusions he found that paragraph 322(5) of the Rules  did  not
    apply.  The appeal was duly allowed on the basis of Article 8.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The Secretary of State  challenged  the  decision  in  respect  of  the
    judge's conclusion on the paragraph 322(5)  issue  only.   Nothing  was
    said about the ten years' continuous lawful residence issue.

 8. Permission to appeal having been refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the application was renewed, and permission granted.

 9. The matter then came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana who, by a
    decision promulgated on 2 April 2019,  concluded  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law and that the appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The first Claimant sought to challenge this decision by  way
    of an application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.   On
    receipt of the application for permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
    exercised her powers under rules 45 and 46 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and set the decision of Judge Chana  aside.



10. In this way the matter came back before me for a decision on  error  of
    law.



The hearing

11. At the hearing, Ms Everett made an application to amend  the  Secretary
    of State's grounds of appeal in order to include  a  challenge  to  the
    judge's conclusions on  the  ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence
    point, having regard to the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  Masum
    Ahmed  [2019]  EWCA  civ  1070.   Mr  Biggs  robustly   resisted   this
    application, submitting that the Secretary of State had had ample  time
    to seek to amend the grounds in advance of  the  hearing  and  that  an
    amendment at this stage would cause the first Claimant real  prejudice.



12. Rather than making  a  decision  on  this  application  immediately,  I
    considered it appropriate to first hear argument on  the  Secretary  of
    State's existing grounds of appeal relating to the judge's  conclusions
    on the paragraph 322(5) point.

13. Ms Everett relied on the  grounds.   She  submitted  that  the  judge's
    reference to the first Claimant being  "careless"  in  respect  of  the
    earning discrepancies was in the circumstances, inadequate.

14. Mr Biggs relied on the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  Balajigari
    [2019] WLR(D) 232 and referred me specifically  to  paragraph  42.   He
    submitted that the judge had found the first Claimant  to  be  credible
    and that was  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the  dishonesty  point.   He
    emphasised the fact that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  alleging
    perversity on the part of the judge and noted that the judge  had  been
    fully aware of the timing of the amendments made to the tax returns.



Error of law decision

15. I gave my decision orally, concluding that there are no material errors
    of law by the judge in respect of the paragraph 322(5) issue.

16. It is quite clear that the judge had proper regard to what was  clearly
    significant evidence put forward by the first Claimant.  It is apparent
    that  the  first  Claimant,  with   the   assistance   of   his   legal
    representatives,   had   provided   detailed   evidence   relating   to
    difficulties with previous accountants and as stated,  albeit  briefly,
    in paragraph 64, the judge had accepted that this evidence  was  wholly
    reliable.  It would be artificial to separate what the  judge  said  in
    paragraph 64 from the evidence set out previously.  It is clear that he
    had the relevant evidence well in mind.

17.  The  judge  expressly  used  the  term  "careless"  in  paragraph  64,
    concluding that this was not a case in which  the  first  Claimant  had
    been deceitful or fraudulent.   It  is  of  note  that  the  very  same
    expression is used by the Court of Appeal in paragraph 35 of Balajigari
    when it stated  in  terms  that  carelessness  was  not  sufficient  in
    paragraph 322(5) cases: dishonesty must be  shown.   Therefore,  whilst
    Balajigari post-dated the judge's decision, what is  said  there  lends
    support to the judge's conclusion. In short, the judge directed himself
    correctly.

18. Contrary to what is said in the grounds of appeal, it is manifestly the
    case that the judge considered  the  paragraph  322(5)  issue  and  the
    evidence pertaining thereto. There has  been  no  identifiable  reasons
    challenge, and perversity is expressly disavowed.  The  judge  believed
    the first Claimant and was entitled to do so. That was  sufficient  for
    the judge to reach the sustainable conclusion that the  first  Claimant
    had not been dishonest and that paragraph 322(5) did not apply.

19. At the conclusion  of  my  oral  error  of  law  decision,  Ms  Everett
    considered her position and formally withdrew her application to  amend
    the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal. In these  circumstances  it
    was of course unnecessary for me make any decision on this issue.

20. My error of law decision and Ms Everett's withdrawal of her application
    has the following  effects.  First,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands in its entirety. Second, the first Claimant  has  never
    acted dishonestly in respect of his  dealings  with  the  Secretary  of
    State and HMRC. Third, and following on from the preceding  point,  the
    basis upon which the first Claimant's 2015 application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain was refused has been shown to  be  erroneous.  In  this
    regard, there might appear to be an analogy with the solution canvassed
    by the Court of Appeal in the first  particular  of  paragraph  120  of
    Ahsan [2018] Imm AR 531 (in the context of the ETS issue):

         "120.    The starting-point is that it seems to me clear that if on
         a human rights appeal an appellant were found not to have  cheated,
         which inevitably means that the section 10 decision had been wrong,
         the Secretary of State would be obliged to deal  with  him  or  her
         thereafter so far as possible as if that error had not  been  made,
         i.e. as if their leave to remain had not  been  invalidated.  In  a
         straightforward case, for example, she  could  and  should  make  a
         fresh grant of leave to remain equivalent to that  which  had  been
         invalidated."

21. Whilst the question of the leave granted to the  first  Claimant  as  a
    result of my decision is a matter for the Secretary of State,  I  would
    expect that what I have said in the preceding paragraph is taken  fully
    into account.



Anonymity

22. No anonymity direction is made.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors of  law  and
it shall stand

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 8 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
