
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04112/2018
                                                               HU/04115/2018
                                                               HU/04119/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 March 2019                              |On 26 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    Y. H.
                                    H. Y.
                                    F. Y.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Turner. Counsel, direct access
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants, citizens of Pakistan were refused leave to remain on 25
January 2018. Their human rights appeals against that decision were heard,
and dismissed, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher, in a decision
promulgated on 16 July 2018. The Appellants' applications for permission to
appeal were granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott Baker on 16 October
2018, on two limbs, that the appeals should have been adjourned, and that
the decision under appeal was flawed by reason of the Respondent's failure
to follow his own policy. The Respondent opposed that grant by a Rule 24
response of 13 November 2018.

Before me, the Respondent's position was completely altered. Mr Diwnycz
conceded that there was a material error of law in the approach taken to
the appeals, because the decision under appeal could not be defended. The
hearings had proceeded without the attendance of any presenting officer,
and so the Judge was not made aware of the failure to follow policy. He was
unable to withdraw the decision under appeal immediately, although his
advice would be that this should now occur.

In the circumstances I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge
other than First tier Tribunal Judge Fisher, at the North Shields Hearing
Centre.

Notice of decision


 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them. This direction applies both to the Appellants  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 22 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

