
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04882/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated            |
|On 22 November 2018              |On 17 January 2019                        |
|                                 |                                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                         Mr VIPULKUMAR KANTILAL RANA
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jaquiss, Counsel, instructed by AY&J Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First  tier
    Tribunal Guring-Thapa dated 23 August 2018 in which the judge dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent  dated  9
    February 2018 refusing his human rights claim.

2     The appellant is a national of India. It is necessary in  this  appeal
    to set out the appellant's immigration history in  some  detail,  taken
    from the respondent's decision letter of  9  February  2018  and  other
    sources. He first entered the United Kingdom  on  1  August  2008  with
    entry clearance as a student, valid from that  date  to  31st  December
    2009.  He made an application for further leave to remain as a student,
    which was granted on 29 December 2009, valid until 19 December 2011. In
    his much later application for indefinite leave to remain  made  on  10
    July 2018, the appellant stated that since his arrival  in  the  UK  in
    2008, he had been absent only from 27 May 2011 to  27  August  2011,  a
    total of 92 days. [Bundle section B page 21].

3     The appellant's wife, TVR, appears to have entered the UK  on  30  May
    2009 as the appellant's dependent. It would  appear  that  TVR  herself
    obtained leave to remain under the points based scheme;  after  leaving
    the UK on 27 May 2011, the appellant re-entered the  UK  on  27  August
    2011 with entry clearance as a  Tier  1  dependent  partner,  i.e.  the
    dependent of TVR, valid to 6 May 2013. The appellant was later  granted
    further leave to remain as a Tier 1 dependent  partner  from  15  March
    2013 to 17 June 2017.

4     On 30 May 2017 the appellant made an application for indefinite  leave
    to remain as the dependent of a Tier 1 migrant. This is the application
    which resulted in the  decision  under  appeal.  However,  prior  to  a
    decision being taken on this  application,  the  appellant  varied  the
    settlement application to an application for leave to remain  on  human
    rights grounds outside the rules (see: (i)  covering  letter  dated  12
    October 2017 from AY& J Solicitors,  at  [C1-C5]  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle; (ii) date stamp of 16 October 2017  on  the  FLR(HRO)  form  at
    [A1], and (iii) the date of 8  November  2017  being  recorded  in  the
    decision letter of 9 February 2018 for the date of this variation). The
    rationale for that variation is not entirely clear but it does not need
    to be for present purposes.

5     In the decision of 9 February 2018, the respondent does  not  actually
    state what TVR's immigration status was.  The  respondent  specifically
    accepted that the application did not fall for refusal  on  grounds  of
    suitability  under  Section  S-LTR  of  Appendix   FM.   However,   the
    application was refused for the following reasons:

    (i)    the respondent was not satisfied on the evidence presented  that
         the appellant was TVR's 'partner' under GEN.1.2 (perhaps a somewhat
         surprising approach, given the immigration history of the appellant
         and his wife and the various grants of leave  to  enter  or  remain
         that they had been given in relation to one another);


    (ii)   EX.1 was  not  met,  because  of  (i)  above,  and  because  the
         appellant's children were not British nor  had  lived  continuously
         for at  least  the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of
         application;


    (iii)  under  para  276ADE(1),  (private  life),  there  were  no  very
         significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into India;


    (iv)   there were no circumstances outside the rules, under  Article  8
         ECHR, under which the respondent considered it appropriate to grant
         leave to remain to the appellant.

6     The appellant duly gave notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

7     However on 10 July 2018, the appellant  submitted  an  application  to
    the respondent for settlement under paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration
    Rules on the grounds of 10  years'  continuous  lawful  residence,  his
    leave  to  remain  having  being  statutorily   extended   under   s.3C
    Immigration Act 1971 during the currency of his appeal.

8     On 17 July 2018, the appellant made an application to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to vary his  grounds  of  appeal,  inviting  the  Tribunal  to
    consider the requirements of paragraph 276B.

9     When the matter was heard by  the  judge  at  the  Nottingham  Justice
    Centre on 24 July 2018, there was no attendance by the respondent.

10    In relation to the appellant's request that  the  judge  consider  the
    appellant's potential entitlement to leave to  remain  under  paragraph
    276B, the judge held as follows:

         "18.     The main thrust of Mr. Gajjar's submission  was  that  the
         removal of the appellant and his family is  disproportionate  under
         article 8 ECHR because the appellant meets the requirements for the
         grant of indefinite leave to remain under  paragraph  276B  of  the
         Immigration Rules. Therefore, this must be  treated  as  a  weighty
         factor in an assessment of proportionality under Article 8.


         19.      I asked Mr. Gajjar if this would appear to be a new matter
         to which the respondent need to consent. His response was that  the
         respondent  had  been  sent  the   bundle   and   the   appellant's
         representatives wrote to the respondent on 10/7/2018 attaching  the
         application for indefinite leave to remain based on the  completion
         of 10 years continuous lawful residence in the UK (B1 - B  40).  At
         B3, which is the extract from the respondent's guidance states that
         under sections 3C and 3D of the Immigration Act  1971,  it  is  not
         possible  to  submit  a  new  application  while   an   appeal   is
         outstanding. However, the applicant can submit further  grounds  to
         be considered appeal. The guidance is that the application for long
         residence must be avoided and refunded  the  fees.  The  respondent
         should then create a file or sub-file and send it to the Presenting
         Officer's Unit dealing with the appeal. Also, a letter must be sent
         to the applicant or their representative informing them that  their
         application has been linked with their outstanding you appeal.


         20.      I find that the issue of  whether  or  not  the  appellant
         meets the requirements of paragraph 276B cannot be considered by me
         as I would be the primary decision-maker. It is asserted  that  the
         appellant meets all  the  requirements  such  as  personal  history
         including character, conduct, associations and employment record. I
         find that I cannot be the primary fact  finder  in  assessing  such
         factors. Therefore, I cannot make  a  finding  that  the  appellant
         meets the requirements of paragraph 276B."

11    The judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the  proportionality  of  the
    respondent's decision to refuse the  appellant's  human  rights  claim.
    Notwithstanding that the respondent had not  been  satisfied  that  the
    appellant and his wife were partners as defined under appendix FM,  the
    judge accepted at [22]:

         "I accept that there is family life between the appellant  and  his
         family. They will be removed as a family unit. I  accept  that  the
         appellant and his family have established a limited private life in
         the UK."

12    The judge directed herself in law as to the  application  of  part  5A
    NIAA  2002,  considered  a  number  of   considerations   under   those
    provisions, and held at paragraph 35 as follows:

         "35.     I find that it is in the children's best interests  to  be
         with their parents and to return to India. It is not the case  that
         the family will be destitute upon their return. The  appellant  and
         his  wife  are   well-qualified   individuals   with   considerable
         employment and self-employment experience. I find  that  these  are
         skills and experience which can be utilized upon  their  return  to
         India. Both the appellant and his  wife  have  close  contact  with
         their family members in  India.  There  is  no  reason  why  family
         members in India cannot provide short-term support to the appellant
         and his family until such time as they  are  able  to  re-establish
         themselves in that country.


         36.       Looking  at  all  the  circumstances  and  balancing  the
         respective interests of the parties, I find that  the  decision  is
         proportionate."

13    The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  that  decision
    in grounds dated 31 August 2018, on grounds, in summary, that the judge
    had erred in law:

    (i)    in misdirecting herself in law by finding  that  she  could  not
         consider the long residence argument advanced by the appellant;


    (ii)   in failing to properly balance the appellant's elder  child  K's
         best interests with the public interest of removing the  appellant,
         as required by  Kaur  (children's  best  interests/public  interest
         interface) [2017] UKUT 14, and in failing to  have  regard  to  the
         fact that K was at a crucial stage in her education, and the  judge
         had failed to have regard to relevant guidance on this issue in  EV
         (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

14    On 18 October 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach issued  a  decision
    which on its face stated simply that 'Permission to appeal is granted'.
    Below that decision, under the heading 'reasons for decision', was  the
    following:

         "...


         3. The First tier Tribunal Judge raised the issue  of  whether  the
         appellant's reliance on long residence in the 276B was a new matter
         to which she needed consent from the respondent [19]. At  paragraph
         20 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  finds  that  she
         would be the primary decision-maker  if  she  considered  the  long
         residence grounds but she does not state whether she finds it to be
         a new matter or why she cannot consider it  in  the  light  of  the
         respondent's policy.


         4. The appellant also asserted that the First-tier Tribunal  failed
         to give sufficient weight to the circumstances of  the  appellant's
         daughter. The First tier Tribunal Judge  has  carefully  considered
         the family's  circumstances  including  those  of  the  appellant's
         daughter (who is not a qualifying child). Permission to  appeal  is
         not granted in respect of that ground.


         5. Permission to appeal is granted in respect of the long residence
         grounds only."

      Procedural issues, including the scope of the present appeal

15    In preparing to hear this appeal, I caused directions to be issued  to
    the parties on 20 November  2018.  In  fact,  my  proposed  directions,
    emailed to administration at Field House were not copied correctly into
    the directions actually issued. The directions actually issued were  as
    follows:

         "The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge hearing the forthcoming hearing on
         22.11.18 directs the parties to be prepared hearing to address  the
         Tribunal on the matters below:


         (i)      Was the grant  of  permission  to  appeal  dated  18.10.18
         compliant with the procedural requirements of  Rule  34(4)(b),  The
         Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber) Rules 2014, and of Ferrer (limited appeal  grounds;  Alvi)
         Philippines [2012] UKUT 304 (IAC)?


         (ii)     If not, what is the effect of such non-compliance?


         (iii)    Did the Appellant serve a statement of additional  grounds
         under s.120 NIAA 2002 in relation to his claim  that  he  satisfied
         the requirements of ILR on long residence grounds under  para  276B
         of the Immigration Rules?


         (iv)     If not, what is the effect of that?


         (v)      What is the application of para 37 of  Amirteymour  v  The
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 353, and
         para 67 of Patel & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2013] UKSC 72 on the present appeal?


         (vi)     Does the mere effluxion of further time since  the  appeal
         was brought, such that Appellant may potentially now  have  resided
         lawfully in the UK for a continuous period of  10  years,  and  may
         potentially have a claim under para 276B, to be considered  by  the
         First tier Tribunal?


         (viii)   In the event that the Upper Tribunal finds an error of law
         in the Judge's decision and sets  it  aside,  does  the  Respondent
         give, insofar as it is needed, consent for the  Upper  Tribunal  to
         consider the Appellant's claim under para 276B? If not, why not?

16    Para (vi) of my proposed directions was incorrectly  transcribed,  and
    para (vii) left out all together. They should have read:

         "(vi)    Does the mere effluxion of further time since  the  appeal
         was brought, such that Appellant may potentially now  have  resided
         lawfully in the UK for a continuous period of  10  years,  and  may
         potentially have a claim under para 276B, amount to a 'new  matter'
         under s.85(6), NIAA 2002?


         (vii)    Did the Respondent give consent for the Appellant's  claim
         under para 276B to be considered by the First tier Tribunal?"

17    Both parties had  received  the  directions  issued  by  the  Tribunal
    (albeit not quite in the form intended) and Ms. Jaquiss has provided  a
    supplementary skeleton argument addressing those issues.

18    In summary, Ms.  Jaquiss  argues  that  the  issuing  of  a  grant  of
    permission to appeal was  noncompliant  with  the  relevant  First-tier
    Tribunal Procedure Rule, as the Tribunal did not give  notification  to
    the appellant of the right to make a renewed application for permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

19     She  argued  however  that  there  was  no  material  effect  of  the
    noncompliance if I dealt with the matter in accordance with the case of
    Safi & Ors (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388  (IAC)  (13
    November 2018), and to treat the decision  as  granting  permission  to
    appeal on all grounds. Ms Jaquiss argued that Safi  was  authority  for
    the proposition that what was of greatest  importance  determining  the
    scope of an appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  was  the  terms  of  the
    decision granting permission to appeal, ordinarily at the  top  of  the
    decision. What was of lesser  importance  were  the  reasons  for  that
    decision, stated underneath.  She referred to the headnote:

         "(1)     It is essential for a judge who is granting permission  to
         appeal only on limited grounds to say so, in terms, in the  section
         of the standard  form  document  that  contains  the  decision,  as
         opposed to the reasons for the decision.


         (2)      It is likely to be only in very exceptional  circumstances
         that the Upper Tribunal will be persuaded to entertain a submission
         that a decision which, on its face,  grants  permission  to  appeal
         without express limitation is to be  construed  as  anything  other
         than a grant of permission on all of the grounds  accompanying  the
         application for permission, regardless of what might be said in the
         reasons for decision section of the document."

    and the following extracts:

         "35      ... As we have said, given  that  the  decision  to  grant
         permission was, on its face, unrestricted, the "reasons" section of
         the document would need to be unambiguous in  order  to  contradict
         that general grant.


         ...


         41.      Henceforth, it is  not  to  be  regarded  as  merely  good
         practice to do what is set out in paragraph  80  of  Rodriguez;  we
         regard it as essential for a judge who is granting permission  only
         on limited grounds to say so, in terms. The place to do  so  is  in
         the section of the document that contains the decision.


         42.      There is one point of detail in paragraph 80 with which we
         would  respectfully  disagree.  We  do  not  consider  that  it  is
         appropriate to state "Permission is granted, limited  as  hereafter
         set out", unless the limitation occurs specifically in the  section
         of the completed document which contains the decision,  as  opposed
         to the reasons for that decision; that is to say, in the first  and
         not the second section (see paragraph 27 above).


         43.      Thus, permission granted on limited grounds  should  state
         "Permission is granted, limited to grounds 1 and 4"  (as  the  case
         may be) or "Permission is granted on grounds 1,  2  and  3  but  is
         refused on grounds 4 and 5" (as the case may be).


         44.      The "reasons for decision" section is to be  construed  as
         just that; i.e. the reasons for the decision which  has  just  been
         made. The reasons for decision must not include any words that  are
         intended to form part of the decision. The reasons section  is  the
         place where the reasons for refusing permission,  either  generally
         or on particular grounds, should be stated, pursuant  to  the  duty
         imposed on the judge by rule 34(4)(a) of the 2014 Rules or, in  the
         case of the Upper Tribunal, rule 22(1) of the 2008 Rules.


         ...


         46.      Henceforth, it is likely to be only  in  very  exceptional
         circumstances  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  will  be  persuaded   to
         entertain a submission that a decision which, on its  face,  grants
         permission to appeal without express limitation is to be  construed
         as anything other than a grant of permission on all of the  grounds
         accompanying the application for permission. That is highly  likely
         to be so, regardless of  what  may  be  said  in  the  reasons  for
         decision section of the document.

20    For his part, Mr. Avery argued that the decision of  18  October  2018
    did not amount to a grant of permission on both the  first  and  second
    grounds. He submitted that the last sentence  of  paragraph  four,  and
    paragraph five of the decision made it unambiguous that permission  was
    being refused on the second ground.

21    At the hearing, I reserved my position as to what  the  scope  of  the
    appeal would be, but invited submissions from the parties  in  relation
    to both of the appellant's grounds of appeal, in the event that I ruled
    that both grounds could be argued.

22    I find that  the  decision  granting  permission  to  appeal  was  not
    compliant with  the  procedural  requirements  of  Rule  34(4)(b),  The
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014, which require that:

         "(4)     If the Tribunal refuses permission to appeal it must  send
         with the record of its decision-


             (a) a statement of its reasons for such refusal; and


             (b) notification of the right to make an  application  to  the
             Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal and  the  time  within
             which, and the manner  in  which,  such  application  must  be
             made."

    No notification was given in the  Tribunal's  letter  accompanying  the
    grant of permission informing the appellant that  he  could  renew  his
    application for permission to appal on any ground on  which  permission
    had been refused. I also find that, however unambiguous  the  terms  of
    the 'reasons for decision'  may  be,  permission  to  appeal  has  been
    granted generally, as is  apparent  from  the  terms  of  the  decision
    itself, which appears above the  reasons  for  the  decision.  I  apply
    paragraphs 40 to 46 of Safi. Insofar as there is any doubt in  my  mind
    that it is correct in law to treat permission as having been granted on
    both grounds, I bear in mind that the second ground relates to the best
    interests of a child, and where that ground appears to be arguable (and
    I so find, contrary to Judge Beach's view), I should, in the light both
    Safi and the best interests of the child, be slow to exclude that issue
    as part of the appellant's case before the Upper Tribunal.

    The substantive issues before this Tribunal

23    Ms. Jaquiss relied on her first ground  of  appeal  arguing  that  the
    judge had erred in law in failing to consider the appellant's potential
    entitlement to leave to remain under paragraph 276B of the  immigration
    rules. Her position, as set out in her skeleton argument on 21 November
    2018 paragraph 10 was that the no section 120 notice had been served on
    the appellant.

24    In fact, I disagree. The decision letter of 9 February  2018  provides
    at page 6 as follows:

         "If you think there are other reasons why we should  allow  you  to
         stay in the UK


         If you think you have a legitimate reason to remain in the  UK  you
         need to make an occasion to stay. Details of how to  apply  can  be
         found in the immigration pages of www.gov.uk.


         If you do not tell us as soon as you can of  any  reasons  why  you
         should be allowed to stay and you apply  later  you  may  lose  any
         right of appeal again a refusal of that application."

25    Section 120 10 IAA 2002 provides as follows:

         "120     Requirement to state additional  grounds  for  application
         etc


             ...


             (2) The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may serve
             a notice on P requiring P to provide a statement setting out-


                  (a)  P's reasons for wishing to enter  or  remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom,


                  (b)  any grounds on which P should be permitted  to  enter
                  or remain in the United Kingdom, and


                  (c)  any grounds on which P should not be removed from  or
                  required to leave the United Kingdom."

26    Section 96 NIAA 2002, which I do not set out, clearly makes  provision
    for the respondent to certify a claim for leave to remain as being non-
    appealable, on the grounds that it represents a claim which could  have
    been set out in a reply to a notice given under section 120.

27    I find that the notice set out in the refusal letter (para  24  above)
    represents a notice given under s.120 NIAA  2002.  The  caution  within
    that notice advises that a  delay  in  providing  further  grounds  may
    result in loss of appeal rights. This is clearly  a  reference  to  the
    interrelation between s.120 and s.96 NIAA 2002.

28    Further, I find that the  appellant's  application  of  10  July  2018
    represented a statement of additional grounds made to  the  respondent,
    in response to the respondent's  notice  under  s.120  NIAA  2002.  The
    application was made within the permitted 28 day period  prior  to  the
    asserted 10 year anniversary of lawful residence in the UK on 1  August
    2018 (the appellant having arrived on  1  August  2008).  He  made  the
    application as soon as he could.

29    It is correct in law, however, that the respondent is prohibited  from
    considering such a purported application, by provisions of  Section  3C
    Immigration act 1971; hence the terms of  the  respondent's  policy  as
    relied upon by the appellant, and as set out in the judge's decision at
    her paragraph 19.

30    Ms. Jaquiss' position was that the judge erred in law in stating  that
    she could  not  consider  the  appellant's  potential  satisfaction  of
    paragraph 276B, as that would require her to be the  primary  decision-
    maker, or because she would not be the primary fact finder in  relation
    to matters such as  character,  conduct  associations,  and  employment
    record.

31    Mr. Avery argued that the judge did not misdirect herself in law,  and
    made a finding, declining jurisdiction, which was sustainable.

    The appropriate approach

32    The law relevant to the judge's approach is  contained  in  s.85  NIAA
    2002 as amended by Immigration Act 2014:

         "85      Matters to be considered


         (1)      An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall  be
         treated by the Tribunal as including an appeal against any decision
         in respect of which the appellant  has  a  right  of  appeal  under
         section 82(1).


         (2)      If an appellant under  section  82(1)  makes  a  statement
         under section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised in
         the statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed
         in section 84 against the decision appealed against.


         (3)      Subsection (2) applies to a statement made  under  section
         120 whether the statement was made before or after the  appeal  was
         commenced.


         (4)      On an appeal under section 82(1) against  a  decision  the
         Tribunal may consider any matter which it thinks  relevant  to  the
         substance of the decision, including a  matter  arising  after  the
         date of the decision.


         (5)      But the Tribunal must not consider a new matter unless the
         Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.


         (6)      A matter is a "new matter" if-


             (a) it constitutes a ground of appeal  of  a  kind  listed  in
             section 84, and


             (b) the Secretary of State has not previously  considered  the
             matter in the context of-


                  (i) the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or


                  (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120."

33    The following authorities are also relevant:

    (i)    Amirteymour v The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2017] EWCA Civ 353 (10 May 2017)


             "37.      The object of a "one stop notice" under section  120
             is  to  make  the  applicant  bring  forward  his  whole  case
             regarding his claim to be allowed to remain in the UK so  that
             it can be considered in one go in all its aspects,  either  by
             the Secretary of State or (after the Secretary  of  State  has
             taken a relevant decision) by the Tribunal on an appeal  which
             is on foot in respect of such a decision. Where such a  notice
             is served, the  Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to  consider  all
             claims made in response to it, whether or not they were raised
             before the Secretary  of  State  at  the  time  she  made  the
             relevant decision against which the appeal is brought: see  AS
             (Afghanistan); Lamichhane v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department [2012] EWCA  Civ  260;  [2012]  1  WLR  3064,  [43]
             (Stanley Burnton LJ); and Patel v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2013] UKSC 72; [2014] AC 651  at  [44]  (Lord
             Carnwath JSC) and [67]-[70] (Lord Mance JSC)."


    (ii)   Patel & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]
         UKSC 72 (20 November 2013)


             "67.       When  section  85(2)  requires  the   Tribunal   to
             "consider any matter raised in  the  [section  120]  statement
             which constitutes a ground of  appeal  of  a  kind  listed  in
             section 84(1) against the decision appealed  against",  it  is
             therefore referring to new reasons or grounds  not  previously
             covered by the decision appealed  against.  So  long  as  they
             "[constitute] a ground of appeal of a kind listed  in  section
             84(1)", they can be relied upon. By inference, it can be said,
             it is or becomes legitimate to treat them  as  constituting  a
             ground of appeal, even though they were not raised  before  or
             decided by the Secretary of State."


    (iii)  Mahmud (S. 85 NIAA 2002 - 'new matters' : Iran) [2017] UKUT  488
         (IAC)


             "1. Whether something is or is not a 'new matter' goes to  the
             jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal and  the
             First-tier Tribunal must therefore determine  for  itself  the
             issue.


             2.  A 'new matter' is a matter which constitutes a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84, as required by  section
             85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting  a  ground  of  appeal
             means that it must contain  a  matter  which  could  raise  or
             establish a listed ground of appeal.  A matter is the  factual
             substance of a claim.  A ground of appeal is the  legal  basis
             on which the facts in any given matter could form the basis of
             a challenge to the decision under appeal.


             3.  In practice, a new matter is a factual  matrix  which  has
             not previously been considered by the Secretary  of  State  in
             the context of the decision in section 82(1)  or  a  statement
             made by the appellant under section 120.   This  requires  the
             matter to be factually distinct from that previously raised by
             an appellant, as opposed to further or better evidence  of  an
             existing  matter.   The  assessment  will   always   be   fact
             sensitive."


    (iv)   Quaidoo (new matter: procedure/process)  Ghana  [2018]  UKUT  87
         (IAC)


             "1. If, at a hearing, the Tribunal is satisfied that a  matter
             which an appellant wishes to raise is a new matter,  which  by
             reason of section 85(5) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002, the Tribunal  may  not  consider  unless  the
             Secretary of State has given consent, and, in pursuance of the
             Secretary of State's Guidance, her representative applies  for
             an adjournment for further time to consider  whether  to  give
             such consent, then it will generally be appropriate  to  grant
             such an adjournment, rather than proceed without consideration
             of the new matter.


             2.  If  an  appellant  considers  that  the  decision  of  the
             respondent not to consent to the consideration of a new matter
             is unlawful, either by reference to the respondent's  guidance
             or otherwise, the appropriate remedy is a challenge by way  of
             judicial review."

34    I find that  the  judge,  in  refusing  to  consider  the  appellant's
    potential satisfaction of 276B, erred  in  law  by  failing  to  direct
    herself in the appropriate manner.

35    Where, as here, an  appellant  has  made  a  statement  of  additional
    grounds following service of a notice to him  under  s.120  NIAA  2002,
    there is clearly nothing, applying Amirteymour  and  Patel,  preventing
    the First tier Tribunal from considering potential arguments under  the
    immigration rules that have  not  previously  been  considered  by  the
    respondent (unless  the  matter  is  a  'new  matter').  Therefore,  in
    appearing to direct herself in law that she was unable to consider  the
    appellant's application for leave to remain on long  residence  grounds
    on the basis that he would  be  the  primary  fact  finder,  the  judge
    misdirected herself in law.

36    The judge  might  have  had  a  sustainable  reason  for  refusing  to
    consider the appellant's satisfaction of the rules on  long  residence,
    if this was in fact a 'new matter', and the respondent  had  not  given
    consent for that new matter to be considered.

37    However, the judge does not in fact make any finding as to whether  or
    not the 276B issue was a 'new matter' as  defined  under  s.85(6)  NIAA
    2002. The judge does not therefore direct herself in law  appropriately
    as to whether or not she had jurisdiction to entertain such arguments.

38    I note here, for the avoidance of doubt, that although  the  appellant
    would only, taking his case at face value,  have  passed  the  10  year
    anniversary of his entry to the UK on 1 August  2018  (i.e.  after  the
    date of hearing before the judge on 24 July 2018), this would not  have
    entitled the judge (had she done so) to find that the appellant had not
    met the requirements of  paragraph  276B  of  the  rules,  because  the
    decision itself  was  signed  by  the  judge  on  21  August  2018  and
    promulgated on 23 August 2018, i.e. after the relevant  date,  and  the
    date  of  hearing  itself  would  not,  in  those  circumstances,  have
    prevented the judge from considering  the  276B  point  or  would  have
    required her to dismiss it on its merits.

39    I am of view the judge's misdirection in law is  a  sufficient  reason
    to set aside her decision. There  is  a  lack  of  clarity  within  the
    judge's decision as to whether or not the appellant's  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain amounted to a new matter, such that I cannot
    confidently predict what decision the judge would have  made,  had  she
    directed herself in law appropriately.  The question  is  not  straight
    forward. For example, whereas in Mahmud at [31] the Tribunal was of the
    view that the birth of a child since the respondent  had  considered  a
    human rights application would be likely to amount to a new matter, the
    fact of a pre-existing couple getting married may not.

40    In the present case, the only matter which would be said  to  be  new,
    was the passage of time,  from  the  appellant  not  yet  having  lived
    lawfully in the UK for 10 years, to him having done so. No marriage  or
    even the birth of a child occurred. Merely the  passage  of  time.  The
    judge may well, I find, have found that the matter was not  'new',  had
    she directed herself appropriately in law.

41    In fact, it is not necessary, in remaking  the  decision,  for  me  to
    come to any concluded view as to whether the passage of time,  and  the
    appellants potential satisfaction of para 276B of the rules  represents
    a 'new matter', for the following reason.

42    At  the  hearing  before  me,  I  was  provided  with  a  letter  from
    respondent  dated  6  November  2018  addressed  to   the   appellant's
    solicitors, stating as follows:

         "I write regarding  the  completed  application  form  your  client
         submitted for consideration to the home office on 10 July 2018  for
         leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  10  years  continuous  lawful
         residence.


         Your  client  already  found  an  outstanding  appeal  against  the
         Secretary of State's decision to refuse your  client's  application
         for leave to remain outside the rules. Your  client  is  restricted
         from making a fresh application  whilst  your  client's  appeal  is
         outstanding in accordance with section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act
         1971 (as substituted by Section 118 of the Nationality, Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002).


         Your client may apply to the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  to
         have your client's case for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  10
         years continuous lawful residence to be treated as a  variation  of
         your client's  grounds  of  appeal.  To  this  end,  your  client's
         documents have been retained in the Home Office file as they may be
         considered as part of your client's existing appeal.


         Arrangements have been made to refund the fee submitted  with  this
         application."

43    Although Mr Avery denied that this was  the  case,  I  find  that  the
    respondent's letter  of  6  November  2018  represents  the  giving  of
    consent, should  it  be  needed,  for  the  Tribunal  to  consider  the
    appellant's potential entitlement to leave to remain on long  residence
    grounds under para 276B of the rules. There is no objection within  the
    letter to the  Tribunal  considering  the  application  and  supporting
    evidence, and indeed, the letter states that the material in support of
    the application 'may be considered as part of  your  client's  existing
    appeal'.

44    The appellant had done everything he needed to do to bring the  matter
    to the attention of the First tier Tribunal - the Judge  had  sight  of
    the respondent's s.120 notice, a copy of the appellant's  statement  of
    additional grounds in response to  that  notice  (the  application  for
    leave to remain on long residence grounds), and the Tribunal  had  been
    requested by the appellant to consider the  same.  This  is  clearly  a
    case, taking into account the guidance at paragraph 37 of  Amirteymour,
    where the Tribunal (whether First tier or Upper)  should,  having  been
    given consent by the respondent, insofar  as  it  was  needed  at  all,
    consider the 276B point.

45    I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Judge.

46    I was invited by Ms. Jaquiss to  re-decide  the  appeal,  taking  into
    account the appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain, and
    all the material submitted in  support  of  that.  Although  Mr.  Avery
    stated that he did not hold all of  those  papers,  his  attention  was
    drawn to the most relevant  documents,  and  he  did  not  request  any
    additional time to consider the full application.

47    For his part, Mr. Avery  objected  to  the  Tribunal  considering  the
    appellant's potential satisfaction of paragraph  276B  on  the  grounds
    that no assessment had been undertaken by the respondent as to  whether
    the appellant had met the requirement under para 276B(ii), that:

         "having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why  it
         would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to remain
         on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:


             (a) age; and


             (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and


             (c)   personal   history,   including   character,    conduct,
             associations and employment record; and


             (d) domestic circumstances; and


             (e) compassionate circumstances; and


             (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; ..."

48    I reject Mr. Avery's submissions  in  that  regard  for  two  reasons.
    Firstly, to prevent the Tribunal from considering whether the appellant
    meets the requirements of 276B(ii) on the grounds that  the  respondent
    has not yet done so would be contrary to  the  purpose  and  effect  of
    s.120 NIAA  2002.  The  respondent  elected  voluntarily  to  give  the
    appellant a notice  under  s.120,  and  the  appellant  has  taken  the
    opportunity to to make a statement of additional grounds in reply.  The
    relevant authorities,  discussed  above,  indicate  that  the  Tribunal
    (subject to the new matter issue) has jurisdiction to consider  matters
    raised in a statement of additional grounds.

49    Secondly, I find that the respondent has in any event already  carried
    out an exercise when making the decision 9 February 2018, which is  not
    materially different to the exercise contemplated under  276B(ii).  The
    respondent found, in that decision, that  the  appellant's  application
    did not fall for refusal on grounds of suitability under section  S-LTR
    of Appendix FM. That provision contains the following mandatory  ground
    for refusal:

         "S-LTR.1.6. The  presence  of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
         conducive to the  public  good  because  their  conduct  (including
         convictions which do  not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to
         1.5.),  character,  associations,  or  other   reasons,   make   it
         undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK."

50    Further, requirements for indefinite leave to  remain  under  Appendix
    FM contains the following mandatory ground for refusal  at  Section  S-
    ILR: Suitability for indefinite leave to remain:

         "S-ILR.1.8. The  presence  of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
         conducive to the  public  good  because  their  conduct  (including
         convictions which do  not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-ILR.1.3.  to
         1.6.),  character,  associations,  or  other   reasons,   make   it
         undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK."

51    It seems to me that in para 276B(ii), the  matters  likely  to  be  of
    greatest concern to the respondent when considering whether there  were
    any  public  interest  considerations  making  it  undesirable  for  an
    applicant to be given indefinite leave to remain would be those set out
    at  (ii)(c),  being  the  applicant's   personal   history,   including
    character, conduct, associations and employment record. There may  well
    be public interest considerations militating against the grant  of  ILR
    to a person whose character, conduct and  associations  suggested  that
    they are part of a criminal gang, even if not having been convicted  of
    an offence.  However, the respondent had no complaints, in finding that
    he did not fall for refusal under S-LTR.1.6 for reason of his  conduct,
    character or associations.

52    Although it is apparent that 276B(ii)  specifies  a  number  of  other
    considerations, other than character, conduct and  associations,  which
    may be relevant when considering whether there were any public interest
    reasons making it undesirable for him to be given indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the ground  of  long  residence,  including  the  applicant's
    employment record, it is to be noted both S-LTR.1.6 and S-ILR.1.8  (the
    latter being relevant to ILR under Appendix  FM) direct to the decision
    maker to consider not only conduct,  character  and  associations,  but
    also 'other reasons' making it undesirable to allow them to  remain  in
    the UK. I find that 'other reasons' is  a  term  sufficiently  wide  to
    encompass all the other specified issues  set  out  at  276B(ii)(a)-(f)
    which are not set out in terms within S-LTR.1.6 or S-ILR.1.8.

53    And yet in the present decision  the  respondent  did  not  raise  any
    reason  at  all,  when  considering  S-LR.1.6,  to  suggest  that   the
    appellant's presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good.

54    I find, having given both parties the opportunity to make  substantive
    submission on  the  appellant's  satisfaction  of  paragraph  276B,  as
    follows:

         (i)(a)   the appellant has had at least 10 years continuous  lawful
         residence  in  the  United  Kingdom;  the  appellant's  immigration
         history is set out in respondent's decision letter,  and  Mr  Avery
         was unable to draw my attention to  any  evidence  suggesting  that
         that summary, and the appellant's assertion that he had been absent
         from the UK for only 92 days in total in the  last  10  years,  was
         incorrect;


         (ii)     having regard to the public interest there are no  reasons
         why it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to
         remain on the ground of long residence, considering the matters set
         out at 276B(ii)(a)-(f), and finding that if there were any  matters
         of public interest, these would have been mentioned in the decision
         letter of 9 February 2018; no  such  matters  are  raised;  in  any
         event, in relation to the appellant's employment  record, the judge
         noted at [16] that since October 2011  the  appellant  has  been  a
         manager at Primark and was earning �30,000 pounds per year;


         (iii)    the applicant does not fall for refusal under the  general
         grounds for refusal; the respondent has not raised any such grounds
         in the decision letter or in submissions;


         iv)      the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge of the
         English language and sufficient knowledge about life in the  United
         Kingdom,  in  accordance   with   Appendix   KoLL;   the   relevant
         certificates are in the appellant's bundle and have been seen by Mr
         Avery;


         (v)      the applicant is not be in the UK in breach of immigration
         laws. He is lawfully  present  with  leave  to  remain  under  s.3C
         Immigration Act 1971.

55    The appellant has been present in United Kingdom for  over  10  years.
    He asserts that he has a private and  family  life  United  Kingdom.  I
    agree with the judge that he has a family life in the UK. I  also  find
    that the appellant has a private life in the UK, as  a  result  of  his
    long residence, employment record, and his  ownership  of  property  (a
    house- which was accepted by the respondent in the decision letter).

56    I find that the refusal of  the  human  rights  claim  amounts  to  an
    interference with that private life.

57    I take into account of the considerations in s.117B NIAA 2002:

    (1)    The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest. The public would, I anticipate, be  interested  to
         be reassured that persons who actually meet the immigration  rules,
         as here, should be granted leave to remain under them.


    (2)    The appellant speaks English.


    (3)    The appellant is financially independent.


    (4)    The appellant has not been present unlawfully.


    (5)    Applying Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2018] UKSC 58, para 44 ("... everyone who, not being a UK citizen,
         is present in the UK and who has leave to reside here other than to
         do so indefinitely has a  precarious  immigration  status  for  the
         purposes of section 117B(5)", the appellant's  immigration  status,
         although continuous and lawful, has been 'precarious',  and  little
         weight should be given to it. However, as per The President in Kaur
         (children's best interests / public interest interface) [2017] UKUT
         14 (IAC), "The "little weight" provisions in Part 5A  of  the  2002
         Act do not  entail  an  absolute,  rigid  measurement  or  concept;
         "little  weight"  involves  a  spectrum  which,  within  its  self-
         contained boundaries, will result in the measurement of the quantum
         of weight considered appropriate in the fact sensitive  context  of
         every case."


         Taking a fact sensitive-approach to the present case, it is  to  be
         noted that the appellant's 10 years lawful residence is the  period
         of time required, under Immigration Rules approved  by  Parliament,
         to warrant a grant of indefinite leave to remain. The way that  the
         rules have been drafted  clearly  intends  that  weight  is  to  be
         attached to such a period of lawful residence.

58    Positive satisfaction of the immigration rules is  a  highly  material
    consideration  in  the  determination  of  the  proportionality  of  an
    immigration decision.  Given that I have found that the appellant meets
    the requirements for indefinite leave to remain under the rules, I find
    that there are no public interest considerations justifying the refusal
    of the human rights claim and requiring  the  appellant  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

59    The  respondent's  decision  refusing  the  appellant's  human  rights
    application is therefore unlawful under s.6 Human Rights Act  1998,  as
    amounting to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's
    private life.

60    Although I have ruled above that the appellant's second  ground  could
    be argued in this appeal, it is unnecessary in the light of my findings
    above to deal with it.

    Decision


    The judge's decision involved the making of a material error of law.


    I set aside the decision.
    I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal on  human  rights
    grounds.


Signed:                                            Date: 4.1.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

