
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04690/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 February 2018                           |On 12 April 2018             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                 redwan khan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khan, Counsel for Sony Sadaf Haroon Solicitors,
St Albans
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  15  March  1998.   He
    appeals against the decision of the respondent dated  6  February  2016
    refusing his application to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 of ECHR.  The appeal was heard by Judge
    of the First-Tier Tribunal Parkes on 15 February 2017.  The appeal  was
    dismissed in a decision promulgated on 17 February 2017.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  lodged.   Permission  was
    granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  on  20  December  2017.   The
    appellant is now an adult overstayer and permission was granted so that
    this can be considered in the light of the  appellant  facing  material
    prejudice because of the delay in consideration of the  application  by
    the respondent.  The application was submitted before the appellant was
    aged 18.  The Judge has accepted this and the  grounds  for  permission
    state  that  an  application   where   the   legal   position   changes
    prejudicially and less advantageously upon a trigger  date,  should  be
    considered as at the date of the application to avoid  such  prejudice.
    The grounds state that in this case material prejudice has been  caused
    and the Judge has failed to identify  this  so  the  decision  must  be
    materially erroneous.  The grounds go on to state that at the  date  of
    application the appellant was under the age of  18  and  therefore  the
    rules applicable should have been those relevant to minors.


 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file dated 16 January 2018 which  states
    that the Judge had full regard to the fact that the appellant was under
    18 at the date of application and the date of the decision but that  he
    correctly identifies the  relevant  date  for  considering  this  human
    rights appeal as being the date of the hearing.  The response  goes  on
    to state that the Judge gave  full  consideration  to  the  appellant's
    circumstances and gave adequate  reasons  for  finding  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances which would justify a grant of leave to remain
    outside the Rules.


 4. The grant of permission states that what has to be looked  at  is  what
    advantage the appellant will gain if he succeeds in getting the  First-
    Tier decision set aside as he is now an adult overstayer. This is  what
    has to be argued.

The Hearing

 5. Counsel submitted that he is relying on  the  grounds  of  application.
    The appellant was under 18 at the date of application and the  date  of
    the refusal.  I put to Counsel that surely the relevant  date  here  is
    the date of  the  hearing.   Counsel  referred  to  the  delay  in  the
    respondent considering the application and the fact that the Judge  has
    not referred to this in his decision.  Counsel submitted that the claim
    should be looked at, at the date of application to avoid prejudice.   I
    asked Counsel what the appellant  would  gain  by  doing  this  and  he
    submitted that different rules apply for  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules and had the application been considered based on  the
    appellant being a minor, it might well have  succeeded.   He  submitted
    that the appellant should have been given that opportunity.

 6.  The  Presenting  Officer  made  submissions  referring  to   paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules  and  submitting  that  the  Judge's
    findings not only refer to this, they also refer to Article  8  outside
    the Rules.


 7. I was referred to paragraph 12 of  the  decision  in  which  the  Judge
    states that the appellant's parents brought the appellant to the United
    Kingdom and left him here with relatives.  The Judge  finds  that  they
    did not abandon him in the usual meaning of the word.  The Judge refers
    to the appellant obtaining benefits from living in the United  Kingdom.
    At paragraph 13 he refers to the appellant  growing  up  in  households
    that have strong Bangladeshi cultural connections.  He has a  Grade  B,
    GCSE, in Bengali and speaks more  than  a  bit  of  that  language,  in
    contrast to what he states in his witness statement.  He speaks Bengali
    to his sister with whom he stays.


 8. The Presenting Officer referred me to  paragraph  18  of  the  decision
    which states that the appellant will  be  returning  to  where  he  was
    brought up, into a culture he retains links  with.   He  is  not  being
    returned to a new country and he submitted that  he  will  be  able  to
    adapt.


 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that at the date of  the  hearing  the
    terms of paragraph 276ADE(1) could not be satisfied and what has to  be
    considered is whether it would be  reasonable  for  this  appellant  to
    return to  Bangladesh  and  the  Judge  has  found  that  it  would  be
    reasonable.  He submitted that there are no material errors of  law  in
    the Judge's decision.

Decision and Reasons

10. This is an appellant who was refused entry clearance as  a  visitor  to
    the United Kingdom on 21 January 2008 but entered the United Kingdom on
    4 October 2008 with a child visa valid until 4 March 2009.  On 3  March
    2009 he applied for indefinite leave to remain as the child of  settled
    parents.  This was refused on 3 February 2011.  On 27 October  2015  he
    applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on a further leave to
    remain application  form  on  the  basis  of  his  private  life.   The
    respondent found that the family life he claimed to have with relatives
    in the United Kingdom did not constitute family life in accordance with
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, so the application was considered
    under the private life route contained within paragraph 276ADE(1) to CE
    of the Immigration  Rules  and  outside  the  Rules  on  the  basis  of
    exceptional circumstances.

11. When the ten year private life route was considered the  appellant  was
    found to meet the suitability  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) of the  Immigration  Rules,  but
    paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  could  not   be
    satisfied.  Although he has been in the United Kingdom for seven  years
    it was found that it would be reasonable for him to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  When he came he was aged 10 years and although he  came  with
    his parents, who are not British or settled in the United Kingdom, they
    returned to Bangladesh.  His claim is that  he  was  abandoned  by  his
    parents however that is not what the Judge finds (paragraph 10  of  the
    decision).  His parents are still in Bangladesh so he has family to  go
    back to therefore it would not be unreasonable to expect him  to  leave
    the United Kingdom to continue  his  private  life  in  Bangladesh  and
    reconnect with his family there.


12. It is clear that even if the application had been considered while  the
    appellant was under 18 years of age the terms of the  Rules  could  not
    have been satisfied.  Paragraph 276ADE(1)(v)  and  (iv)  could  not  be
    satisfied before he was aged 18 years.  At paragraph 6 of the  decision
    the Judge states there  are  no  compelling  circumstances  that  would
    justify a grant of leave outside the Rules under Article  8  while  the
    appellant was under 18 years of age.


13. The Judge then correctly goes on to consider the claim at the  date  of
    the hearing which is correct and at paragraph 9 refers to the appellant
    not having spent more than half his life in the UK.   The  Judge  makes
    reference to the appellant's family in Bangladesh at paragraphs 11  and
    12 and refers to the benefits the appellant has had from living in  the
    United Kingdom.


14. The Judge therefore finds that whether the appellant is aged 18 or over
    his claim cannot succeed under the Rules, and at paragraph 16 the Judge
    finds that as the appellant is now an adult he could live in Dhaka  and
    support himself as he speaks Bengali and English and he would not  have
    to return to his parents.  At paragraph 17 the Judge  refers  to  there
    being no compelling circumstances which would  justify  a  grant  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules now that the appellant is over 18 but  this
    is no different from his situation when he was under 18.   The  Judge's
    findings still apply and have been properly explained in the decision.


15. At paragraph 18 the Judge refers to the appellant returning to where he
    was brought up and to a culture with which he retains links.  He speaks
    the language and he can readapt to Bangladesh.  The Judge  goes  on  to
    state that there is no obvious need for him to have  any  contact  with
    his family in Bangladesh if he does not want this.


16. Although there are differences in paragraph 276ADE(1) for people  under
    18 and people over 18 this appellant's claim cannot succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules in either case.  The Judge has  made  it  clear  that
    there are no compelling circumstances which would mean that  the  claim
    could succeed outside the Rules.  This applies at the appellant's  date
    of application and at the date of the hearing.


17. The permission states that it was granted so  that  any  advantage  the
    appellant will gain can be considered if the First-Tier decision is set
    aside as the appellant is now an adult overstayer.   I  find  that  the
    Judge's decision would have been the same whether the appellant  was  a
    17 year old or an 18 year old.  No argument has been put to me  showing
    that the appellant will gain anything if the First-Tier decision is set
    aside.  There is no material error of law in the Judge's decision.


Notice of Decision


18. As there is no material error of  law  in  the  Judge's  decision,  his
    decision promulgated on 17 February 2017 must stand.


Signed                                  Date 09 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
