
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04516/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 16th May 2017                     |On 18th May 2017                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           LOVE NII BOYE ODAMTTEM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Ghana born  on  2nd  December  1967.  He
       arrived in the UK in  December  2002  with  a  visit  visa.  He  then
       overstayed. He made a human rights application  in  2012,  which  was
       refused without a right of appeal in 2013. In May 2015  the  claimant
       was asked to make a statement of additional grounds which he did:  on
       7th August 2015 the claimant's application,  via  this  statement  of
       additional grounds, to remain in the UK on human rights  grounds  was
       refused. His appeal against this decision was allowed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Morgan in a  determination  promulgated  on  the  13th
       October 2016.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Grimmett on 4th April 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that the
       First-tier judge had erred in law in allowing the appeal on the basis
       that the decision was not in accordance with the law due to  lack  of
       reference to the EEA Regulations when all the claimant had before the
       First-tier Tribunal was a human rights appeal.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. The claimant and his representatives  (BWF
       Solicitors) did not attend the hearing, but I was  satisfied  from  a
       letter of 26th April 2017 to the Upper Tribunal that they were  aware
       that it was due to take place and that it was fair and just  for  the
       hearing to proceed.

  Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The Secretary of State in her grounds of appeal firstly submits  that
       it was an error  of  law  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  fail  to
       determine the issue  of  whether  the  claimant  has  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with his partner. Secondly it is argued  that
       it was an error of law to allow the appeal on the  basis  of  an  EEA
       right to a residence card when the claimant had  only  made  a  human
       rights application to remain in the UK, and in  the  context  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal having to determine the appeal under s.86 of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    5. The claimant made no written or  oral  submission  on  the  contended
       errors of law.

  Conclusions - Error of Law

    6. EEA rights exist whether or not the claimant has made a relevant  EEA
       application on the correct form, and where they exist  they  must  be
       recognised by the Secretary of State and the First-tier Tribunal.

    7. The First-tier  Tribunal  satisfied  itself  that  the  claimant  was
       validly married to his Dutch wife, Mrs Grace Mensah at paragraphs  1,
       2 and 6 of the decision and that  there  is  no  evidence  that  this
       marriage is one of convenience. These facts are not contested in  the
       grounds of appeal. I find that this was a sufficient finding  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal  that  family  life  existed  in  this  case.  In
       accordance with EU law, it was not relevant to consider  whether  the
       marriage was genuine and  subsisting  but  merely  that  it  had  not
       terminated (see  Diatta  v  Land  of  Berlin)  and  was  not  one  of
       convenience in order to give the claimant a right to remain in the UK
       with his wife in the context of evidence of Ms Mensah's employment in
       the UK (which clearly existed in the  bundle  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and includes  an  employer  letter  and  payslip,  and  bank
       statements).

    8. It might have been ideal  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had,  having
       established family life existed,  made  it  plain  firstly  that  the
       claimant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  family   life
       Immigration Rules  at  Appendix  FM  as  there  was  no  evidence  of
       insurmountable obstacles to family life taking place abroad so as  to
       satisfy EX1, and then explained that it was appropriate  to  look  at
       the matter outside of the Rules given the EU aspects of  this  matter
       provided a potentially compelling element. However,  I  do  not  find
       that a failure to articulate these  matters  amounts  to  a  material
       error of law.

    9. As it was plain that removal of the claimant would interfere with his
       family life with his wife and her children, the next Razgar  step  is
       to decide whether the decision is "not in accordance with  the  law".
       No reasons are given in the grounds as to  why  a  decision  on  this
       point was not  properly  open  to  and  required  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal given that this is a human rights appeal and a human  rights
       analysis was clearly required.

   10. The decision also accords with the authority cited by the  First-tier
       Tribunal at paragraph 6 of the decision, Greenwood (No. 2) (para  398
       considered) [2015] UKUT 00629, in that  the  disposal  is  simply  to
       allow the appeal (it is not remitted) but as per (iv) of the headnote
       this First-tier Tribunal makes: "a decision  the  effect  whereof  is
       that the Secretary of  State  either  must,  or  may,  make  a  fresh
       decision".

   11. Further at paragraph 25 of Greenwood (No. 2) it is said:  "Similarly,
       in circumstances where the Secretary of State has not made a decision
       on whether the appellant has a Community law right to remain  in  the
       United Kingdom or in respect of the best  interests  of  an  affected
       child, the FtT must make the primary  decision:  see  VM  (Zambia)  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 521 and DS
       (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2011]
       EWCA Civ 305."  So clearly it was right, and in accordance with  this
       authority for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine  this  relevant
       issue of the appellant's EU rights as a spouse of a Dutch citizen.

   12. I find it was therefore lawfully open to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
       allow the appeal on human  rights  grounds  on  the  basis  that  the
       decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance with the law
       for failure to acknowledge or deal with the fact  that  the  claimant
       was married to an EU national working in the UK and for that decision
       to have implicit in it that the Secretary of State should now make  a
       decision on the issue of whether the claimant is entitled to  an  EEA
       residence permit  given  the  findings  with  respect  to  his  valid
       marriage to a Dutch citizen.

  Decision:

      1. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I uphold the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
         appeal.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  16th May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley





