
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
      Appeal Number: HU/04623/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and reasons Promulgated |
|On: 1 April 2019                        |On: 17 April 2019                |
|                                        |                                 |
|                                        |                                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                                  OLISA [O]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms B Morjaria of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS



1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, appealed  against  the  decision  of
   the respondent refusing the appellant's  application  to  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom based on  his  family  life  with  his  children  in  this
   country.




2. Permission to appeal was granted First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne  in  a
   decision dated 1 January 2019 as he was of the view that it  is  arguable
   that the Judge should have considered the appellant's appeal pursuant  to
   Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  because  it  was
   raised and pursued by the appellant.


3. At the hearing I was informed that family  court  proceedings  have  been
   initiated by the appellant and he has been granted some contact with  his
   children through social services.


4. This appeal has a long litigation  history.  The  appellant  entered  the
   United Kingdom as a student and his further  applications  for  leave  to
   remain were refused. His appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
   remove him from the United Kingdom was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Symes on 10 December 2014.  The  appellant  had  claimed  that  his
   children will face forcible FGM on their return to Nigeria.  He  appealed
   to the Upper Tribunal and a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Mailer  rejected
   the appeal.


5. It was noted that the appellant at that time  had  provided  no  credible
   evidence that  he  was  in  a  genuine  parental  relationship  with  his
   children. On the contrary, it  was  stated  that  the  abundant  evidence
   provided demonstrates that the breakdown of the appellant's marriage  and
   that his children became the area of allegation and  counter  allegations
   between the appellant and his wife.


6. It was clear at the time that the appellant's access to his children  was
   sporadic at best and was cut  off  because  his  wife  perceived  him  as
   seeking to poison the children against him. Therefore, the  position  was
   reviewed by August 2016 and a decision made that the appellant was not to
   have contact with his children due to the ongoing  acrimony  between  the
   parents. The appellant was advised to  seek  contact  with  his  children
   through the courts and on 24 July 2018 he commenced family proceedings at
   the Barnett Family Court to establish some contact with his children.




7. The appeal should be reheard  to  determine  whether  the  appellant  has
   family life with his children which will be breached and also whether his
   children's rights under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
   Rights will be breached by requiring their father  to  leave  the  United
   Kingdom and return to Nigeria. Findings of fact must be  made  about  the
   best  interests  of  the  children  after  the  family  proceedings   are
   concluded.


8. In the circumstances, I direct that  the  appeal  be  placed  before  any
   First-tier Tribunal Judge apart from First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey  for
   hearing of the appeal de novo.



                                           Dated this 14th day of April 2019
Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
..........................................

Ms S Chana



