
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04755/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th August 2017                           |On 20th September 2017        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                mr Parbir Pun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, new delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A O'Callaghan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sweet, promulgated on 5th  June  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on  24th  May  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nepal, who was born on  27th  May
    1988.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  29th
    July 2015 refusing his application for entry clearance to settle in the
    UK as a dependent son of a  former  Gurkha  soldier,  pursuant  to  the
    Respondent's policy in relation to former Gurkhas which is set  out  in
    Appendix K, IDI chapter 15, Section 2A, and is dated 5th January  2015.



The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is  that,  although  he  had  been
    working in Malaysia, he  had  not  been  paid  for  the  work  and  had
    therefore returned to Nepal, where his father spoke to him on  a  daily
    or weekly basis, supported him financially, and  sent  money  transfers
    through the bank and sometimes by cheque from his  disability  pension.
    The father, Prem Bahadur Pun, had even visited the Appellant  in  Nepal
    on one occasion in November 2014 when the Appellant was working  there.



The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that the Appellant was  not
    part of an independent family unit (as he lived on his own), but he was
    still financially and emotionally not independent of his  father.   The
    judge accepted that the Appellant's father had been making payments  to
    the Appellant by way of cheques and IME (a form of money transfer which
    enabled the Appellant to access his father's pension), and  the  father
    also financed the Appellant's visit to  Malaysia  for  the  purpose  of
    work.  Nevertheless, the judge held that,

         "It is also clear that the Appellant  has  been  able  to  lead  an
         independent life after his parents came  to  the  UK  in  September
         2013.  His parents were not able to raise the  necessary  funds  to
         support an application for the Appellant on  an  earlier  occasion"
         (paragraph 19).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  failed  in  applying
    Article 8 properly to the facts of the Appellant's  case  and  did  not
    follow relevant current jurisprudence.

 7. On 29th June 2017, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    this was a very brief decision and arguably failed to  demonstrate  the
    relevant provisions applicable in a case such as this.

 8. On 17th July 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Secretary  of
    State to reflect that the judge clearly set out  his  reasons  for  the
    finding that there is no family life for  the  purposes  of  Article  8
    between the Appellant and his parents.



Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 18th August 2017, Mr O'Callaghan, appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant relied  upon  his  Grounds  of  Appeal.   He
    emphasised that the judge reached the conclusion that the Appellant was
    not  financially  and  emotionally  dependent  on  his  father  without
    providing any reasons for this finding.   The  judge  also  erroneously
    concluded that the Appellant had been able to lead an independent  life
    because it was clear from the authorities that a period  of  separation
    does not necessarily split the family: see UG (Nepal) [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    58.  The judge also erred in placing weight  on  the  presence  of  the
    Appellant's five married siblings in Nepal and this was  irrelevant  to
    assessing whether the Appellant had continuing financial and  emotional
    dependence on his sponsoring father.  He,  after  all,  was  unmarried.
    Moreover, the judge's statement that there had not been a breach of the
    Appellant's right to family life was not the relevant test to be  taken
    into account in a case such as this.

10. Finally, the recognition by the judge that, "his parents were not  able
    to raise  the  necessary  funds  to  support  an  application  for  the
    Appellant on an earlier occasion" (paragraph 19)  when  the  sponsoring
    father had himself come to the  UK,  was  significant  because  in  Rai
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320, to which the judge was referred, it was emphasised
    that the fact that the Appellant would have applied to come to  the  UK
    earlier if his parents could  have  afforded  the  application,  was  a
    significant factor in favour of allowing the appeal.

11. For his part, Mr Tufan submitted that the judge was not wrong in saying
    that there was no Article 8 case to be made out  here.   The  Appellant
    had been living in his own home for a long time now.  The existence  of
    financial dependency does not trigger Article 8.  (See paragraph 35  of
    AAO [2011] EWCA Civ 840).

12. In reply, Mr O'Callaghan submitted that, whilst it  is  true  that  the
    judge's main findings appear in his concluding paragraph  at  paragraph
    19, one has to look at the preceding paragraphs from paragraphs  16  to
    18 which do demonstrate that the Appellant had a  strong  claim  to  be
    given entry clearance.  Against that background, the judge had  wrongly
    concluded that the Appellant was able to live a separate life when  his
    parents came to the UK, because this was only over a period of eighteen
    months, and the case law suggested that such separation is not fatal to
    an Article 8 claim where the Gurkha policy applied.

13. Second, as far as "financial" dependency was concerned, the  judge  had
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  financially  dependent  upon   his
    sponsoring father, and had even  drawn  from  his  sponsoring  father's
    pension through an IME account.  The father had not only made financial
    payments to the  Appellant  but  had  even  visited  the  Appellant  in
    Malaysia.

14. Third, it was simply wrong to say that there would be no breach  of  an
    Article 8 right to family life because the  Appellant  had  five  other
    married siblings who were living separately, because the Appellant  was
    not asserting a right to a family life with them, but was asserting  it
    in relation to his father and mother, being dependent only  upon  them,
    not having established an independent family life of his own.  When his
    parents left to come to the UK the emotional and  financial  dependency
    continued.  It did not cease.  The Appellant was 27 years of age  then.



15. Finally, the case of Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320, makes it  clear  that  if
    the Appellant would have applied at the same time for leave  to  enter,
    as his parents (see paragraph 42), then that was a material factor.  In
    the instant case, the  Appellant  did  not  apply  (see  paragraph  15)
    because of lack of funds at the same time as his parents, and the judge
    acknowledged (at paragraph 19) that this was because his  father  could
    not afford it.  All in all, therefore, the judge ought to have assessed
    these matters in the context of the Gurkha policy at  Appendix  K,  IDI
    chapter 15, Section 2A, of 5th January 2015.

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

17. First, the judge ought to have approached this matter with Appendix  K,
    IDI chapter 15, Section 2A of the Home Office  policy  of  5th  January
    2015, actually at the forefront of his mind.  Although this  policy  is
    set out earlier on  in  the  determination  (see  paragraph  2),  I  am
    satisfied that its import is not applied and followed  through  in  the
    determination itself.  As the judge himself recognised, this is a  case
    where, "his parents were not able  to  raise  the  necessary  funds  to
    support an application  for  the  Appellant  on  an  earlier  occasion"
    (paragraph 19).  Be that as it may, his father did make payments to him
    by way of cheques, by way of IME, and financed his  visit  to  Malaysia
    for the purpose of work, and even visited him there.

18. The suggestion, against the backdrop of these facts, that, "but  it  is
    also clear that the Appellant has been able to lead an independent life
    after his parents came to the UK in September 2013" is unwarranted.

19. The decision in Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320,  which  Counsel  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant laid stress upon in his submissions before  the
    Tribunal was properly recognised and recorded  by  the  judge.   It  is
    stated that,

         "It is clear that the Appellant would have applied to come  to  the
         UK if his parents could have afforded the application.  ... ... the
         Sponsor would have made  his  application  on  discharge  from  the
         British Army if he had been allowed to do so and then the Appellant
         would have been born in the UK" (paragraph 15).

20. The case of Rai establishes that if the Appellant would have applied to
    come to the UK earlier, if his parents would have been able  to  afford
    to do so,  was  not  immaterial  to  the  success  of  an  application.
    Finally, it is plain  that  dependency  existed  both  emotionally  and
    financially right the way through, and has continued to do  so  to  the
    present day.

21. The error reached by the Tribunal lies in the statement  that  although
    the Appellant "is not part of an independent family unit (as  he  lives
    on his own)," that nevertheless "the Appellant has been able to lead an
    independent life after his parents came to the UK  in  September  2013"
    (paragraph 19).

22. In terms of the Gurkha policy, and the established jurisprudence, which
    has developed through long years of  litigation  in  such  cases,  that
    conclusion was not open to the judge.

Remaking the Decision

23. In remaking the decision, I have taken into account the findings of the
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.  I can do no better than to  echo  the  words  of  Lord  Justice
    Lindblom in Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320 that:

         "Those circumstances of the Appellant and his family, all  of  them
         un- contentious, and including - perhaps crucially - the fact that
         he and his parents would have applied at the same time for leave to
         enter the United Kingdom and would have come to the United  Kingdom
         together as a family unit had they been able to afford to do so, do
         not appear to have been  grappled  with  by  the  ...  judge  under
         Article 8(1).  In my view they should have been.  They went to  the
         heart of the matter: the  question  of  whether,  even  though  the
         Appellant's parents had chosen to leave  Nepal  to  settle  in  the
         United Kingdom when they did, his family life with  them  subsisted
         then, and was still subsisting at the time of the Upper  Tribunal's
         decision.  This was the crucial question under Article 8(1) even on
         the most benevolent reading of his determination, I  do  not  think
         one can say that the Upper Tribunal Judge  properly  addressed  it"
         (see paragraph 42).

24. If one were, accordingly, to properly  address  the  critical  question
    under Article 8(1) it is plain, to my mind, that this appeal  succeeds.



Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

26. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal,  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, I make a fee award of the amount that has been paid.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017

