

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Numbers:
HU/04507/2017

                                                     hu/04516/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 October 2019                      |On 22 October 2019            |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                    PRIYANTHA B N NAWARTHNE MUDIYANSELAGE
                       HARSHEE DEEPAMALEE SURIARACHCHI
                          (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, of Counsel, instructed by Chancery
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge  S  Smith  on  9  September  2019,
          against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge E  B  Grant,  to
          strike out the appeals for want of jurisdiction. The determination
          was promulgated on 21 May 2019.


       2. The appellants are Sri Lankan nationals and sought leave to enable
          the second appellant to  undergo  an  ovarian  cystectomy  and  to
          complete IUI and IVF treatment. The application was refused on  27
          February 2017 under paragraph 322(1) on the basis that it was  for
          a purpose not covered by the rules. Moreover, the respondent noted
          that the surgery had been successfully completed and that the  six
          months  requested  for  IUI  treatment  had   also   passed.   The
          application was also refused  because  the  respondent  considered
          that the first appellant had used a  fraudulently  obtained  TOEIC
          certificate to obtain previous leave.


       3. Appeals were lodged on 13 March 2017. The grounds raise article  8
          and the appeal is ticked as being a human rights decision.


       4. On 24 April 2019 (there were  previous  adjournments  because  the
          appellants' representatives  had  ceased  to  operate)  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge Grant decided that there was no appealable decision
          as the appellants had not filed appeals on asylum or human  rights
          grounds. She had regard to a  letter  from  the  appellants  which
          purportedly stated that no protection or human  rights  claim  was
          being made.


       5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  the  reference
          to human rights in that letter was to violations in Sri Lanka  and
          arguably should have been read in the context of the making  of  a
          protection appeal. The  judge  considered  that  Judge  Grant  had
          arguably misinterpreted the said letter.


          The Hearing


       6. At the commencement of the hearing, I  indicated  to  the  parties
          that I was minded to set aside the decision of Judge Grant on  the
          basis that she erred in law in finding that there  were  no  valid
          appeals. Ms Everett sensibly did not seek to resist that  approach
          and Mr Solomon was content and  had  nothing  to  add.  The  first
          appellant was in attendance. He and his wife now have two children
          and Ms Everett confirmed that this would not be treated as  a  new
          matter for the purposes of the appeal hearing.


          Discussion and Conclusions


       7. I now give my reasons for setting  aside  the  decision  of  Judge
          Grant.


       8. The appellants both filed their appeals with grounds which set out
          their article 8 claim. They also ticked the box  on  their  appeal
          forms indicating that these were human rights appeals. The  letter
          referred to by the judge is dated 30 May 2016 and was submitted to
          the respondent shortly after the making  of  the  application  for
          further leave to  remain  (for  six  months).  The  relevant  part
          states: "...it would be a grave and irreparable damage to both  of
          our lives if we go back to Sri Lanka at this stage  of  my  wife's
          treatments...Secondly, I have been living in  United  Kingdom  for
          nearly six years and I have severe obstacles and impediments to go
          back to my home country, which is Sri Lanka and  start  my  family
          life there. However, I'm not making any claim at this stage on  my
          life threats or subject to violation of my  human  rights  in  Sri
          Lanka and I retain my rights to make any claim later  if  required
          on that ground".


       9. The first difficulty with Judge  Grant's  decision  is  that  this
          application was made by an unrepresented appellant and, therefore,
          some leeway should have been afforded to him in the interpretation
          of his claim. Nevertheless, it seems quite clear from  the  letter
          sent  to  the  respondent  that  the  appellant  had  relied  upon
          compassionate matters and  had  raised  private  and  family  life
          concerns as  part  of  his  application.  Indeed,  the  respondent
          considered whether leave to remain outside the rules was warranted
          when reaching her decision. The  appellant's  reference  to  human
          rights violations was patently meant to refer to violations in Sri
          Lanka and was made in the context of making an asylum claim.


      10. More important,  however,  is  the  evidence  that  regardless  of
          whether or not a human rights claim  had  been  expressed  in  the
          application for leave, the issue is clearly raised, and at length,
          in the appellants' grounds of appeal. It is also relied on in  the
          statement  of  additional  grounds.  There  can  be  no  question,
          therefore, that the appellants did  intend  to  bring  appeals  on
          human rights grounds and that, in fact, they did so. As there  has
          been no consideration of any of the grounds  raised,  although  it
          has to be said that the period of  leave  sought  has  long  since
          passed, it is appropriate for the matter to be decided by a  judge
          of the First-tier Tribunal as there has been no  consideration  of
          any of the issues by a First-tier Tribunal Judge.




      11. The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
          decision to be made on the human rights claim by any judge  except
          Judge E B Grant.

                     Directions

      12. No later than 7 working  days  prior  to  the  next  hearing,  the
          appellants shall file a paginated bundle of all the documents they
          seek to rely on in support of their  appeal  hearing.  The  bundle
          shall include full witness statements for both  appellants,  birth
          certificates for their two children and a skeleton argument.


      13. Further to Ms Everett's confirmation, the birth  of  the  children
          shall not be treated as a new  matter  for  the  purposes  of  the
          appeal hearing.


          Decision


      14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The  matter
          is remitted for a fresh hearing  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
          Hatton Cross at a date to be arranged.


          Anonymity


      15. No request for an anonymity order was made.


    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 21 October 2019










