


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04994/2017
      HU/04992/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On : 24 April 2018                            |On : 2 May 2018              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 samia jarad
                               jehan alyousef
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran of Alex Moran Immigration & Asylum
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.     The appellants are citizens of Syria born on 1 November  1950  and
      15 February 1977 respectively and are mother and daughter.  They  have
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  McGrade  dismissing   their   appeals   against   the
      respondent's  decision  to  refuse  their   applications   for   entry
      clearance.

   2.     The appellants applied for entry clearance to settle in the UK  as
      the adult dependant relatives of the sponsor,  the  first  appellant's
      son and the  second  appellant's  brother,  Bilal  Mohamed  Yossef,  a
      naturalised  British  citizen.  It  was  stated  in  the   appellants'
      application that they were refugees from the civil war  in  Syria  and
      had been living in Turkey since  October  2012.  The  first  appellant
      suffered from diabetes, hypertension and  degenerative  back  problems
      and had been a widow since the death of her husband in June 2014.  She
      lived with her daughter, the second appellant, in southern Turkey. The
      second appellant was also suffering from problems with her  back.  The
      sponsor was the first appellant's eldest of five sons  living  in  the
      UK. He worked as a chef, was married with one child and lived with his
      wife and child and his brother. All five sons supported the appellants
      financially. The sponsor wanted to bring the appellants to the UK  due
      to the deterioration in their health and increasing inability to  care
      for themselves. It was stated in the appellants' application that they
      had no formal right of residence in Turkey and  only  enjoyed  limited
      rights in the country. They  had  no  access  to  the  Turkish  social
      security system and had no social or family support network. They  did
      not have access to the type of long-term medical support they required
      and they could not find local care due to language problems.

   3.     The appellants' applications were refused 15 February  2017  under
      the eligibility provisions of Appendix FM of  the  immigration  rules,
      specifically paragraph EC-DR.1.1(d) with reference to E-ECDR.2.4 and E-
      ECDR.2.5 on the basis that the respondent was not  satisfied,  on  the
      evidence produced by the  appellants,  that  they  required  long-term
      personal care to perform everyday tasks or that they  were  unable  to
      obtain the required level of care where  they  were  currently  living
      with  the  financial  assistance  of  the  sponsor.   The   respondent
      considered that the decision did not breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

   4.     The appellants appealed against the decisions  and  their  appeals
      were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge McGrade on 14 September  2017.
      The judge heard from  the  sponsor,  Bilal  Mohamed  Yossef,  and  his
      brother Jalal Mohamed Al  Yousef.  Judge  McGrade  accepted  that  the
      respondent's decisions engaged Article 8 on family  and  private  life
      grounds and went on to consider proportionality. It  was  conceded  on
      behalf of the appellants that they could not meet the requirements  of
      the immigration rules in  Appendix  FM-SE  in  relation  to  specified
      evidence, although it was asserted on behalf of  the  appellants  that
      they could meet the substantive requirements of the rules.  The  judge
      accepted that there were  difficulties  faced  by  the  appellants  on
      account of their medical problems but was not satisfied that they were
      unable to obtain the required level of care in  Turkey.  He  concluded
      that the refusal of entry clearance was not disproportionate.

   5.     Permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  by  the
      appellants on the grounds  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
      whether the care  required  by  the  appellants  could  reasonably  be
      provided, in the terms set out in BRITCITS v The  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 368, that the judge had failed
      to consider the  appellants'  emotional  and  psychological  needs  as
      required by Britcits v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department
      [2017] EWCA Civ 368; and that the judge had failed to take account  of
      various   relevant   factors   which   could   constitute   compelling
      circumstances, in assessing proportionality.

   6.     Permission was initially refused in the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
      was granted, upon renewal, by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum, on 4  January
      2018, in the following terms:

    "The medical evidence does not appear to suggest  that  the  appellants
    have any emotional or psychological requirements, and there has been no
    verification of  any  such  requirements  by  medical  experts.  It  is
    nevertheless arguable that the FtJ failed to take account of  a  number
    of relevant considerations, identified in paragraphs 20 and 23  of  the
    grounds, in undertaking the proportionality assessment,  and  that  the
    FtJ failed to approach the terms of the ADR rules in light of the  CA's
    assessment in Britcits [2017] EWCA Civ 368, particularly at [59]."

   7.     At the hearing Mr Moran relied and expanded upon  the  grounds  of
      appeal. Mr Tarlow submitted that there was no material error of law in
      the judge's decision.

The Legal Framework

   8.      The  relevant  immigration  rules  relating  to  adult  dependant
      relatives are set out at [5] of the judgment in Britcits, as follows:

    "5.   As from 9 July 2012 the right of an ADR to apply  for  indefinite
    leave to enter is now  contained  in  section  E-ECDR  2.1  to  2.5  of
    Appendix FM to the new rules.  They  provide  as  follows,  so  far  as
    relevant:


         "E-ECDR.2.1. The applicant must be the-


             (a)  parent aged 18 years or over;


             (b)  grandparent;


             (c)  brother or sister aged 18 years or over; or


             (d)  son or daughter aged 18 years or over,


             of a person ('the sponsor') who is in the UK.


         ...


         E-ECDR.2.3. The sponsor must at the date of application be-


             (a)  aged 18 years or over; and


             (b)


                  (i)  a British Citizen in the UK; or


                  (ii)     present and settled in the UK; or


                  (iii)    in the UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
                  protection.


         E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant  and  their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or  disability  require  long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.


         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant  and  their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help  of  the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country  where
         they are living, because-


             (a)  it is not available  and  there  is  no  person  in  that
             country who can reasonably provide it;


             or;


             (b)  it is not affordable."


   9.     The relevant Home Office guidance in the  Immigration  Directorate
      Instructions is set out at [6] of the judgment in Britcits:

   "6. Immigration Directorate Instructions ("the  Guidance")  contain  the
   following relevant guidance to the new ADR Rules at 2.2.2.  with  effect
   from 13 December 2012:


         "2.2.2 Unable to receive the required level of care in the  country
         where they are living


         The ECO [Entry Clearance  Officer]  needs  to  establish  that  the
         applicant has no access to  the  required  level  of  care  in  the
         country  where  they  are  living,  even  with  the  practical  and
         financial help of the sponsor in the UK. This could be  because  it
         is not available and there is no person in  that  country  who  can
         reasonably provide  it,  or  because  it  is  not  affordable.  The
         evidence required to establish  this  is  set  out  below.  If  the
         required level of care is available or affordable, the  application
         should be refused.


         2.2.3 No person in the country who can reasonably provide care


         The ECO should consider whether there  is  anyone  in  the  country
         where the applicant  is  living  who  can  reasonably  provide  the
         required level of care.


         This can be a close family member:


             Son


             Daughter


             Brother


             Sister


             Parent


             Grandchild


             Grandparent


         or  another  person  who  can  provide  care,  e.g.  a   home-help,
         housekeeper, nurse, carer, or care or nursing home.


         If an applicant has more than one close  relative  in  the  country
         where they  are  living,  those  relatives  may  be  able  to  pool
         resources to provide the required care.


         The ECO should bear in mind any relevant cultural factors, such  as
         in countries where women are unlikely to be able  to  provide  such
         support."


Discussion

  10.     It is argued on behalf of the appellants that the judge failed  to
      apply the relevant case law to  interpret  the  immigration  rules  in
      determining the care available to  them  in  Turkey  and  reliance  is
      placed on [59] in Britcits in that regard, which states as follows:

    "Second, as is apparent from the Rules and the Guidance, the  focus  is
    on whether the care required by the ADR applicant can  be  "reasonably"
    provided and to "the required level"  in  their  home  country.  As  Mr
    Sheldon confirmed in his oral submissions, the provision of care in the
    home country must be  reasonable  both  from  the  perspective  of  the
    provider and the perspective of the applicant, and the standard of such
    care must be what is required for  that  particular  applicant.  It  is
    possible that insufficient attention has been paid in the past to these
    considerations,  which  focus  on  what  care  is  both  necessary  and
    reasonable for the applicant to receive in their  home  country.  Those
    considerations include issues as to the accessibility and  geographical
    location of the provision of care and the standard of  care.  They  are
    capable of embracing emotional and psychological requirements  verified
    by expert medical evidence. What is reasonable is,  of  course,  to  be
    objectively assessed."


  11.     Emphasis is  placed  by  Mr  Moran  on  the  statement  that  "the
      provision of care in the home country must be reasonable both from the
      perspective of the provider and the perspective of the applicant".  It
      is asserted that the judge erred in  law  by  failing  to  apply  that
      principle. However, having carefully considered the  judge's  decision
      and the evidence which was before him I find myself in agreement  with
      Mr Tarlow, that there was no material error of law and that the  judge
      had considered all  relevant  matters.  It  would  perhaps  have  been
      helpful if the judge had specifically referred to Britcits and to  the
      principle of reasonableness in the context of [59] but it seems to  me
      that nothing material arises from this, for two reasons.

  12.     Firstly, there is nothing in [59] of Britcits  which  sets  out  a
      separate test to be applied in ADR cases, which the  judge  failed  to
      apply, but rather [59] is simply an observation as to the requirements
      of the relevant rules and guidance and the focus therein. It is  clear
      that Judge McGrade had full regard to the provisions of  the  relevant
      rules and I do not agree with Mr Moran's submission that the fact that
      he did not specifically and expressly refer to the  word  "reasonable"
      demonstrates a failure to consider all the requirements of  the  rules
      or demonstrates a misinterpretation of the rules.

  13.     Secondly, this was not a matter of the judge failing  to  consider
      whether the care required by the appellants was  reasonably  available
      and accessible, but the judge's finding was that there was no evidence
      of any efforts having been made to find appropriate care in the  first
      place, other than by word of mouth or neighbours.  The  only  evidence
      before the  judge,  which  he  plainly  took  into  account,  was  the
      sponsor's evidence in his statement  of  three  previous  unsuccessful
      care arrangements, but the judge found at [24] that there was  nothing
      to show that the family had made any wider enquiries about  recruiting
      carers or finding residential care. Accordingly, given the absence  of
      any evidence to show that efforts had been made to find such care, the
      judge was unable to  go  on  and  assess  whether  it  was  reasonably
      accessible and adequate.

  14.     It is also relevant to note that the judge found that the evidence
      before him indicated that the second appellant's heath  problems  were
      not long-term but that she suffered from a  condition  which  required
      rest and from which she was then likely to  recover.  Accordingly  the
      situation before him was that the second appellant would  be  able  to
      resume her care of her mother, so that the care currently required was
      simply to assist the second appellant  in  looking  after  her  mother
      whilst she (the second appellant) was incapacitated.

  15.     Accordingly I find nothing in the judge's decision to suggest that
      he failed to consider the approach set out at [59] in Britcits or that
      his approach to the evidence was inconsistent with  that  set  out  in
      Britcits. Neither do I find that there was any error on  the  part  of
      the judge  in  failing  to  consider  the  appellants'  emotional  and
      psychological needs and I am entirely in agreement with Upper Tribunal
      Judge Blum's observation, in his grant of permission, that  there  was
      no evidence to suggest that  they  had  any  particular  emotional  or
      psychological requirements.  The  judge  plainly  had  regard  to  the
      difficulties they faced in terms of having left their home country and
      finding themselves as  refugees  in  another  country,  their  medical
      problems and their separation from their family and  their  desire  to
      join their family in the UK. There was, however,  no  evidence  before
      the  judge  to  suggest  that  their   emotional   and   psychological
      difficulties extended beyond that.

  16.     With regard to the second and third grounds, I do  not  find  that
      the judge failed to conduct a  proper  proportionality  assessment  or
      failed to take into account relevant matters. Whilst it  is  the  case
      that the judge did not expressly refer  to  the  test  of  "compelling
      circumstances" justifying a  grant  of  entry  clearance  outside  the
      immigration rules, it is plain from his findings  that  he  gave  full
      consideration to the appellants' circumstances  and  to  all  relevant
      matters  and  that  he  did  not  find  their  circumstances   to   be
      sufficiently compelling to  render  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
      disproportionate. It is not the case, as the grounds assert  at  [19],
      that the judge only considered the factors set out at [19(a) to  (c)].
      On the contrary, [27] of the judge's decision plainly  shows  that  he
      considered the further factors raised by the appellants.  It  was  not
      necessary for the judge to refer to each and every factor set  out  at
      [20] and [23] of the grounds. Clearly he had regard to the appellant's
      appeal bundle and to the background information set out  therein  and,
      whilst his decision may well have  benefitted  from  a  more  detailed
      analysis than that set out  [27],  it  is  plain  that  he  gave  full
      consideration to the appellants' situation  and  to  the  difficulties
      that they faced. The evidence before the judge was of a general nature
      and the judge noted that there was no evidence  of  specific  problems
      faced by the appellants other than  those  which  he  had  considered.
      Indeed the evidence before him was that both appellants were living in
      privately rented accommodation and had  access  to  medical  treatment
      including the medication and procedures referred  to  in  the  medical
      reports at pages 258 to 268. The judge plainly had  sympathy  for  the
      appellants, as he expressed at [28], but was entitled to conclude that
      they had failed to meet the burden of proof which  lay  upon  them  to
      meet the requirements of the immigration rules and had failed to  show
      that the respondent's decision was disproportionate.

  17.     Accordingly the judge was fully entitled to dismiss the appeal  on
      the basis that he did and I find no errors of law in his  decision.  I
      uphold the decision.

DECISION

  18.     The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
      involve an error on a point of law. I do not set aside  the  decision.
      The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

Signed   [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  26 April 2018
