
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04449/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2018                           |On 23 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   ALI [S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Seelhoff, A. Seelhoff Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
     First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey, promulgated on 14 September  2017,  in
     which she allowed Mr. [S]'s appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
     decision to refuse further leave to remain on the basis of  his  family
     and private life.
  2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the Secretary of State as
     the Respondent, and to Mr.  [S]  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
     positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "It is arguable that  the  judge  has  materially  heard  (sic)  by
         failing to give adequate reasons for holding that a person who  has
         a certain level of education would have no reason to secure a  test
         certificate by deception.


         Furthermore, it is arguable that the judge has failed  to  identify
         compelling  circumstances  such  as  to  justify  consideration  of
         whether they would be a breach of Article 8."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I stated  that  the  decision  did  not
    involve the making of a material error of law.  My full reasons are set
    out below.


Error of law


 5.  The  Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's   application   under   the
    immigration rules for two reasons.  The  Respondent  alleged  that  the
    Appellant had used deception in relation to his English language  test,
    and he therefore did not meet the suitability  requirements.   Secondly
    he did not meet the  eligibility  requirements  as  he  had  failed  to
    provide evidence that he had been granted contact with his  child.   He
    therefore failed to meet paragraph E-LTRPT.2.4.   These  were  the  two
    issues addressed by the Judge in her decision,  first  whether  or  not
    deception had been used, and secondly the position in relation  to  the
    Appellant's son.


 6. Given that the Judge found that the Respondent was not right to  refuse
    the  Appellant's  application  with  reference   to   the   suitability
    requirements, and given that there  was  evidence  before  her  of  the
    contact order, as reflected in her findings relating to section 55,  it
    appears that the Judge found that the Appellant met the requirements of
    the immigration rules in relation to family life as a parent.  However,
    she did not state this expressly.


  7. In relation to the first ground of appeal, the failure to give adequate
     reasons in relation to the allegation of deception, I was  referred  by
     Mr. Seelhoff to the factual narrative of the Appellant's  case  as  set
     out in paragraphs [9] to [12].  He referred to the  fact  that  it  had
     been acknowledged that the college where the Appellant had sat his test
     was  "thoroughly  corrupt  and  dishonest".    The   Appellant's   then
     immigration adviser had owned the college where the Appellant  had  sat
     the English test.  Mr. Seelhoff submitted that the Appellant had  given
     a credible account of how he had come to  sit  the  test  and  in  what
     circumstances, and the Judge  had  been  entitled  to  take  this  into
     account.


 8. I have also considered the Appellant's witness statement.  He sets  out
    at [8] to [10] and [19] to [21] an account of his dealing  with  Salman
    in relation to his immigration issues, and sitting the English language
    test.


 9. The Judge finds, with reference  to  the  relevant  caselaw,  that  the
    Respondent has satisfied the burden of proof which  lies  on  her,  and
    finds that the burden then shifts to the Appellant, [21] to  [24].   At
    [26] and [27] she gives reasons for why she finds  that  the  Appellant
    has met that burden.  She accepts that he took the  advice  of  someone
    who he thought would give him sound advice, and  placed  his  trust  in
    that person.  She accepts his innocent explanation, and  gives  reasons
    for doing so.  Her reasoning is adequate.  I  find  that  there  is  no
    error of law in the Judge's finding that the Appellant  had  discharged
    the burden on him.


10. The second ground refers to the failure of the Judge  to  identify  any
    "compelling circumstances" so as to justify a consideration of  Article
    8 outside the rules.  The Judge sets out at [28] to [36]  the  position
    of the Appellant's son, and the Appellant's relationship with him.   As
    stated above, given that there was a Child  Arrangements  Order  before
    her, and given that this was the only reason given  by  the  Respondent
    for refusing the application under  the  eligibility  requirements,  it
    would appear that on the Judge's findings, the Appellant had  satisfied
    the requirements of the immigration rules relating to Article 8 in  any
    event.


11. The Judge has set out a narrative of the Appellant's case at [9], which
    includes the Appellant's relationships with his ex-wife and his  child.
    The Judge is critical of the Respondent's lack of careful consideration
    of the position of the Appellant's child [28].  It is clear that  there
    were compelling circumstances in the Appellant's case relating  to  his
    child.  Even had she needed to show any, and especially given  that  it
    appears that the rules were met she did not need to do so, she is right
    to consider  that  the  Appellant's  child  and  his  family  situation
    constitute compelling circumstances.


12. Without rehearsing all of the Judge's findings from [28] to  [36],  she
    finds that it is "in the highest degree unlikely" that the  Appellant's
    ex-wife will enable contact between the Appellant and his  son  if  the
    Appellant left the UK [29].  She  sets  out  the  contact  between  the
    Appellant and his son.  She refers to the report of this contact  which
    stated that the sessions went well, and that the child  responded  well
    [30].  She refers  to  the  Cafcass  Case  Analysis  referring  to  the
    positive contribution that the Appellant can make  to  his  son's  life
    [32].  She  also  refers  to  the  Family  Court's  criticisms  of  the
    Appellant's ex-wife [33].


13. The Judge makes a clear finding in relation to  the  Appellant's  son's
    best interests at [35].  This finding was open to  her.   At  [36]  she
    refers to section 117B(6).  On the basis of the  unchallenged  evidence
    of the Appellant's contact with his son and the son's  situation,  even
    had the Appellant not  met  the  requirements  of  the  rules,  section
    117B(6) would apply to the Appellant, such  that  the  public  interest
    would not require his removal.  On the evidence before her,  the  Judge
    found that it would not be reasonable to expect the Appellant's son  to
    leave the UK.  This finding was open to her.  Had she found that he did
    not meet  the  suitability  requirements,  this  failure  to  meet  the
    suitability requirements would have to be considered in the  assessment
    of reasonableness but, given the circumstances,  which  have  not  been
    disputed, there is no error  in  her  finding  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the Appellant's son to leave the UK, and therefore
    that section 117B(6) would apply.


14. Although the decision could have been clearer as to whether or not  the
    Appellant satisfied the immigration rules which relate to Article 8, or
    whether the  appeal  only  succeeded  under  Article  8  "outside"  the
    immigration rules, there is no material error of law in the decision.


Decision


 15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
     a material error of law, and I do not set it aside.


 16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


 17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 19 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
