
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/04864/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                              |
|On 15 December 2017                           |On 16th March 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - new delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR NIR BAHADUR THAPA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office
                                Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Thapa):  Ms A O'Callaghan, Counsel, instructed by N
                                C Brothers & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal M A Oliver, promulgated on 16 February 2017, following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 19 January 2017, in which he had allowed  Mr
    Thapa's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  refusing  to
    grant him settlement as the family member of a former  Gurkha  veteran.
    For ease of reference, throughout this decision I  shall  refer  to  Mr
    Thapa, who was the original appellant, as "the claimant",  and  to  the
    Secretary of State, who was the original respondent, as "the  Secretary
    of State".

 2. The claimant is a 30 year old national of Nepal, who  was  born  on  28
    December 1986.  He applied for clearance to settle with his  father,  a
    Gurkha veteran who had served from 16 January 1980 to 1 July  1997  and
    who had been discharged with an exemplary record of service.  The basis
    of the application was that but for what has now in Gurkha  cases  been
    confirmed as being an "historic injustice" the claimant's father  would
    have applied for and would have been granted settlement at a time  when
    the claimant, as a minor dependent child, would have been  entitled  to
    settlement with him.

 3. It has now been established within Gurkha cases and  is  common  ground
    between the parties that in circumstances such as  this,  where  family
    life has continued between the  adult  child  and  his  Gurkha  veteran
    father, unless there is some other factor (such as criminal conduct  on
    behalf of that child) it will normally not be proportionate  to  refuse
    him settlement because in these circumstances the weight to be accorded
    to the historic injustice is  sufficiently  high  as  to  outweigh  the
    weight which has  to  be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control.  The issue in these cases is  effectively  whether
    or not family life can truly be said to have continued and that  is  an
    issue which has to be determined on the specific facts of each case  in
    accordance with current jurisprudence which  has  developed  since  the
    case of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31, in which the judges in  the  Court
    of Appeal (specifically Sedley LJ and Arden LJ) had given  guidance  as
    to the test to be applied.  Simon  Brown  LJ  had  given  a  concurrent
    judgment in that case.  The  case  law  has  been  developed  since  in
    various decisions  including  a  decision  of  this  Tribunal  (Lang  J
    presiding over a panel hearing) in Ghising  (family  life  -  adults  -
    Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160  and  also  in  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320).

 4. In his decision,  Judge  Oliver  found  at  paragraph  17  that  "I  am
    satisfied that the [claimant] enjoys a family  life  with  his  parents
    which amounts to emotional dependency" and for this  reason  considered
    that under existing jurisprudence he was entitled to settlement.

 5. The Secretary of State's argument, permission  to  appeal  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page, has been put concisely by Mr
    Tufan.  He submits that the  judge's  reasons  for  finding  that  "the
    [claimant] enjoys a family life  with  his  parents  which  amounts  to
    emotional dependency" are not sufficient to establish that Article 8(1)
    of the ECHR is engaged, which is essential before an  adult  child  can
    succeed in an application for settlement.  Mr Tufan submits  that  what
    is required following Kugathas is something beyond the normal emotional
    attachment to be expected between an adult child and his  parents.   In
    his submission at the very least the judge's finding is not  adequately
    reasoned.

 6. On behalf of the claimant, Ms O'Callaghan refers to the reasoning which
    she says has been given by the judge in support of his finding.  First,
    the judge has referred to his finding that the claimant  has  no  other
    means of  financial  support  beyond  that  provided  by  his  parents.
    Secondly, he is not living independently.  Thirdly,  he  was  the  only
    member of his close family to be left behind in Nepal, after  the  rest
    of his family had left.  In this regard she refers the Tribunal to what
    is said by the Upper  Tribunal  panel  in  Ghising,  referring  to  the
    decision of the ECtHR in AA v United Kingdom (Application  No.8000/08),
    in which that court had found  "that  a  significant  factor  would  be
    whether or not the adult child  had  founded  a  family  of  his  own".
    Although in that case the court considered that aspect  in  conjunction
    with whether a child was still single and living with his  parents,  in
    Kugathas it was held in terms that family life could continue  even  if
    the child applicant and his parents were living in different  countries
    - see per Arden LJ at paragraph 25 where she states that  "it  is  not,
    however, essential that the members of the family should be in the same
    country".   Ms O'Callaghan argues that following Ghising the fact  that
    the claimant has no other family support in Nepal is, in the  words  of
    the European Court of Human Rights in AA "a significant  factor".   The
    judge also in this case had in mind that the claimant's parents had not
    chosen to leave their son behind because he was by then independent but
    had had no choice other than to come, which was a factor considered  by
    the Court of Appeal to be significant in Rai (see at paragraph 42).  In
    other words, this was yet  another  case  where  the  parents  had  not
    deliberately left their child behind because  they  considered  he  was
    independent but had given consideration to his  position  and,  as  the
    judge had noted at paragraph 16,  "he  obviously  was  aware  that  the
    claimant and his brother intended to apply as soon as they are able  to
    do so because that is precisely what they did do".  So this was  not  a
    case where the fact that the  parents  came  was  any  indication  that
    family life had stopped.

 7. Further, this case had  the  additional  factor  which  the  judge  had
    referred to in his decision that the claimant had been  involved  in  a
    motorcycle accident which had increased his emotional dependence on his
    parents; his mother had subsequently gone back to  Nepal  in  order  to
    support  him  which  not  only  extended  the   dependence   but   also
    demonstrated that as far as this family was  concerned  the  claimant's
    first port of call was his mother as would  be  expected  in  a  family
    which was as close-knit as it is said that this family is.

 8. I do not have  to  consider  in  this  case  whether  or  not  I  would
    necessarily have reached the same decision as Judge Oliver, although on
    the facts of this case I may very well have done so.  It is  sufficient
    that I am satisfied  that  on  the  basis  of  the  material  which  he
    considered, Judge Oliver was entitled to reach the conclusion  that  he
    did that the claimant still enjoyed family life with his parents  while
    he was still an adult up to the time of the decision.  In  my  judgment
    even  though  the  Secretary  of  State's  submissions  were   advanced
    persuasively as well as succinctly by Mr Tufan,  they  are  founded  on
    semantics and lack substance.  It is quite clear from the decision that
    Judge Oliver did understand what he was required to do.  Indeed, as  Mr
    Tufan accepted, his exposition of the history of the Gurkha  litigation
    is very helpful and is entirely accurate.  He had in mind  the  factors
    that he ought to have in  mind  when  considering  the  extent  of  the
    dependency between the claimant and his parents, and the fact  that  he
    does not use the same phraseology as used in Kugathas does not indicate
    that he applied the wrong test.  He considered that  the  claimant  was
    still dependent on his parents and that for the reasons  he  has  given
    that dependency went beyond that of a typical adult child.  In light of
    the weight which must  be  given  to  the  "historic  injustice"  I  am
    satisfied that it was entirely open to the judge to find as he did that
    the claimant's appeal should be allowed on human rights grounds.

 9. It follows that there being no material error of law in Judge  Oliver's
    decision, the Secretary of State's appeal must be dismissed and I  will
    so find.

Notice of Decision

There being no material  error  of  law  in  Judge  Oliver's  decision,  the
Secretary  of  State's  appeal  against  that  decision  is  dismissed,  the
consequence being that Judge  Oliver's  decision,  allowing  the  claimant's
appeal, is affirmed.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date:    14 March 2018

