
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04516/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated                          |
|On 8th March 2018                    |On 27 March 2018                     |
|And determined on the papers         |                                     |
|on 23rd March 2018                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                           OLUWASEUN ADENIYI IDOWU
                                     Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation on 8th March 2018:
For the Appellant:     Ms Grace Brown instructed by Michael Stevens
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a Nigerian citizen, date of birth 7th  November  1982
      who first arrived in the UK on 20 August 2011. For reasons set out  in
      a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe his  appeal  against  the
      refusal of his human rights claim was dismissed on 11 May 2017. Before
      me on 8th March 2018, Mr Deller accepted that the First-tier  Tribunal
      judge had erred in  law  in  failing  to  give  any  or  any  adequate
      consideration to the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with a British  Citizen  child  with  whom  he
      lives  with  his  partner.  The  judge  did  not   factor   into   his
      consideration the citizenship of the child and the respondent's policy
      on British Citizen children who would be affected by  the  removal  of
      one parent with whom they lived.


   2. I set aside the decision to be remade.


   3. At its highest this appellant has committed deception by obtaining and
      relying upon a fraudulent ETS certificate in  an  earlier  application
      for leave to remain in the UK. The appellant denies this deception and
      has been trying to obtain from the respondent (so far  unsuccessfully)
      the necessary disclosure to enable him to carry out appropriate tests.
      Even if the appellant has perpetrated  deception,  the  issue  remains
      whether that action by him is sufficient, given  the  context  of  his
      close, genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and (now) two
      British citizen children, to mean that  the  decision  to  refuse  his
      human rights claim is proportionate.

   4. Mr Deller suggested, and this was agreed to  by  Ms  Brown,  that  the
      appropriate course of action would be for the remaking of  the  appeal
      be adjourned.

   5. I adjourned the hearing.


   6. On 22nd March 2018 Mr Deller informed me by email that


             "...I have decided that  the  Secretary  of  State  wishes  to
             withdraw her case. Irrespective of the still inchoate question
             of whether Mr Idowu was party to the fraudulent  obtaining  of
             an ETS certificate, the weight to be given to such conduct  if
             shown could not in my view outweigh his relationships with his
             children. That is not of  course  to  condone  such  behaviour
             where demonstrated, but our current policy would  not  warrant
             expecting Mr Idowu to leave in  his  individual  circumstances
             and thus there seems no need to continue with the case.
             ....I have been in touch with the solicitors who have given  a
             preliminary indication that they are content with things being
             summarily concluded before I send the  case  for  a  grant  of
             leave to remain...."


   7. The withdrawal of her case by the respondent is a  withdrawal  of  her
      opposition to the appellant's appeal.


   8. In the light of the email from Mr Deller I take the view  this  appeal
      can be determined on the papers before me. I remake  the  decision  in
      the appeal and allow it.


        Conclusion


   9. There is an error of law in the decision by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      and I set aside the decision to be remade.


  10. I remake the decision by allowing the human rights claim appeal.

        [pic]
     Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
        23rd March 2018
