
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04850/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 September 2020                          |On 1 July 2021                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     SD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Robert Parkin, Counsel instructed by Synthesis
                    Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellant's son, herein called "DD". Breach of  this  order  can  be
       punished as a contempt of court. I make this order because the child
       has personal educational and health needs and I  see  no  legitimate
       public interest in his identity being in the public domain.

    2. This is an appeal against a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismissing the appeal of the appellant, a citizen of Turkey, against
       a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse him leave  to  remain
       on human rights grounds.  The appellant is a national of Turkey.  He
       entered the United Kingdom in August 2004 and eventually  leave  was
       extended until 7 January 2018.

    3. On 18 January 2018 he was sent to prison for eighteen months for  an
       offence involving the misuse of a  trademark.   He  was  helping  to
       supply "fake good".

    4. In summary, it was the appellant's case that  he  ought  not  to  be
       deported because he had a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
       his wife and their son.  The son was born in 2006 so is now about 14
       years old and has significant learning difficulties.

    5. The main reason for granting permission is that  it  was  considered
       arguable that the Tribunal did not consider if there were any  "very
       compelling circumstances" under paragraph 398 of  HC  395  over  and
       above those identified in paragraph 399 and 399A.

    6. I begin by considering just what the  First-tier  Tribunal  decided.
       In submissions made directly to the Secretary of State  it  was  the
       appellant's case that he should not be deported  because  he  had  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and  son  who  was
       born in 2006.  The son's  circumstances  were  made  more  difficult
       because he had learning problems and went to a special school.   The
       Secretary of State acknowledged that the best interests of the child
       were a primary consideration.  The appellant's  son,  identified  as
       "DD", was not a British citizen and had  not  lived  in  the  United
       Kingdom for at least seven years.   The  child  entered  the  United
       Kingdom in November 2014.  He had been back to Turkey  for  a  visit
       and it was not accepted that it was unduly harsh for DD to return to
       Turkey or to remain in the United Kingdom without his  father.   His
       mother was the primary carer  as  had  been  demonstrated  when  the
       appellant was in prison.

    7.  It  was  accepted  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship with his wife but not that it would be unduly harsh for
       his wife to return to Turkey where she was a national and had  spent
       her formative years and it was not accepted it was unduly harsh  for
       her to remain in the United Kingdom without her husband.

    8. The Secretary of  State  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was
       socially and culturally integrated into the  United  Kingdom.   That
       was evidenced by his criminality.   Further,  it  was  not  accepted
       there were very significant  obstacles  to  his  reintegration  into
       Turkey where his mother and other family members lived.  There  were
       no very compelling circumstances.

    9. The appellant gave evidence to the First-tier Tribunal with the  aid
       of an interpreter.

   10. He said that he had been in the United Kingdom since 2004.   It  has
       been his intention to live in the United Kingdom to learn  to  speak
       English and then return to Turkey but he adopted to the British  way
       of life.  He met his wife.  They married in April  2006.   His  wife
       had been in the United Kingdom since about 2003.

   11. He was embarrassed at having been sent to prison and embarrassed  at
       the effect it had on his family.   He  accepted  responsibility  for
       what he had done and did not try and justify his criminal behaviour.

   12. He said his son did not know he was in prison.  They had lied to the
       boy and told him that his father was  working  in  Legoland  outside
       London.  They kept in touch by his  mother  including  contributions
       from the child in e-mail messages she sent to the appellant.

   13. It was said  that  the  son  had  "learning  difficulties  and  mild
       autism".

   14. The appellant said that his son discovered the  possibility  of  his
       being removed because he had seen a letter marked "Deportation"  and
       that started a conversation.  He told his son that they would not be
       separated again.

   15. The appellant said he had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  sixteen
       years and related to British culture and democracy.   He  could  not
       support his wife in his circumstances. She was  running  the  family
       business but he helped with his son's studies and took him from  and
       to school and took him out at the weekends.

   16. The First-tier Tribunal made findings about the appellant's criminal
       behaviour but I do not find them  particularly  important.  For  the
       purposes of an article 8 balancing  exercise  the  severity  of  the
       crime reflected by the sentence is the important factor.

   17. The appellant confirmed that his son was aged 8 when he came to  the
       United Kingdom and that he attended school in Turkey because he  had
       special needs (paragraph 35 of the Decision and Reasons).

   18. The appellant's wife had struggled in his  absence.   This  business
       was not doing well and the school  had  raised  concerns  about  the
       child.

   19. His son would be supported  by  SENDCO  (Special  Educational  Needs
       Coordinator) until he was 25 years old.

   20. He said it was not possible for his wife and son to go with  him  to
       Turkey.  He explained that the son was receiving  treatment  in  the
       United Kingdom and  making  good  progress.   They  had  looked  for
       alternatives in Turkey and had found somewhere in Ankara but it  did
       not seem to be able to help much.  He thought it would  be  damaging
       psychologically for his son to stay in the United Kingdom away  from
       his father.  He  talked  about  his  son's  arrival  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  His son came first when he was aged about 1 and went  back
       after three months.  They  were  beginning  to  recognise  signs  of
       autism and it was  not  thought  beneficial  to  go  to  the  United
       Kingdom.  He said that his son had  made  good  progress  and  spoke
       fluently.  His wife did not bring their son to  the  United  Kingdom
       because he went to see him in Turkey from time to time.

   21. His son had a close relationship with his grandmother who seemed  to
       understand him very well.

   22. Nevertheless he brought the child to the  United  Kingdom  in  2014.
       The doctors were satisfied with his ability  to  speak  Turkish  and
       thought him ready  to  integrate  into  a  different  culture.   The
       appellant said that his wife had worked hard to  provide  their  son
       with speech classes in the United Kingdom.

   23. The judge heard supporting evidence from the appellant's wife.   She
       said how their son had missed the appellant when he  was  in  prison
       and her own emotions were "frozen".  She had no  family  members  in
       the United Kingdom but received psychological  support  through  the
       NHS.

   24. When her husband returned from prison he resumed his  place  in  the
       family home taking care  of  the  son,  taking  him  to  school  for
       example, and giving the extra care and  support  that  his  learning
       difficulties required.  She did not want to face again managing  him
       on her own.  She was very grateful to the son's school and  teachers
       for the support they gave.  She  wanted  to  remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom with her husband and child.  She  had  applied  for  British
       nationality because that was in her mind where their life was to  be
       lived.

   25. In cross-examination she confirmed that  she  and  her  husband  and
       their son were all Turkish nationals and the son came to the  United
       Kingdom  in  2014.   In  Turkey  they  had  lived  with  her   son's
       grandmother and his learning difficulties were recognised in  Turkey
       and there was special treatment available.  He received  support  in
       the United Kingdom from  teachers  who  spoke  Turkish  as  well  as
       English because he did not speak English when he arrived.

   26. She claimed not to have discussed going to Turkey as a  family  unit
       because they had established a new life in the United Kingdom.   She
       did not agree that they could re-establish their life in Turkey.

   27. Although she continued to talk to  her  son  in  Turkish  he  always
       responded in English and had adapted to the  British  lifestyle,  as
       indeed had the appellant and her.  She did not feel she could remain
       in the United Kingdom with her son without her husband  because  she
       was so lonely when he was in prison.  She explained that she started
       to see problems as the child started to develop and went to  doctors
       in different cities and approached various specialists.

   28. Her son's grandmother was particularly useful at supporting him.

   29. One of the reasons she  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  is  she  was
       encouraged to come by one of her son's doctors who thought that  the
       family being reunited would be beneficial all round.   However,  she
       did not bring him to the United  Kingdom  in  2007  because  he  was
       getting treatment and  she  wanted  that  to  continue.   She  found
       leaving him for a time necessary and in his  best  interests.   They
       were living in a "decent home".

   30. He was 13  years  old  and  needed  support  particularly  with  his
       language.  He had no friends that visited him.

   31. In reaching her conclusions the judge recorded that the Secretary of
       State had accepted that the appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship with his wife and his son  and  the  judge  found  that
       there was established family life between them  all  in  the  United
       Kingdom as well as a "substantial degree of private life" since  the
       appellant arrived in 2004.

   32. Unremarkably, the judge found that the decision was an  interference
       with the family life of the  appellant,  his  wife  and  their  son.
       Again unremarkably, she found the decision  lawful  and  then  asked
       herself if it was proportionate.

   33. The child is not a British citizen and had not lived in  the  United
       Kingdom for more than seven years preceding the application  and  so
       could not come within paragraph 399 of HC 395.  Similarly, the child
       was not a "qualifying child" for the purposes  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 for the same reasons.  He was not  a
       British national and had not lived long enough in the United Kingdom
       at the time of the application to qualify.

   34. The judge then directed her attention to Section 117C  of  the  2002
       Act.  She found, correctly, that Exception 1 did not apply if for no
       other reason than that he was not lawfully resident  in  the  United
       Kingdom for most of his life.

   35. The judge found that Exception 2 could apply.   It  applies  in  the
       case of deportation of foreign criminals  where  the  person  has  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  qualifying  partner  or
       parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  the  effect  of
       deportation on the partner or child  would  be  unduly  harsh.   The
       child  is  not  a  qualifying  child  for  these  purposes  but  the
       appellant's wife is a qualifying partner because she is  settled  in
       the United  Kingdom.   The  judge  found  that  the  effect  on  the
       appellant's wife would not be unduly harsh.  The  judge  noted  that
       the appellant's wife has  some  mental  health  problems  which  are
       treated in the United Kingdom but nothing that would  stand  in  the
       way of her managing without her husband in  the  United  Kingdom  or
       returning to Turkey.

   36. The judge then recognised that the appellant's main point lay in the
       effect of deportation on his  son.   The  son  has  severe  learning
       difficulties and was improving in the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge
       noted a psychotherapist's report and quoted extracts from  it.   The
       judge accepted evidence of the "negative effects" of the appellant's
       absence.  The judge found that it was in the child's best  interests
       to live with both of his parents and separation would  be  upsetting
       but not that it would be unduly harsh if that were the test.

   37. The judge accepted that the best interests would be to grow up  with
       both parents but it was not established that should be in the United
       Kingdom but in any event the judge reminded herself  that  the  best
       interests were a primary but not decisive consideration.  There  was
       provision for the child in Turkey  where  he  had  spent  his  early
       years.  The family  had  contacts  with  Turkey  because  they  made
       frequent family visits.

   38. As I have indicated the main reason for giving  permission  was  the
       failure  to  consider  properly  if  there  were  "very   compelling
       circumstances"  under  paragraph  398  of  HC  395.   Paragraph  398
       provides that the public interest is in deportation and that  public
       interest "will only be outweighed by other factors where  there  are
       very compelling circumstances over  and  above  those  described  in
       paragraph 399 and 399A".

   39. The grounds for permission  to  appeal  says  the  consideration  is
       inadequate and referred to the decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in
       Kiarie and Byndloss v SSHD [2017] UKSC  42  at  paragraph  55  which
       listed "non-exhausted points" that  might  be  taken  into  account.
       These are listed in the grounds and particularly refer to the impact
       of deportation and the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of
       a child.  The grounds are clear and although not drawn by Mr  Parkin
       were, appropriately, adopted by him in his submissions.

   40. The difficulty that Mr Parkin faces is that although he can point to
       factors  in  the  circumstances  of  the  child  and   the   child's
       relationship with the father which might, possibly, have persuaded a
       judge to amount to very compelling circumstances he is not  able  to
       point to anything that should have been considered that has not been
       considered or has been considered irrationally.

   41. I hope my brief summary of his submissions does  not  indicate  that
       his submissions were ineffective or that I have considered  them  in
       only a cursory way.  I have got the point.  I  am  very  aware  that
       this is a decision that will have a big impact on  the  life  of  an
       autistic child who is  taking  advantage  of  the  opportunities  of
       living in the United Kingdom.  The child is clearly innocent of  any
       deficiencies on the part of his father and is not to  be  criticised
       in any way for benefiting  from  educational  opportunities  in  the
       United Kingdom that flowed from his law entrance.

   42.  Further,  separation  from  the  father  has   been   significantly
       unsettling and is something that needs to be thought about.

   43. I have thought about it.

   44. Mr Clarke's line was predictable and none the worse  for  that.   He
       reminded me, rightly, that this is a question of seeking an error of
       law.  He said that exceptions are provided and there was no argument
       to be made that the  exceptions  were  not  considered,  either  the
       exceptions under the Rules or the exceptions set out in the Act  and
       the plain fact is  the  appellant  does  not  qualify.   Either  the
       necessary ingredients are not met or, alternatively where  there  is
       an element of discretion, the matters  have  been  considered.   The
       child should not be elevated to the status  of  a  qualifying  child
       because he is not but the decision clearly showed  concern  for  the
       child and the child's circumstances.  There are quotations from  the
       reports that were provided to the judge and a clear finding that the
       child's best interests were to grow up with  both  parents  although
       not necessarily in the United Kingdom.

   45. The judge found that the appellant could resume business  activities
       in Turkey.  The child had obtained treatment in Turkey.  It is not a
       case where there is proper reason to fear that the appellant and his
       family would be  returned  to  penury  or  that  specialist  medical
       treatment would not be  available.   All  this  was  considered  and
       explained.

   46. The appellant himself had not made a good impression.  The judge had
       not believed him in parts and found he had  tried  to  minimise  his
       involvement.   These  are  trading   standard   offences   of   some
       significance as  reflected  by  the  sentence  and  are  not  to  be
       trivialised.

   47. The judge also found that the harm done to the appellant's  son  had
       been exaggerated.  That perhaps is understandable by a woman who was
       anxious to do the best that she could for her child  but  the  judge
       concluded at paragraph 117 that she found  "the  appellant  has  not
       demonstrated that there is any compelling reason why she should  not
       be deported to Turkey".

   48. Mr Parkin reminded me that Article 8 is wider  than  the  Rules  and
       that is a point properly made.  What he could not do is identify any
       public law error.  This is an argument  about  weight  and  that  is
       largely a matter for the judge unless perversity is established  and
       it has not been established.

   49. Putting all these things together and having  reflected  on  it  for
       rather longer than I should have done, I find that the appellant has
       not established any error of law in the decision and I dismiss  this
       appeal.



Notice of Decision

   50. This appeal is dismissed.

                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 1 July 2021                    |

