
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04695/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th April 2019                        |On 29th April 2019                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   G N S
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Nadeem (LR), City Law Immigration Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Place, promulgated on 20th October 2017, following a  hearing  at
    Nottingham on 9th  October  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on  1st
    January 1991.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    10th August 2015, refusing his application for leave to remain  in  the
    UK on the basis of his private and family life.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a UK partner, who is  a  British  citizen,
    and is of English origin, and that they had been  living  together  for
    more than two years.  They now have a British citizen child,  and  have
    access to that child, secured  through  the  court,  whereby  they  are
    allowed to visit the child six times a year.  The  decision  to  remove
    the Appellant  would  impact  upon  the  Appellant's  human  rights  by
    severing his link with his child, and forcing his partner to either  go
    to Pakistan, or to remain in the UK, in which  event  the  relationship
    will also be impacted upon in a manner that infringes his human rights.



The Judge's Findings

 4. In a careful, and detailed determination, the judge  observed  how  the
    Appellant maintains that he and his wife were Islamicly married on 30th
    March 2012, and have lived together since.  They have a child  together
    and that child is subject of a guardianship order until she is 18 years
    of age.  The Appellant served time in prison, and  that  was  the  only
    period of time when  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  lived  separately.
    Thereafter, they had been living together and there are  utility  bills
    to prove this.  The period spent separately was four  months  when  the
    Appellant was in prison at the end of 2013.  However, during this  time
    the  Appellant's  wife  maintained  contact  with  him  by  email  (see
    paragraph 21).

 5. A feature of this family between the Appellant and  his  wife  is  that
    there were concerns, leading up  to  the  making  of  the  guardianship
    order, expressed by both the local authority and the guardian  herself,
    about the nature of the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    wife, and whether his  wife  "is  being  exploited  by  the  Appellant"
    (paragraph 24).  Nevertheless, the judge was satisfied that there was a
    genuine and subsisting relationship between the two of them.

 6. The Appellant maintains that he has sometimes  seen  his  child  up  to
    eight or ten times a year.  The judge found there to be no  documentary
    evidence to support this.  Although the Appellant  and  his  wife  have
    attempted to increase the number of times when  they  can  visit  their
    child, a Cafcass letter of June 2016 recommends to the court  that  the
    visits remain at  six  time  a  year  and  that  the  Social  Services'
    assessment describes (at page 69 of bundle  2)  that  under  a  special
    guardianship order, the Appellant and his wife would need the leave  of
    the court to vary the order, and that such  a  request  would  only  be
    granted, if it was  the  case  that  arose  from  "where  the  parent's
    lifestyle changes were significant and have proved to  be  sustainable"
    (paragraph 27).

 7. The judge was of the view that in the three years since that report  on
    June 2016, between the  Social  Services  assessment  and  the  Cafcass
    letter, "such changes were not thought  to  have  occurred"  (paragraph
    27).  Another feature of this appeal was that the Appellant  sought  to
    rely upon a letter from  the  guardian  (at  page  24  of  bundle  one)
    supporting the Appellant in his attempts to gain further access to  the
    child.  The judge rejected this because "there is  nothing  to  confirm
    that it comes from the guardian - it does not even appear to  bear  her
    name; it is not dated and,  now  the  guardian  apparently  offers  her
    support, she has not come to the hearing ..." (paragraph 28).

 8. In the circumstances, it was also the case that  "all  decision  making
    relating to  [the  child's]  day-to-day  care  rests  firmly  with  the
    guardian and that should the Appellant and [his wife] wish  to  contest
    any such decision making, they would have to do so through the  courts"
    (paragraph 29).  The  judge  then  went  on  to  deal  with  Article  8
    separately and observed  that  the  decision  would  be  no  different.
    Whereas the Appellant's wife would have a "understandable reluctance to
    move with the Appellant to Afghanistan" there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to her doing so (paragraph 37).

 9. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    concluded that the Appellant did not  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship as a parent with a qualifying child (paragraph 31).   This
    is because in the opinion of  Sonia  Strachan  (an  independent  social
    worker), "it is highly beneficial for child S to have contact with  her
    birth parents" (quoted at paragraph 38 of the judge's decision).

11. On 30th April 2018, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on
    the basis that, against the background of the grounds  of  application,
    it was likely the case that Section 117B(6)(a) of the  Immigration  Act
    2014 was satisfied.  Second, the private life under Article  8  of  the
    Appellant's British citizen partner would be damaged and infringed were
    the Appellant to be removed.  The judge's  treatment  of  this  on  the
    basis that it was "understandable" that there would  be  reluctance  on
    the  wife's  part  to  move  to  Afghanistan  (paragraph  27)  did  not
    adequately carry out the assessment required.  In fact, the  judge  did
    not anywhere in the decision refer to the wife's  British  nationality,
    her lifelong residence in the UK,  and  her  substantial  private  life
    under Article 8 in this country.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 5th April 2019,  Mr  Nadeem,  appearing  on
    behalf  of  the  Appellant,  relied  upon  the  extensive  grounds   of
    application.  He submitted that there was no  Rule  24  response.   The
    grounds of application make it clear that the existing  Cafcass  report
    was dated 2013, and there was no updated Cafcass report that  addressed
    the position currently of the Appellant and his wife  as  parents.   He
    also referred  to  the  recent  decision  of  SR  (subsisting  parental
    relationship - s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT 00334, which  is  to  the
    effect that in considering Section 117B(6) the act does not necessarily
    require a consideration of whether the child will in fact  or  practise
    leave the UK.  The question that disposed is "would  it  be  reasonable
    'to expect' the child to leave the UK?".  He submitted that  the  facts
    here were similar to the reported decision in SR.   The  Appellant  was
    married to an English lady who had never been to Afghanistan  and  this
    aspect had not been properly considered by the judge.

13. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the facts of the  instant  appeal
    was rather different from that case of SR.  There was  in  the  instant
    case a Cafcass report.  It is known that the Appellant has a child with
    a British citizen lady.  However, that lady was  considered  to  be  an
    unsuitable parent, and the child was at a very young  age,  in  January
    2013, in the first six months of the birth, removed to a guardian,  and
    this was five years before this hearing.  The  child  has  been  living
    away from both parents.  It is the guardian who has the day-to-day care
    of the child.  The concerns of the authorities in relation to  the  bad
    influence of the Appellant are also manifest in the documentation.  The
    court made a special guardianship order to give the child contact  with
    her natural parents six times a year, but by way of supervised  visits.
    The Appellant is stating that he has sought to increase that.  However,
    there was no evidence to this effect before the court.

14. In any event, the Cafcass 2016 information is to the  effect  that  the
    court has not been amenable to  this.   The  grant  of  permission  was
    misconceived.  In SR there was no  Family  Court  decision  taking  the
    child away from the father.  The mother was deemed  unsuitable  because
    she conceived following  a  number  of  miscarriages  that  arose  from
    pregnancies with different  men,  until  she  fell  pregnant  with  the
    current child at the age of 17.  As for her accompanying the  Appellant
    to Afghanistan, the mother only expressed "reluctance to move with  the
    Appellant to Afghanistan"  (paragraph  37)  and  there  is  nothing  to
    suggest that there was the requisite insurmountable  obstacles  in  her
    way to doing so.  The reliance upon Agyarko did not help the  Appellant
    because that case makes it clear that "insurmountable obstacles"  is  a
    "high threshold".

15. Finally, the Appellant's wife had converted to  Islam.   She  wore  the
    hijab.  There would be  no  problem  of  her  relocating  to  a  Muslim
    country.

16. In reply, Mr Nadeem submitted  that  the  parties  were  in  a  genuine
    relationship.  They had a  genuine  parental  relationship  with  their
    child.  There were three aspects to  this  appeal.   The  first  aspect
    concerned the Appellant having met his wife when they  were  both  very
    young.  He was 18 and she was 14.  The  second  aspect  concerns  their
    having had a child, but devoid of the parental skills  needed  at  that
    young age to look after the child, in a manner that is confirmed by the
    Cafcass report.  The third aspect concerns the fact that in  2016  they
    did go to court to ask for further contact.  The report relied upon was
    the 2013 Cafcass report, and there was no new Cafcass opinion as to the
    current state of the parents' ability to look after their child.   What
    is also unmistakable was that they have had the minimum of  six  visits
    of supervised access to see their child per year.  In addition to this,
    they made contact by telephone.  The evidence shows that after 2013 the
    mother became stable.   She  did  not  have  continuing  mental  health
    problems.  However, Cafcass did not produce an updated report.

Error of Law

17. I am not satisfied that the decision of the judge involved  the  making
    of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of  TCEA  2007).   My
    reasons are as follows.  First, this is a case  where  the  Appellant's
    wife has gone into a relationship with the Appellant, as recognised  by
    the judge, in circumstances where she  was  aware  of  his  immigration
    situation.  It is a case where the local  authority  has  had  concerns
    about the nature of the relationship and of the Appellant's wife "being
    exploited by the Appellant" (paragraph 24).

18. Second, insofar as the child is concerned, shortly after the  birth  of
    the child, there was a guardianship order, that  placed  the  child  in
    more stable surroundings, and that position  is  to  remain  until  the
    child is 18 years of age.

19. Third, the judge has regard to  all  of  the  evidence  that  has  been
    presented before her, and does not err as  a  factual  matter  in  this
    respect.  It is said that the Appellant and  his  wife  had  sought  to
    increase their contact with the  child  but  the  judge  observes  that
    "there is no documentary evidence before me of any application  to  the
    courts" (paragraph 30).  It is moreover, also observed that  there  may
    "hope one day to have more contact with her but the documents show that
    the purpose of the special guardianship order is  to  provide  child  S
    with stability and continuity" and the submission made by Mr Nadeem  at
    the time before the judge that allowing the Appellant to remain in this
    country "would greatly increase their chances of regaining  custody  of
    child S is  unsubstantiated  (paragraph  30).   There  is,  of  course,
    nothing stopping the Appellant from making that application now.

20. Fourth, it is important that the letter that was purportedly  from  the
    guardian, was rejected by the judge, as not even bearing her name,  not
    being dated, and not being supported by her attendance at the court  to
    support the claims made by the Appellant.

21. Fifth, the  Appellant's  wife  has  only  expressed  a  "understandable
    reluctance to move with the Appellant to Afghanistan" but the test,  as
    the judge made clear, is one of  "insurmountable  obstacles",  and  the
    decision in Agyarko makes it clear that unless there are "unjustifiably
    harsh consequences", an adverse decision would not be disproportionate.
     It also makes clear that appropriate weight needs to be given  to  the
    Secretary of State's policy and  the  public  interest  in  immigration
    control, and the threshold is a high one to surmount.

22. It is of course the case that the Appellant's  wife  has  not  been  to
    Afghanistan, but the judge deals with this by observing that  "she  was
    aware of the Appellant's lack of immigration status  when  she  entered
    into a relationship with him" (paragraph 37), and is now a  convert  to
    his faith, and "no evidence was put to me, other than the  relationship
    with child S, as to why the Appellant, and [his wife] could not  go  to
    Afghanistan" (paragraph 37).  Ultimately, the  judge  could  only  have
    decided the appeal on the basis of evidence.  If the evidence  was  not
    put to that effect, the judge could not have taken it into account.

23. Finally, the decision by the judge that the  social  worker's  opinions
    that it would be highly beneficial for the child to have  contact  with
    her birth parents has to be  construed  in  the  context  that  nothing
    should  interrupt  or  undermine  the  placement  with   the   guardian
    (paragraph 38).  Accordingly, the decision by  the  judge  was  not  an
    irrational one and there is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

An anonymity order is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2019

