
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04792/2016
                                                               HU/04795/2016
                                                             & HU/04797/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2019                  |On 27 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                    1) MO
                                    2) MD
                                    3) MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss A Smith, instructed by JCWI
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                             ANONYMITY DIRECTION

     Having had  regard  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
     Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:
     Anonymity Orders, I consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the
     following terms:


        Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify any of the appellants.   This
        direction applies to, amongst others, both the Appellants  and  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The first appellant (MO) is a national  of  Nigeria,  born  in  January
    1984.  The  second  (MD)  and  third  (MA)  appellants  are  the  first
    appellant's children, born in June 2005 and June 2011 respectively.

 2. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision
    made by the Secretary of State ("SSHD") on 8  February  2016,  refusing
    their application to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  human  rights
    grounds.  That decision was the subject of an appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT"), which was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart on 17 October 2017 and dismissed in a decision  promulgated  on
    15 November 2017.  Permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 13 April 2018.

 3. By way of a decision of the 31 August  2018,  I  set  aside  the  FtT's
    decision and directed that the re-making of the appeal be determined by
    the Upper Tribunal. The matter was then stayed to await the outcome  of
    the Supreme Court's decision in KO (Nigeria) and Others [2018] UKSC 53,
    which was handed down on 24 October 2018.

 4. The appeal came back before the Upper Tribunal on 12 February 2019,  at
    which time I heard evidence and submissions. However, I agreed to defer
    the making of my decision until the Upper Tribunal (Presidential panel)
    had issued its decision in JG (s117B(6)):  "reasonable  to  leave"  UK)
    Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072. After JG had  been  handed  down,  I  invited
    further submissions from the parties. Written submissions were received
    from the appellants on 8 April 2019. The SSHD did not  respond  to  the
    invitation.

 5. On 12 April 2019, the Court of Appeal handed down its  decision  in  AB
    (Jamaica) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 661. Despite the obvious relevance  of
    this decision to the  instant  appeal  I  concluded  that  it  was  not
    necessary to invite the parties to make yet further submissions,  given
    that the Court of Appeal  had  agreed  with  the  approach  to  section
    117B(6) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("2002 Act")
    taken by the Tribunal in JG, albeit not for the same  reasons  as  were
    identified in JG.





Appellant's Immigration History

 6. The FtT recorded the appellants' immigration history in  the  following
    terms, which I adopt:

         "2.  The appellant had a number of visit visas issued for  the  UK,
             the most recent being issued in 2010 valid until 27  September
             2012.  She said that she had been visiting the UK for over  11
             years.  On 12 November 2013 she applied for leave to remain on
             the basis of family and private life  in  the  UK.   This  was
             refused without right of appeal on 31 January 2014.   She made
             a further application on similar grounds on 18 February  2015.
             This was rejected on 7 October 2015.

         3.   The 2nd appellant is said to have been  born  in  the  UK  and
             never left since  birth  however  he  was  issued  with  entry
             clearance in Nigeria as an accompanied  child  valid  from  27
             September 2010 until 27 March 2011.  He was  included  on  the
             family and private life applications  submitted  in  2013  and
             2015 as well as the current application.

         4.   The 3rd appellant was born in the United Kingdom and  included
             on  the  previous  application  as   well   as   the   current
             application."

 7. The FtT thereafter summarised the terms of the appellants'  application
    to the SSHD as follows:

         "5.  A letter from a charity, Minority  Development  and  Advocacy,
             accompanied the application. This said the 1st  appellant  was
             referred to them by the Refugee and  Migrant  Project  (RAMP).
             The letter states that the 1st appellant is a single parent of
             two British sons.  She arrived in the UK in December 2004 as a
             visitor and has not left or  returned  to  Nigeria  since  her
             arrival.  She has overstayed.   She cannot  recall  the  exact
             date she arrived or provide her Nigerian passport  as  it  was
             destroyed in a house fire.  She  separated  from  her  partner
             since 2010 with whom she underwent a form of marriage ceremony
             and does not know  his  whereabouts.   He  is  the  biological
             father of her 2 sons.  She is destitute and constantly  moving
             from place to place.  She does not receive public  funds  save
             child benefit and gets day-to-day support from  charities  and
             food  banks.   In  Nigeria   she   had   been   disowned   and
             excommunicated from the local community and her family had cut
             her off financially and emotionally.

         6.   The appellant suffered domestic  abuse  for  her  partner  who
             abandoned  her  and  her  two  children.   She  suffers   from
             depression and mental illness since her traumatic experiences.
              She has forgotten everything of  her  country  of  birth  and
             fears the possibility of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM)  were
             she to return.  The family never approved of her marriage  and
             this would cause her further problems.

         7.    In  the  UK  the  children  are  settled   and   doing   well
             academically.   The  relationship  between   the   appellant's
             children and their local community would be ended if  the  1st
             appellant were required to return to her  country  of  origin.
             They have close friendships with  classmates.   The  appellant
             would be  at  serious  risk  of  FGM  from  the  community  or
             prospective partner/husband.

Appeal Proceedings thus far

 8. As alluded to above, I set aside the FtT's decision for  reasons  given
    in my decision of 31 August 2018. In summary, I found that the FtT  had
    failed to have regard to s117B of the 2002 Act - a failure which was of
    a particular significance in the instant appeal given that  as  of  the
    date of the FtT's  decision  (which  was  the  relevant  date  for  the
    purposes of s117B(6) of the 2002 Act) MD had  spent  the  previous  six
    years and 11 months continuously living in the United Kingdom and  over
    seven years in total living in the United Kingdom. MA  had  also  spent
    over 6 years continuously living in the UK.

 9. The FtT should have approach the issue of the weight to be attached  to
    the time spent by the children living in  the  United  Kingdom  in  its
    proper context i.e. in light of the terms of  section  117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act, the judgment in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705,  and  the
    fact that at the relevant date one child had been  continuously  living
    in the United Kingdom for just one  month  short  of  the  time  period
    identified in s117B(6) and had been living in the UK for  a  period  in
    excess of seven years in total.  An  analysis  of  the  FtT's  decision
    showed that it did not do so, and in  my  conclusion,  such  a  failure
    constituted an error in its approach and reasoning.

10. In addition, I observed that before the FtT the appellants  had  relied
    upon evidence from Ms Jasmine Smith -  an  independent  social  worker.
    There is no doubt that  Ms  Smith  is  suitably  qualified  to  provide
    evidence as an independent social worker.  In  her  evidence  Ms  Smith
    identified the documents before her when reaching her  conclusions  and
    referred to having interviewed all three of the  appellants.   However,
    at paragraph 51 of its decision the FtT stated,  inter  alia,  that  Ms
    Smith's report was "[51] based entirely on what the appellant  said  in
    her statements, much of which is untrue and consequently I cannot place
    much weight in the report".

11. Even a brief consideration of Ms Smith's report leads inexorably to the
    conclusion that it was not based entirely  on  the  statements  of  the
    first appellant, but on information provided by all  three  appellants,
    numerous well-known country background reports as well  as  Ms  Smith's
    personal expertise.

12. Taking the aforementioned errors in the FtT's decision cumulatively,  I
    found  that  its  decision  on  the  issue  of  whether  it  would   be
    proportionate for the appellants to leave the United Kingdom  and  live
    in Nigeria was unsustainable and that it must be revisited on a  lawful
    basis. It is for that reason that I set aside the FtT's decision.

13. I  found  all  of  other  grounds  pursued  by  the  appellants  to  be
    unarguable.

14. The parties agreed at the hearing that if I set aside the  decision  of
    the FtT it would be appropriate for the appeal to remain in  the  Upper
    Tribunal for further consideration. This is the  course  I  adopted.  I
    limited the scope  of  the  rehearing  to  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellants' removal would breach Article 8 ECHR. I also  directed  that
    the findings of primary fact made by the FtT within paragraphs 41 to 47
    of its decision would form the starting point for the remaking.

Remaking of Decision

Legal Background

15. Article 8 of the ECHR provides:

         "(1) Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
         life, his home and his correspondence.


         (2)  There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the
         country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others."

16. In R (Razgar) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]  UKHL
    27, at [17], Lord Bingham of Cornhill set out the questions that  arise
    for determination when removal is resisted in  reliance  on  Article  8
    grounds:

         "(1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?


         (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences of such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?


         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
         in the interests of national security, public safety or the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder
         or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?


         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?"

17. In that context, courts and tribunals must have regard in particular to
    the matters set out in Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002, as amended by the Immigration Act 2014.


     Section 117A provides:

         "(1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


             (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
             family life under Article 8, and


             (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
             Human Rights Act 1998.


         (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard -


             (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
             117B, and


             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest question' means the
         question of whether an interference with a person's right to
         respect for private and family life is justified under Article
         8(2)."



    Section 117B provides:

         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.


         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-


             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)  Little weight should be given to-


             (a)  a private life, or


             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
             established by a person at a time when the person is in the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom."

18. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
         who-


         (a)  is a British citizen, or


         (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
         seven years or more"

19. In AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 661, the Court of  Appeal  adopted  the
    interpretation of s117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  found  in  its  earlier
    decision of MA (Pakistan), where at [36] Elias LJ said:

         "Looking at section 117B(6) free from authority, I would favour the
         argument of the appellants. The focus on paragraph (b) is solely on
         the child and I see no justification for  reading  the  concept  of
         reasonableness so as to include a consideration of the conduct  and
         immigration history of the parents as part of an  overall  analysis
         of the public interest. I do not deny that this may result in  some
         cases in undeserving applicants being allowed to remain,  but  that
         is not in my view a reason  for  distorting  the  language  of  the
         section. Moreover, in an appropriate case the  Secretary  of  State
         could render someone liable to deportation, and thereby render  him
         ineligible to rely on this provision, by certifying that his or her
         presence would not be conducive to the public good."

Factual Background - starting point

20. As I identified above, the findings of primary fact made by the FtT  in
    paragraphs 41 to 48 of its decision form  the  starting  point  for  my
    consideration of the relevant factual matrix. These can  be  summarised
    thus:

      i) MO obtained, and entered the UK on 12 December 2010 using, a  visit
         visa knowing that she intended to stay in the UK permanently.

     ii) MD and MA were conceived outside of the UK and born in the UK.

    iii) MO's claim to have lived in  the  UK  continuously  since  2004  is
         false.

     iv) MD departed the UK to Nigeria (with MO) on 16 May 2009 and returned
         to the UK (with MO) on 12 December 2010;

      v) MO has been dishonest throughout, she is educated and had  a  place
         at University in Nigeria. She is in  contact  with  her  family  in
         Nigeria and they are close. She has  close  ties  to  Nigeria,  has
         resources to draw upon and is resourceful;

     vi) MO has submitted false documents, used false identities,  has  lied
         in applications and lied in oral  evidence  regarding  registration
         with the Doctor and the name on the children's  birth  certificate.
         MO used a false name when she accessed medical treatment in the  UK
         and when registering the birth of her child;

    vii) There is no evidence MO has been subjected to domestic violence.

Further evidence before the Upper Tribunal

21. Further evidence was given by MO to the Upper Tribunal at  the  hearing
    of 12 February. In doing  she  adopted  the  contents  of  her  witness
    statement dated 7 February 2019 and was tendered for cross-examination.

22. In her statement MO asserted that she had  lived  in  the  UK  with  MD
    between 2005 and 2009, and that she was not been in the UK for most  of
    2009 or 2010. MD speaks only English, has had his entire  education  in
    the UK, considers himself to be a Londoner and fears life  in  Nigeria.
    He also fears losing his friends and other connections in the UK should
    he move to Nigeria. MD has additional educational needs, and the school
    has helped improve MD's behaviour.

23. MA was born in the UK in June 2011 and has lived his entire life in the
    UK. He is a Londoner and an  emotional  child.  He  is  doing  well  at
    school. He knows nothing about how things  work  in  Nigeria.  He  gets
    upset at the thought of moving to Nigeria. They have cousins and uncles
    in the UK with whom they are close.

24. In paragraphs 14 to 24 of her  statement  MO  seeks  to  paint  a  dire
    picture of the situation that  would  face  her  and  the  children  in
    Nigeria, asserting that she would have no funds, no  accommodation,  no
    opportunity to work, that her father is ill,  that  her  parents  share
    cramped accommodation with the extended family, and that  her  siblings
    have their own families and could not support her  and  that  when  she
    returned to Nigeria in 2009 she was destitute and forced to live with a
    friend.

25. Under cross examination MO gave further  information  relating  to  the
    circumstances of her siblings in Nigeria. She accepted that  she  could
    help her brother's wife sell goods there "to begin with" but maintained
    that she could not live with her parents in  Lagos  because  they  have
    only two rooms, one in which they live and one  in  which  her  brother
    lives. She accepted that her children could be schooled in Nigeria  but
    asserted that this would not be to the same standard as  the  schooling
    in the UK. She  thought  this  because  of  the  standard  of  her  own
    education.

26. Finally, MO asserted that she has no relationship with  the  children's
    father, although the children do remain in telephone contact with  him.
    He has let her down in the past. On 2 or  3  February,  the  children's
    father called MO on WhatsApp to say he had left Nigeria.

27. In addition to her won evidence MO also produced a further report  from
    Jasmine Smith, an independent social worker. Ms Smith stated  that  she
    had interviewed all three appellants for a second time  on  3  February
    2019. In summary, the report sets out the  connections  the  appellants
    have to he UK, in particular the children; identifies that MD  has  now
    started his GCSE preparation at school, states that both children  know
    no other life other than that in the UK and concludes that it would not
    be in the children's best interests to leave the UK. Emphasis  is  also
    placed on the children's need for stability.

Submissions

28. Both parties' oral submissions focused on  the  correct  interpretation
    and application of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, an issue which  has
    now been resolved by the Court of Appeal - as to which see above.

29. Mr Wilding further submitted  that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    children to follow MO to Nigeria. MO could obtain work  there,  as  she
    had accepted in evidence, and there was no evidence that  the  children
    could not receive adequate education  in  Nigeria.  As  to  the  expert
    report, he invited the Tribunal to attach little weight to the expert's
    assessment that it would not be reasonable for the children to move  to
    Nigeria, the issue of reasonableness being a matter of mixed  fact  and
    law.

30. Ms Smith, in her submissions made on behalf of the  appellants  at  the
    hearing, reminded the Tribunal that both children had lived in  the  UK
    for over seven years; one for almost his entire life and the other  for
    his entire life. It is in the best interests of the children to  remain
    in the UK, as the expert confirms. The children would struggle to  cope
    with life in Nigeria. The family in  Nigeria  are  poor,  education  in
    Nigeria is not as good as in the UK and MO's work prospects are limited
    to selling items with her sister in law. In  her  written  submissions,
    filed after the hearing, Ms Smith made comparison between  the  instant
    appellants' circumstances and the circumstances that prevailed in  JG's
    case. It was asserted that in the circumstances of the instant case  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the two child appellants to leave the
    UK.

Decision and Discussion

31. It is plain that all three  appellants  have  built  up  a  significant
    private life in the UK. MO and MD have lived  here  continuously  since
    December 2010 and, save for the periods spent 'visiting' Nigeria,  both
    also resided in the UK between 2005 and 16 May 2009.  MO  continues  to
    work with a voluntary organisation (RAMP) in the UK and has done so for
    some time - a fact not disputed by Mr Wilder. MD was born in the UK  in
    June 2005 and has undertaken his entire education here. He is about  to
    finish year 9, having started his GCSE preparations this year.  MA  was
    born in the UK in 2011 and has  never  lived  elsewhere.  He  has  also
    undertaken the entirety of his education in the UK. Each appellant  has
    established a network  of  friends.   None  of  these  matters  are  in
    dispute.

32. In all the circumstances, I accept that removing each of the appellants
    would cause an interference with their respective private lives of such
    gravity so as to engage Article 8 ECHR.

33. Such an interference would be in accordance with the law.

34. This case therefore turns on the answer to Razgar questions 4 and 5.

35. It is at this stage that one must turn to section 117B of the 2002 Act.
    Reliance is placed with  some  vigour  by  the  appellants  on  section
    117B(6). In this regard it is not disputed that MO has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with her children - MD and MA, or that
    both children are "qualifying" children - both child appellants  having
    now lived in the UK for a continuous period in excess of  seven  years.
    In MD's case he has lived in the UK continuously for a period  of  8  �
    years and for a substantial part of  his  life  in  total.  As  already
    alluded to, MA was born in the UK in June  2011  and  has  never  lived
    elsewhere, nor has he ever left the UK.

36. The question for determination is whether "it would not  be  reasonable
    to  expect  [either]  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom."  Such  a
    consideration must be undertaken in the  'real  world'  which,  in  the
    context of this case, leads to an  analysis  being  undertaken  on  the
    basis that MA and MD would follow their mother to Nigeria if  she  were
    to be removed. There is no prospect of them remaining in the UK without
    their mother.

37. I have no hesitation in concurring with the FtT's view of MO. She is  a
    dishonest individual who has  at  every  turn  sought  to  deceive  and
    manipulate the UK immigration authorities, even to the extent that  she
    came to the UK whilst pregnant on two occasions so the child  would  be
    born here and, on the second occasion, she came to the UK as a  visitor
    with the intention of seeking to remain here indefinitely. However,  as
    identified above, consideration of the 'real  world'  circumstances  do
    not allow  for  the  assessment  of  reasonableness  of  requiring  the
    child(ren) to leave  the  UK  to  be  infected  by  the  findings  made
    regarding the dishonesty and manipulation of immigration system by MO.

38. I reject MOs evidence that the children's father has left Nigeria.  She
    has provided no evidence in support of  such  contention,  despite  the
    relative ease with which this evidence could have been obtained i.e. by
    production  of  the  WhatsApp  message  or  other  evidence  from   the
    children's  father.  The  same  can  be  said  of   the   MO's   family
    circumstances in Nigeria. There has been ample opportunity  for  MO  to
    produce evidence supporting her contentions  that  there  would  be  no
    accommodation available to her  and  children  upon  return,  but  such
    evidence has not  been  produced.  Given  MO's  dishonest  attempts  to
    manipulate the Tribunal and the immigration authorities in the  past  I
    am not prepared to accept assertions of this  sort  when  corroborating
    evidence could have been made available. As to the availability of work
    upon return to Nigeria, MO accepted that she could assist her sister in
    law in selling goods, and she has also acquired skills in the UK  which
    will no doubt benefit her in the employment market in Nigeria.

39. Moving on, I do not set out  again  the  child  appellants  immigration
    histories save to emphasise that MA has lived all of his life in the UK
    and has never travelled outside of the UK and that MD has spent  almost
    the entirety of his life in the UK, save for approximately 2 years, and
    has started on the educational pathway to his GCSE's. I have  no  doubt
    both regard the UK as their home. I accept  Ms  Smith's  evidence  that
    each of the children has significant non-familial bonds to the  UK  and
    that removal would be against there best interests.

40. There is little independent evidence before  me  regarding  educational
    opportunities in Nigeria. I do not accept MO's own assertions regarding
    the  availability  of  education  there,  these  being  based  on   the
    circumstances as MO saw them when she was  at  school.  In  her  report
    Jasmine Smith refers to  evidence  of  the  acceptability  of  corporal
    punishment in Nigerian schools, but this adds  little  if  anything  to
    this case, and I take account of the fact that  the  most  recent  Home
    Office  COIS  report  indicates  that  "Although  free  and  compulsory
    education  is  federally  mandated  by  the   Education   Act,   little
    enforcement of compulsory education laws occurs at state level.  School
    fees are often charged, and the cost of materials  can  be  prohibitive
    for families. Access to education is further  hindered  by  a  lack  of
    teachers...".

41. The stage at which MD has reached in his studies  and  consequences  of
    him now being withdrawn from  those  studies,  is  something  I  attach
    significant weight to. MD is  not  a  child  who  has  entered  the  UK
    educational pathway in its latter stages but is someone  who  has  been
    exclusively educated in the UK and has reached the  position  in  which
    the  culmination  of  these  studies  is  in  sight  -  having  started
    preparation for his GCSEs.

42. Jasmine Smith's expert opinion, which  has  not  been  the  subject  of
    contrary opinion by an expert relied upon by the SSHD  nor  indeed  was
    this aspect the subject of adverse comment by  Mr  Wilding  during  his
    closing submissions, is that removing MD from the  educational  pathway
    at this stage of his studies would "not only  likely  to  be  extremely
    disruptive but could cause irreversible damage to his development". She
    further stated that whilst she had previously  observed  MD  to  be  an
    enthusiastic  young  child,  the  passing  of  time  between  her   two
    assessments had seen changes in him. During this time, he has  suffered
    emotionally and now appeared deeply sad and emotionless.

43. MA is not in  the  same  position  and  it  is  said  that  he  remains
    "oblivious" and has "no idea that his life could change forever".

44. Drawing all of this together, I do not accept that the appellants would
    be destitute upon moving to Nigeria. I do not accept  MO's  version  of
    the circumstances that prevailed upon her return to  Nigeria  in  2009,
    and I conclude  that  there  would  have  been,  and  will  be  if  the
    appellants return  now,  some  familial  support  available  there.  In
    particular the appellants will, in my conclusion, be able to live  with
    family members there. I also find that MO could obtain work in Nigeria,
    even if this is selling goods with  her  sister  in  law.  Furthermore,
    whilst I do not accept the child appellants' father has left Nigeria as
    claimed, I do accept that he has thus far played no more than a minimal
    role in their lives and no role in their upbringing. There  is  nothing
    in the evidence which leads me to conclude that  this  situation  would
    change.

45. I conclude that there is a likelihood of  the  child  appellants  being
    able to enter into the educational system in Nigeria  but  accept  that
    this is would not be to the same educational standards as are available
    in the UK.

46. Having taken all the circumstances of the case in the round,  including
    the fact that MD was born in the UK, has spent almost his  entire  life
    here, has substantial private life connections  to  the  UK,  has  been
    educated exclusively in the UK and that he has now embarked on his GCSE
    preparations,  as  well  as  Jasmine  Smith's  conclusions  as  to  the
    consequences for MD of withdrawing him from UK education at this stage,
    I find that it would not be reasonable to expect MD to leave the UK.

47. Looking at MA's circumstances in isolation, if I exclude from  my  mind
    the earlier finding in relation to MD I do not accept that it has  been
    established that it would not be reasonable to expect MA to  leave  the
    UK, despite the fact that he has lived here his entire life. As Jasmine
    Smith indicates, he is  oblivious  to  the  situation.  He  is  not  as
    embedded on the educational pathway as his brother and the consequences
    for him of leaving the UK educational pathway at this stage are not  as
    significant as in MD's case.

48. Nevertheless, the consequence of my findings in relation to MD is  that
    statute mandates that the public interest does not fall  in  favour  of
    MO's removal (section 117B(6)) despite her immigration history.  If  MO
    is not to be removed, then plainly  the  real-world  scenario  dictates
    that it would not be proportionate to remove either of the children.

49. For this reason, all three appeals must be allowed.

50.  I  observe,  however,  that  had  I  been  required  to   assess   the
    proportionality of  removing  MO  absent  the  conclusion  mandated  by
    section 117B(6,) I would have  unhesitatingly  concluded  against  her.
    Nevertheless,  she  has  successfully   managed   to   manipulate   the
    immigration  system  to  her  advantage  by  using  her  children   (in
    particular MA) as the bedrock  of  an  Article  8  claim  which,  as  a
    consequence of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, has been made out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and is set aside.

Upon re-making the decision under appeal I allow the appellants'  appeals  -
their removal being a breach of Article 8 ECHR.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 O'Connor
Date: 26 June 2019
