
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04801/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 October 2017                    |On 27 October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A GRUBB
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                            Daphne Elaine Howell
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Grubb, Counsel instructed by Hoole and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She was born on in 1958 and  so
    is 59 years old.  Having entered the UK on a visit visa in August 2002,
    she overstayed. She first applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of
    family and private life in March 2010.  The  application  was  refused,
    since which time she has periodically made further applications without
    success. On 10th of January 2014  she  was  served  with  form  IS.151A
    confirming to her that she was an over-stayer, and  I  S.151A  part  2,
    notice of the respondent's intention to remove her  to  Jamaica.  On  2
    September 2014, she made a further application for leave to remain,  on
    the basis of family and private life. This too was  refused,  initially
    without an in-country right  of  appeal.  Judicial  review  proceedings
    prompted a reconsideration, with a fresh decision issued on  18  August
    2015, again refusing the application, but notifying the appellant of an
    in-country right of appeal. The appellant exercised her right of appeal
    and it came before Judge Solly in the First-tier Tribunal, on 9 January
    2017. The judge dismissed the appeal.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 2. On 23rd of August 2017, the appellant was granted permission to  appeal
    by the First-tier Tribunal, it being found that the judge had  arguably
    failed to make adequate findings on material evidence integral  to  the
    family life claim.

 3. On 05 September 2017, the respondent filed a rule 24 notice seeking  to
    uphold the judge's decision.

 4. Before  us,  Ms  Grubb,  who  represented  the  appellant,  relied  and
    elaborated upon the Grounds of Appeal. Ms Grubb drew to  our  attention
    to paragraph 52 of the judge's decision, which is as follows:

      a) "The Home Office accept that  the  appellant  have  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with her son may be considered  as
         involving extraordinary bonds which normally  exist  between  adult
         children and their parents. However, the  evidence  before  me  was
         that the nature of the care provided by the appellant for  her  son
         and grandchild son was akin to that of a wife.  The  social  worker
         confirms that the son has parental responsibility for the  grandson
         Jahvanni and he receives carer's allowance for  him.  There  is  no
         evidence as to why Jahvanni's father is unable to fully parent  his
         son Jahvanni. There is no evidence about what he cannot do  due  to
         his sight problems and accordingly  I  find  that  Carlton's  sight
         problems do not prevent him parenting his son."

 5. Ms Grubb argued that there was a wealth of evidence  before  the  judge
    going to the history of the appellant's son's failure to  fully  parent
    his son. The  position  was  most  strongly  reflected  in  the  social
    services  evidence  that,  absent  the  presence   of   the   appellant
    grandmother in the household, the child  would  have  gone  into  local
    authority care. The closure of the case to children services in January
    2016 indicated the continuing success of the caring arrangements  which
    revolved  upon  the  appellant's  presence  in  the  child's   father's
    household, as confirmed from the medical evidence  of  Dr  K  Alexander
    referencing the stability that the appellant's presence brings to  both
    her  son  and  her  grandson.  The  medical   evidence   stresses   the
    vulnerability of the grandson Jahvanni. The judge was overly  concerned
    with the "why" as opposed to the actual factual matrix. Whilst  it  may
    be that the judge concluded that the appellant's father would  be  able
    to step up to the plate, and fully parent his child in the event of the
    appellant's  removal,  the  decision  does  not  say  so,  nor  provide
    reasoning to justify that conclusion.

 6. In short, the judge concludes that the appellant has  a  role  akin  to
    that of a wife in the household. Ms Grubb makes  the  point  that  that
    makes her  role  "as  mother"  to  the  child.  In  that  context,  the
    conclusion that the appellant has no parental role in relation  to  the
    child because he has a natural parent whom  the  judge  finds  has  not
    established why he cannot (or will not) fully parent the child, results
    in too narrow a consideration of the family life between the  appellant
    and the child.

 7. Mr Richards relied on the rule 24 response to the point that the  judge
    had taken account of the relevant evidence  and  she  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant did not enjoy a parental relationship  with
    her grandson. On the findings,  the  best  interest  consideration  was
    sufficient.

Discussion

 8. The judge rejected the submission that  the  father's  failure  stemmed
    from alcohol and  drug  dependence  because  of  the  lack  of  medical
    evidence  to  confirm  such  a  diagnosis.  The  judge  recognises  the
    importance of the appellant's role in the household referring  at  [47]
    to the evidence of the school that the appellant is a key figure in the
    child's life,  supporting  him  by  attending  events  such  as  parent
    evenings and medical appointments with the school paediatrician,  being
    the point of contact the school use most often because of problems   in
    consistently being able to make contact  with  Jahvanni's  father,  and
    that the appellant "is the most constant adult in Jahvanni's life and a
    vital asset in facilitating Jahvanni's development in ensuring his well-
    being. The judge also gives prominence at [49] to a letter  from  Dr  K
    Alexander indicating that the appellant has been providing a degree  of
    stability to both her son and grandson, and that the grandson  is  very
    vulnerable, and would be particularly at risk if he had no stable  home
    life.

 9. We find that the appellant's  grounds  are  sustained.  The  judge  has
    failed adequately  to  assess  the  evidence  in  the  context  of  the
    relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the  grandchild.   Although
    concluding that the appellant's son has a  relationship  of  dependency
    upon her, such as to engage family life rights,  the  judge  failed  to
    give  adequate  separate  consideration  to   the   position   of   the
    relationship between  the  appellant  and  her  grandchild.  The  judge
    appears distracted by her finding that the son  retained  his  parental
    relationship  and  responsibilities  towards  the  grandson.   Parental
    relationships are not necessarily exclusive.  It  follows  the  judge's
    reasoning provides insufficient findings of fact as  to  the  character
    and quality of the family life enjoyed with  her  grandson.  Without  a
    proper assessment of that relationship, appropriately set  out  in  the
    reasoning, the finding as to parental responsibility is and the  impact
    of interference upon family life insufficiently reasoned. Detailed fact-
    finding and assessment of the relationship remains outstanding.

10.  In  light  of  our  conclusions  we  are   in   agreement   with   the
    representatives jointly expressed view that the matter should be  dealt
    with de novo, and in  those  circumstances,  we  find  the  appropriate
    course is to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.





Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals an error of law for the
    reasons set out above.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing
    before a Judge other than Judge Solly





Signed            E. Davidge            Date 24 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


