



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/04996/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at: Field House             |                   Decision and Reasons  |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 12 December 2017              |                   On:  2 January 2018   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                              Mrs Rushmin Begum
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, counsel, instructed by Hamlet Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 10 August 1987. She
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge who  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision refusing her application for settlement in the  UK  with  her
      sponsor. The decision was promulgated on 13 July 2017.

   2. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt found that
      it was arguable that the Judge  took  an  incorrect  approach  to  the
      evidence of indirect contact by way of  telephone  calls,  which  also
      included a large number of calling cards and  telephone  records.  She
      noted that it was apparently  undisputed  that  those  records  showed
      multiple calls on numerous days to the home where the appellant lives,
      albeit with other family members and the evidence of the appellant and
      the sponsor regarding regular telephone calls, consistent.

   3. Although the sponsor gave evidence about cash  remittances  for  which
      there was no documentary evidence, the Judge did not indicate why that
      evidence or that of the appellant and  sponsor  in  general,  was  not
      reliable as to the genuineness of the relationship.

   4. Judge Pitt also found that it is arguable  that  the  Judge  had  been
      required to conduct a separate assessment as to the genuineness of the
      marriage in the Article 8 assessment outside the  Rules,  taking  into
      account the evidence as at the date of hearing rather than as  at  the
      date of decision. There was post-decision evidence by way of telephone
      calls, remittances and a further visit, arguably capable of allowing a
      different conclusion to that under the Rules.



The background to the appeal

   5. In refusing her application, the respondent was not satisfied that the
      relationship with her sponsor was genuine and subsisting.

   6. They met on 10 December 2009 and married on 17 December  2009.  Before
      the marriage they  had  met  on  only  two  occasions.  There  was  no
      independent evidence of contact immediately after  the  wedding.  Some
      telephone evidence had been produced but this simply showed calls made
      to Bangladesh over a period of time.  Money  transfers  were  produced
      which could have been produced by anybody with a home computer.






The error of law hearing

   7. Mr Malik, who did not represent the appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal submitted that the Judge erred in  not  taking  into  account
      post-decision evidence. The decision was made after 5 April 2014.

   8. At paragraph [12] the Judge found that the calls to the family home in
      Bangladesh had not necessarily been to his wife. He had earlier  noted
      that this was an arranged marriage and the parties had  only  met  for
      the first time one week prior to the marriage and  only  once  in  the
      intervening period. They saw each other again when the application was
      made in February 2016. The sponsor had claimed not to have a good  job
      and therefore it had been expensive for him to travel more  regularly.
      Many of the telephone calls in evidence were after  the  date  of  the
      application.

   9. Mr Malik referred to paragraph [9] where the  Judge  stated  that  the
      telephone evidence consisted  of  calls  made  after  the  application
      between June 2016 and May 2017 using Lycamobile.  Calls  between  2014
      and 2015 were also made on a service called Simplecall and  were  also
      made on Talk Home between 2013 and 2014. Not all the calls  were  made
      to the same number and most of them were to a number ending 831.

  10. It had been agreed at  the  First-tier  hearing  that  the  issue  was
      whether the marriage was subsisting [10].

  11. Mr Malik referred to page 3 of the appellant's bundle which  contained
      the witness statement of the sponsor which was before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. In his statement he claimed that  he  missed  her  and  kept
      contacting her by various telephone cards. He used various cards  over
      the period.

  12. The sponsor also stated  that  the  receiver's  telephone  number  was
      provided in the application form. Mr Malik referred to page 8  of  the
      bundle which confirmed in a written acknowledgement  that  the  global
      mobile number of the subscriber ended in 831. That document  is  dated
      20 March 2016. Moreover, Annex B  of  the  index  in  the  appellant's
      bundle identified the document produced at page 8, as 'Acknowledgement
      of Mobile Registration of the appellant for her mobile number.'




  13. Mr Malik referred to the Upper Tribunal's decision in Naz  (Subsisting
      Marriage-Standard of Proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT  00040,  produced  in
      the bundle before the First-tier tribunal.  The  Upper  Tribunal  held
      that post-decision visits by a sponsor to their spouse are  admissible
      in evidence appeals to show that the marriage is subsisting.

  14. He referred to the  appellant's  application  form  contained  in  the
      respondent's bundle. There she has set out her primary contact  number
      which ended in '831'. That telephone number that corresponded with the
      printouts produced identifying calls  that  have  been  made  to  that
      number.

  15. The evidence of these telephone calls is set out from  pages  201  and
      following. The appellant's application was made on  3  February  2016.
      The evidence produced demonstrated that a considerable number of calls
      made via Simple Cell for the period 27 December 2014 until  8  January
      2016, which all pre-date the date of the application.

  16. Evidence was also produced at pages 205-216 on the Talk  Home  account
      summary of the sponsor. This identified calls to the  831  number  for
      the period 18 November 2013 until 15 January 2014. There was also  the
      Lyca Mobile print out setting out the sponsor's call history  for  the
      period 12 June 2016 until 17 May 2017.

  17. Mr Malik submitted that there was 'enough evidence' to show that there
      had been  continuous  telephone  contact  between  the  appellant  and
      sponsor since 18 November 2013. Prior to that, the sponsor stated that
      calling cards were used from the date of marriage on 17 December 2009.



  18. The Judge also failed to take into account that there had been several
      visits made since 2009. The sponsor visited her from 10  October  2012
      until 24 November 2012; again on 13 February 2016 until 24 March  2016
      and more recently between 17 April 2017 until 6 May 2017.

  19. The Tribunal  in Goudey (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan  [2012]
      UKUT 00041 noted that the matrimonial relationship  must  continue  at
      the relevant time rather than just the formality of a marriage, but it
      does not require the  production  of  particular  evidence  of  mutual
      devotion before entry clearance can be granted. Evidence of  telephone
      cards is capable of being  corroborative  of  the  contention  of  the
      parties that they communicate by telephone, even if such  data  cannot
      confirm the particular number the sponsor was calling in  the  country
      in question. Where there  are  no  countervailing  factors  generating
      suspicion as to the intentions of the parties, such  evidence  may  be
      sufficient to discharge the burden of proof on the claimant.

  20. Mr Malik noted that there  has  never  been  any  dispute  as  to  the
      validity of the marriage. The Judge had however failed to engage  with
      the extent of the communication,  including  the  calling  cards.  The
      appellant  herself  asserted  in  her  witness  statement  before  the
      Tribunal  that  her  husband  has  visited  her  on  three  occasions,
      including at the time when the appeal was pending. Further, they  kept
      contact by telephone and he continued to  send  money  to  her  almost
      every month - paragraph 3, page 7.

  21. Mr Malik submitted that the Judge has given no proper reasons  why  he
      rejected all this  evidence.  There  is  only  one  paragraph,  namely
      paragraph 12 of the decision. In addition, there was evidence of money
      transfers in the bundle at page 191 showing remittance forms and money
      receipts to the appellant from her sponsor between November  2010  and
      2016.

  22. Moreover at [8] the Judge noted the sponsor's cross examination to the
      effect that apart from the remittances, all money was sent to her on a
      monthly basis. It was sent through an agent for cash. The evidence was
      not engaged with in the decision section of the determination.

  23. Mr Malik further submitted that where a claimant  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules, it would be necessary for the Judge  to  go
      on to make  an  assessment  under  Article  8  applying  the  criteria
      established by law - Singh v SSHD [2015] and  PG (USA) v  SSHD  [2015]
      EWCA Civ 118.

  24. There has been no findings or any  assessment  under  Article  8.  The
      Judge found that the appellant cannot succeed outside the Rules on the
      basis of a disproportionate interference with his family  life  as  he
      did not accept that the appellant had a subsisting marriage.

  25. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Melvin relied on the  Rule  24  reply.
      The complaint that there is no indication as to  why  documentary  and
      oral evidence was rejected is a "mere disagreement". The  Judge  noted
      that there was only one visit between the marriage  in  2012  and  the
      date of application. He found that the appellant's assertion  that  he
      loves his wife was not corroborated. The telephone evidence post dates
      the application and only demonstrates calls to his family home and not
      necessarily to his wife.

  26. The  contention  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  post-decision
      evidence  which  could  make  a  difference  outside  the   rules   is
      misconceived. The Judge has taken into account all the evidence or the
      lack thereof.  He  is  clearly  suspicious  of  the  post  application
      evidence. The grounds fail to identify any compelling circumstances.

  27. Mr Melvin referred to the six findings made at [12] which he submitted
      were open to the Judge. He noted  that  the  sponsor  decided  not  to
      attend this hearing.

      Assessment

  28. The Judge had regard to the telephone calls which were after the  date
      of the application [12]. It does not appear that he had regard to  the
      full history of the telephone calls that  were  made  and  which  were
      produced in evidence.

  29. The Judge stated that the calls were  not  necessarily  to  his  wife.
      However, there was evidence that the mobile  telephone  number  ending
      on 831, and which the  sponsor  claimed  related  to  the  appellant's
      mobile phone, was the number of  the  mobile  telephone  shown  to  be
      listed in her name.

  30. There was  thus  potentially  significant  evidence  which  the  Judge
      overlooked.  Further,   there   was   also   evidence   of   telephone
      communication between them  for  the  period  between  the  date  they
      married in 2009 until the present.

  31. There was also evidence produced  of  money  transfers  to  her  on  a
      monthly basis, which was sent through an agent for cash.  The  sponsor
      had claimed that all the money went only to his wife.

  32. Nor was a separate Article 8 assessment made  outside  the  Rules,  at
      which evidence was admissible at  the  date  of  hearing  rather  than
      simply the date of decision. This post-decision evidence is capable of
      producing a different conclusion to that under the Immigration Rules.

  33. I accordingly find that there have been errors  of  law.  The  parties
      agreed that should that be the finding, the  decision  should  be  set
      aside and the case remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
      decision to be made.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and it is set aside. The case is  remitted  to
      the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for  a  fresh  decision  to  be
      made.


      Anonymity direction not made.










      Signed  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


      Dated: 22 December 2017








