
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04059/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 October 2017                   |On 7 November 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                    [J B]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born  on  [  ]  2004.  He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 29 July  2015  to
    refuse to grant him entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the  child
    of parent present  and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal in a  decision
    dated 20 January 2017 on the basis that the appellant's sponsor has not
    demonstrated sole responsibility for the  appellant.   The  Judge  also
    stated that submissions were made on the basis that the  appellant  may
    be entitled British nationality, but it was not an issue that  she  had
    jurisdiction to consider.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
    in a decision dated 16 August 2017, stating that it  is  arguable  that
    the Judge fell into error as it is open to the appellant to argue  that
    he was in truth a British citizen and it was not open to the  Judge  to
    refuse to deal with that argument when it was raised.  The  Judge  also
    granted permission on the grounds which are  not  relevant  because  it
    became apparent at the hearing that the appellant is indeed  a  British
    citizen.

 4.  I  consider  that  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  possible  British
    nationality. That is a matter that the appellant drew to the  attention
    of the First-tier Tribunal who  refused  to  deal  with  it  under  the
    erroneous belief that she had no  jurisdiction  to  do  so.  The  Judge
    accepted  that  the  appellant's  mother  had  been   granted   British
    citizenship before his birth in 2009 and the appellant was born on [  ]
    2004.  Therefore, the appellant was born  to  a  British  citizen.  The
    consequence of that is then pursuant to Section  1(a)  of  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981, the appellant would be  a  British  citizen  from
    birth.

 5. I also find that the appellant would to be entitled, on application, to
    be registered as a British citizen pursuant  to  Section  1(4)  of  the
    British Nationality Act 1981. Therefore,  according  to  the  law,  the
    respondent has no power to exclude him from the United Kingdom.  It  is
    somewhat surprising that neither the appellant's legal representatives,
    the respondent or the First-tier Tribunal Judge thought it  appropriate
    to consider whether the appellant was  a  British  citizen  from  birth
    and/or could apply to be registered as a British citizen.

 6. The  senior  presenting  officer  at  the  hearing  accepted  that  the
    appellant is a British citizen by birth.

 7. I find that the decision of the first-tier Tribunal contains a material
    error of law and I set it aside in its entirety. I remake the  decision
    and allow the appellant's appeal on the basis  that  he  is  a  British
    citizen and does not  require  entry  clearance  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom.

DECISION

Appeal allowed.

I make no anonymity order.

I make a fee order in favour of the appellant for the  cost  of  the  filing
fees.

Signed by,

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Ms S Chana  Dated this 5th day of November 2017
