
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/04949/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 7 March 2019                      |On 11 March 2019                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  RAGAZ [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


No appearance by or for the appellant
For the respondent, Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant sought to remain in the UK, based  on  his  relationships
    with a partner and with her child.  The respondent refused his claim by
    letter dated 24 January 2018.  FtT Judge Debra H Clapham dismissed  his
    appeal by a decision promulgated on 17 October 2018.

 2. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  UT  are  set  out  in  his
    application filed with the FtT on 31 October 2018.  Their main theme is
    that the FtT failed to assess the best interests of the child.

 3. On 8 February 2018 the UT issued notice to the  appellant  and  to  his
    solicitors (then on record) of the hearing on 7 March 2019 at 10 am.

 4. The notice issued to the appellant has not been returned.

 5. On 4 March 2019 the appellant's solicitors advised  the  UT  that  they
    were no longer acting for him.

 6. By 1pm on 7 March 2019 there was no appearance at the  hearing  centre,
    and no communication to the UT, by or for the appellant.

 7. Mr Govan confirmed that the last  address  for  the  appellant  on  the
    respondent's records is the same address as on UT records, and that the
    respondent had received no recent communication from him.

 8. It is the  appellant's  responsibility  to  notify  tribunals  and  the
    respondent of any change of address.

 9. The hearing proceeded in absence of the appellant.

10. The appellant's grounds are based  on  legal  generalisations,  not  on
    evidence about the child's best interests which was before the FtT.

11. The grounds fall back at [10-12] on a duty on the tribunal and  on  the
    respondent to investigate and to tender evidence about the child's best
    interests.  That point is not well taken.  It was for the appellant  to
    bring the evidence to make his case, and for  the  judge  to  make  her
    decision on that evidence.

12. The FtT accepted, as conceded by the respondent at  the  hearing,  that
    there was family life among the appellant, his partner and her son, but
    it was obviously rather weak, as explained at [98 -  99].   The  appeal
    did not lie directly under the immigration rules, but their terms  were
    the starting point in assessing the human rights claim.  The respondent
    found the case to fall a long way short of the terms of the rules.  The
    judge does not deal with those issues point by point, but even  on  the
    concession made, the case still fell significantly short of the rules.

13. The judge set out the oral evidence from the appellant and his  partner
    in some detail.  The appellant said that the child called him  "daddy";
    the child went to bed by himself; he took  the  child  to  school,  and
    played with him; and the child's father sees him once a week, or  every
    two weeks [45-53].  His partner said that her son adored the appellant;
    her son has calmed down since they met; they played and spoke together;
    her son called him "dad"; she and the appellant took him to school; and
    he has finished primary school [60-66].

14. At [102] the judge observed that the  only  matter  in  favour  of  the
    appellant was a letter from a doctor, which went to an  improvement  in
    the health of  his  partner,  but  the  judge  saw  no  basis  for  the
    conclusion that the appellant's presence resulted in that  improvement,
    and said it might also be  due  to  her  child's  improving  behaviour,
    although that would be speculative.  At [103], she turned to the  child
    and to the  argument  that  his  behaviour  had  improved  due  to  the
    appellant's presence.  She found it significant that in a report on the
    child, written in 2016, at a time when the appellant  claimed  to  have
    formed the relationships on which he relied, there was  no  mention  at
    all of the appellant.

15. The child appears always to have lived with his mother, and to have  an
    ongoing relationship with his father, although the appellant sought  to
    play that down.  The appellant sought to maximise the period over which
    he has had  a  part  in  the  child's  life,  and  the  extent  of  his
    involvement, but there was nothing to show that he  had  brought  major
    benefit to the child.

16. There was evidence from which the FtT, if it had  been  more  specific,
    might have found that the child was likely to miss the appellant, for a
    time and to an extent, if he was no longer part of his life.  There was
    nothing by which the FtT might  have  held  that  the  absence  of  the
    appellant would be significantly detrimental, even in the  short  term,
    to the child's interests.

17. The grounds do not show that the making of  the  decision  of  the  FtT
    involved the making of any error on a point of law,  so  that  decision
    stands.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    [pic]


    7 March 2019
    UT Judge Macleman






