
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04449/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2018                               |On 22 August 2018            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                              MISS DIYA GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Layne, Counsel for Everest Law Solicitors,
Ealing, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Nepal  born  on  16  April  1983.   She
    appealed the Entry Clearance Officer's decision  of  13  February  2017
    refusing her application for entry clearance to settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the adult dependent daughter of Bimala Gurung, widow of  the
    appellant's late father who was an ex-Gurkha soldier.  Her  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Miller on 9 November 2017 and
    was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 1 December 2017.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Buchanan on  25  May  2018.
    The permission states that it is arguable  that  the  First-Tier  Judge
    erred in his assessment of the claim made in terms of Article 8 of ECHR
    and applied the wrong  test  and  rejected  evidence  at  paragraph  15
    without reasons.  It states that it is arguable  that  there  has  been
    failure to give any reasons  for  finding  the  refusal  proportionate.
    There is only one paragraph,  paragraph  23,  reciting  the  First-Tier
    Judge's conclusions, and there is no explanation given by the Judge for
    concluding "I do not believe that the appellant  is  dependent  on  her
    mother to the extent which has been alleged".  The Judge also  gave  no
    reason for concluding that the case was  not  one  where  the  historic
    injustice would justify the appellant being allowed to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom.


 3. There is no Rule 24 response.



The Hearing


 4. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the Judge did not give  proper
    reasons for finding that family life  between  the  appellant  and  her
    mother was limited and so it  would  be  proportionate  to  refuse  the
    appellant's claim.  He submitted that the  Judge's  findings  are  very
    brief and are at paragraph 23 of the decision  and  he  submitted  that
    they are inadequate and insufficient.

 5. Counsel submitted that to find that family life is limited flies in the
    face of the evidence.  He submitted that there is clearly emotional and
    financial dependency by the appellant on her mother.  There is evidence
    of financial remittances over a two-year period and evidence of  social
    media contact and visits to Nepal by the appellant's mother to see her.
     I was asked to take note of the appellant's  mother's  passport.   She
    visited in 2013, 14, 15 and 16.  Although she did not go  in  2017  she
    again visited in April 2018.  Counsel submitted therefore that there is
    annual contact between the  appellant  and  her  mother  and  therefore
    emotional dependency.


 6. I was asked to consider paragraph 23 of the decision and find that  the
    findings by the Judge are flawed.   The  appellant  has  not  had  very
    limited contact with her mother and it cannot be right for the Judge to
    state that he does not find that this is  a  case  where  the  historic
    injustice would justify the appellant being allowed to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom.


 7. Counsel submitted that there is clearly family life and it  is  clearly
    strong.  I was asked to take note of  the  case  law  relating  to  ex-
    Gurkha's family members and the case  law  dealing  with  the  historic
    injustice.  The case law states that substantial weight should be given
    to historic injustice and that if the reason for dismissing the  appeal
    was based on the United Kingdom requiring effective immigration control
    then this is not sufficient for the appeal to be dismissed.   The  case
    law states that in most cases of this type, relating to adult dependent
    relatives of ex-Gurkhas, it is normal for the case to succeed in favour
    of the appellant unless  there  is  criminality  or  the  like,  a  bad
    immigration record or deception, none of which are  relevant  here.   I
    was asked to consider the case of Ghising [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) which
    states  that  the  historic  wrong  will   ordinarily   determine   the
    proportionality assessment where the respondent  only  relies  on  fair
    immigration policy as a legitimate aim.


 8. I was asked to consider this claim in the round.  I was asked  to  note
    the brevity of the findings at paragraph 23 and  find  that  these  are
    inadequate and find that there is family life between the appellant and
    the sponsor and when  a  proportionality  assessment  is  carried  out,
    because of the historic injustice this appeal should have been  allowed
    under Article 8.


 9. The Presenting Officer accepted that this is not a perfect decision and
    submitted that the  Judge  is  concerned  because  there  is  not  much
    evidence about contact between  the  appellant  and  her  mother.   The
    sponsor claims to have lost her  phone  which  means  there  is  little
    evidence of contact between the appellant and the sponsor and there  is
    limited evidence of money transfers. He  submitted  that  there  is  no
    additional evidence from the appellant to establish family life  and  I
    was asked to consider the case of KUGATHAS (2003) EWCA civ  3  relating
    to the relationship between an adult child and a parent having to  have
    more than normal family life between them.


10. The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  Judge  finds  that  the
    appellant is not as dependent on her mother as the  Tribunal  is  being
    told because of the lack of evidence before him and that perfectly good
    reasons are given for the Judge's conclusion.  He  submitted  that  the
    conclusion is short because of the limited evidence before  the  Judge,
    and it is not clear how family  life  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor has continued since they were separated in 2010.


11. I put to the Presenting Officer that there is a considerable amount  of
    evidence but the  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  a  lot  of  the
    evidence relates to the sponsor's circumstances in the  United  Kingdom
    and is not particularly relevant to Article 8.


12. He submitted that there are some  money  receipts  in  the  appellant's
    bundle and the Judge's conclusion was open to him because of  the  lack
    of evidence.  Regular payments were not made by the appellant's  mother
    to the appellant. The payments were sporadic and he submitted that  for
    eight years there is very little evidence  of  financial  support.   He
    submitted also that the fact that the telephone has been  lost  by  the
    sponsor means that there is little evidence about the calls between the
    appellant and her mother and these calls are only for  a  very  limited
    period and although there are calling cards there are no dates on them.




13. Counsel submitted that there is  financial  dependency  in  this  case.
    There are 11 receipts  in  the  appellant's  bundle  in  total  and  he
    submitted that the sponsor had not realised she would require  to  keep
    her receipts.  It is clear that money was sent to the appellant by  the
    sponsor and there is also evidence of contact between them on the calls
    logs on file and on social media.  He submitted that the most important
    thing is face to face contact and the fact that the  sponsor  has  been
    making annual visits to her daughter, the most recent of which  was  in
    April 2018 should have been given considerable weight by the judge.  He
    submitted that the sponsor in this claim does not have a lot of  money.
    She is a cleaner but still manages to visit  her  daughter  once  every
    year and keeps in touch with her in spite of the distance between  them
    and still manages to send her funds.


14. Counsel submitted that the Judge should have found that  the  appellant
    is dependent on her mother and that there is family life under  Article
    8.  He submitted that based on the case of Ghising & Others [2013] UKUT
    00567 (IAC) where Article 8 is engaged and but for the  historic  wrong
    the appellant would have been settled in the United Kingdom  long  ago,
    this will determine  the  outcome  of  the  Article  8  proportionality
    assessment in the appellant's favour where the matters relied on by the
    respondent consist solely of the public interest in maintaining a  firm
    immigration policy.


15. Counsel asked me to allow the appeal.



Decision and Reasons


16. This is a typical case of an adult dependent relative of  an  ex-Gurkha
    coming to the United Kingdom to join a parent.


17. There is a considerable amount of case law about  this,  in  particular
    the said case of Ghising and the case of Gurung and others (2013)  EWCA
    civ 8.


18. The Judge finds that there is insufficient evidence of contact  between
    the sponsor and the appellant but it is  clear  that  the  sponsor  has
    visited the appellant on a yearly basis since she came  to  the  United
    Kingdom. The judge has not  explained  his  findings  in  the  decision
    satisfactorily.


19. It is unlikely that the sponsor would  have  realised  that  she  would
    require to keep the receipts for the remittances sent  by  her  to  her
    daughter since she arrived in the United Kingdom,  or  that  she  would
    have realised she should keep evidence of contact between her  and  her
    daughter.  I find that the Judge's statement that there is only limited
    family life between the  sponsor  and  her  daughter  to  be  a  flawed
    statement. He has not  given  proper  reasons  for  this  finding.  The
    appellant and her mother stayed together until her mother came  to  the
    United Kingdom and since she has been in the  United  Kingdom  she  has
    visited her daughter every year.  I find that  based  on  the  evidence
    before the Judge and when the case law is considered, the judge  should
    have  found  that  the  historic  injustice  must  succeed   over   the
    respondent's requirement for effective immigration control.   In  these
    ex-Gurkha cases  the  historic  wrong  will  ordinarily  determine  the
    proportionality assessment where the respondent  only  relies  on  fair
    immigration policy as a legitimate aim and that because of the historic
    injustice underlying the appellant's case, considerations under Section
    117A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  would  have
    made no difference to the outcome and certainly no  difference  adverse
    to the appellant. The judge has not properly  considered  the  relevant
    case law.

20. I find that when all the relevant factors and all the  evidence  before
    the judge are balanced against the only argument  put  forward  by  the
    respondent;  -  the  need  for  firm  immigration  control,  then  this
    appellant's appeal should have succeeded under Article 8. I  find  that
    there are material errors of law in the judge's decision.


Notice of Decision

21. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-Tier  Judge's
    decision and I direct that that decision is set aside.


22. I am remaking that decision and I am allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Article 8.


23. Anonymity has not been directed.




Signed                                  Date 13 August 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray

