
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/04871/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th February 2019                    |On 19th March 2019                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               mr Badar Munir
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Jaquiss (Counsel), Nasim & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S S Cunha, Senior HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pears, promulgated on 26th October 2018, following a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 27th September 2018.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and  was  born  on  1st
    April 1982.  He appealed against the  decision  of  31st  January  2018
    refusing his application for indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK  on
    the basis that he had been here at least for ten  continuous  years  of
    lawful residence.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim was  that  he  had  completed  ten
    years of continuous lawful residence and there was no gap in his  leave
    to remain, because this had been extended pursuant to Section  3(c)  of
    the Immigration Act 1971.  He claimed that although there  had  been  a
    refusal of his application on 29 November 2010, this had been appealed.
     In addition, the Appellant also argued that he should be granted leave
    outside the Immigration Rules based on his family life and private life
    under Article 8 (see paragraph 4 of the determination).

The Judge's Findings

 4. In a short determination, the judge held that  there  was  no  evidence
    before him of his having a partner or a child,  no  evidence  from  his
    mother or other family members, no evidence of engagement with  British
    society, and no statements from his friends.  Moreover, it was not  the
    case that the Appellant had appealed an earlier decision so as to  have
    continuous lawful residence as he  claimed  because  no  such  evidence
    existed (see paragraphs 12 to 14 of the determination).

Submissions

 5. At the hearing before me on 11th February  2019,  there  was  agreement
    between Ms Jaquiss and Ms Cunha appearing for  the  Appellant  and  the
    Respondent  Secretary  of  State   respectively,   that   the   judge's
    determination did indeed contain an error of law.   This  was  for  two
    reasons.  First, there was no consideration of the appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, even though the judge had stated  (at  paragraph  4)
    that part of the Appellant's  claim  was  that  his  appeal  should  be
    allowed outside the Immigration Rules.  Second,  there  was  no  proper
    consideration of the Section 117B requirement in favour of  immigration
    control.

 6. Ms Jaquiss submitted that two issues in particular  arose  (given  what
    the judge had decided at paragraph 14), namely,  firstly,  whether  the
    Appellant had lodged his appeal following the refusal on 29th  November
    2010 as he claimed.  Secondly, what weight in terms of the Section 117B
    considerations, ought to be given to his genuine belief, that  such  an
    appeal  had  indeed  been  lodged.   This  was  important  because  the
    Appellant had subsequently then been  granted  an  extension  of  stay.
    This does not normally happen in Ms Jaquiss' experience,  unless  there
    was a reason for the Secretary of State to  grant  leave.   This  would
    only have arisen if there had indeed been a valid  appeal  lodged.   If
    therefore, such an appeal had been lodged, then the fact that there was
    a grant of further stay, went to the Appellant's genuine belief that he
    was not in breach of the Immigration Rules, so that  the  Section  117B
    considerations would fall to be applied in his  favour.   All  of  this
    needed to be assessed properly again by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Ms
    Cunha did not disagree.



Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows. This
    appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by
    a judge other than Judge Pears (pursuant to practice  statement  7.2(b)
    for the simple reason that the Tribunal below has  not  considered  the
    Appellant's claim  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  of
    freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence; nor has consideration been  given
    to how the balance of considerations would  fall  in  relation  to  the
    application of 117B of the 2014 Act.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.

 9. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th March 2019

