
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/04567/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 March 2018                          |   On 16 April 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     MW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Akusu-Ossai, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    we continue to refer to the parties as they were before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born in 1969. He  first  arrived
    in the UK in September 2000 with a visitors' visa but  he  was  refused
    entry. He was granted temporary admission so that he could report for a
    flight to Jamaica the next day, but he failed to report. He remained in
    the UK without leave until 5 September 2005 when he  was  detained  and
    removed to Jamaica.

 3. He next arrived in the UK on 15 March 2008 with entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse, having married a British  Citizen  (Ms  W)  in  Jamaica  on  26
    November 2005. He was subsequently granted leave to remain as a  spouse
    until 26 August 2012. An application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    ("ILR") as a spouse was refused on 12 March 2013 and he thus became  an
    overstayer.

 4. On 18 May 2015 he made an application for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds on the basis  of  his  family  and  private  life.  That
    application was refused in a  decision  made  on  6  August  2015.  The
    appellant appealed against that decision and  his  appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge R.G. Walters ("the FtJ") at a hearing  on  19
    September 2017 whereby the appeal was  allowed.  Permission  to  appeal
    against the FtJ's decision having been granted, the appeal came  before
    us.

 5. In order to put the parties' respective arguments and our decision into
    context, we summarise the FtJ's decision.

    The FtJ's decision

 6. The FtJ summarised the parties' cases and  to  which  he  made  further
    reference in his findings. Although under the subheading  "My  Findings
    of Fact", that section of the  FtJ's  decision  consists  mostly  of  a
    narrative of the evidence  of  the  appellant  and  his  wife,  without
    explicit findings along the way. Nevertheless, at [22] he said that  he
    found the appellant and his wife (Ms W) to be "honest witnesses who had
    given credible evidence".

 7. That evidence, set out under the 'Findings' subheading, was as follows.
    The appellant explained that there was a gap between the expiry of  his
    leave in August 2012 and the application of January 2013  which  was  a
    result of the appellant having been under the impression that he needed
    to pass the English language  and  citizenship  test  in  order  to  be
    granted further leave as a spouse. He had only passed the test  on  the
    third attempt.

 8. The appellant said that at the date of hearing before the  FtJ  he  was
    staying at his mother's property and that he  and  his  wife  had  been
    living apart since April 2017. They were living apart  because  he  has
    "anger management issues" which he said were caused by his difficulties
    with literacy. However, he said that he hoped to be reunited  with  his
    wife.

 9. His daughter, G, is the child of a woman (who he named)  with  whom  he
    had had a relationship. However, G's mother had refused to provide  him
    with a copy of G's passport or her  birth  certificate.  The  appellant
    gave G's date of birth and said that he and G's mother  were  separated
    before G was born because G's mother found out that he was  married  to
    his present wife (Ms W). The appellant's evidence was that  he  sees  G
    regularly and in the most recent school holidays had seen her for weeks
    at a time.

10. In relation to the appellant's own  mother,  he  said  that  she  is  a
    British Citizen and he attends all her medical appointments, and  helps
    her with household chores.  She  has  limited  mobility  after  a  knee
    operation.

11. Ms W's evidence was that she is a British Citizen and the address  that
    she lived at was one in respect of which  she  and  the  appellant  are
    joint tenants. She had recently retired after 29 years'  service  as  a
    finance officer with a local authority in South  London.  She  and  the
    appellant were living apart but she  said  that  they  were  "currently
    working to address these problems as we very much love each other". The
    appellant, she said, suffered from anger management  issues.  She  said
    that they hoped to resolve  their  difficulties,  but  added  that  the
    pressure of his immigration case had not helped their situation.

12. Her evidence was that she would be devastated if the appellant were not
    allowed to stay in the UK  because  she  could  not  live  in  Jamaica,
    explaining that she was born in the UK, had spent all  her  life  here,
    has two adult children in the UK who are very much part  of  her  life,
    and also having her extended family here consisting of her siblings and
    parents.

13. In relation to G, her evidence was that G visits her house on a regular
    basis and G had spent most of  the  recent  summer  holidays  with  the
    appellant. G is very much part of her life, she said. During term  time
    she stays at her house roughly every other weekend.

14. She explained in cross-examination that she  was  trying  to  get  back
    together with the appellant, and that they still see each other despite
    their living in separate  accommodation.  She  supports  the  appellant
    financially, as does the appellant's mother.

15. In his specific findings at [22]-[24], in addition to stating  that  he
    found the appellant and Ms W to be honest  and  credible,  he  accepted
    that they hoped "to give their marriage another go",  stating  that  he
    found it particularly impressive that Ms W attended court in support of
    the appellant.

16. Noting that there was no DNA or documentary evidence to show that G was
    the appellant's daughter, the FtJ accepted that she was. He found  that
    Ms W was such a credible  witness  that  he  was  able  to  accept  her
    evidence on this, and found that she had built up a relationship with G
    over the years and that G had become part of her life.

17. Also noting that there was no documentary evidence that G is a  British
    Citizen (the appellant's evidence  being  that  G's  mother  would  not
    cooperate in providing documentary evidence), he found it probable that
    she is a British Citizen, based on the evidence of  the  appellant  and
    his wife. He referred to two "very  well-written  letters"  from  G  in
    support of the appellant remaining in the UK, the letters referring  to
    the things that they do together, her visits to the  appellant's  house
    and his sister's house.

18. At [26] the FtJ concluded that the appellant's removal would amount  to
    an interference with the exercise  of  his  and  his  wife's  right  to
    respect for private and family life, and that Article 8 was engaged. He
    found that the interference was not in accordance with the law  because
    the appellant "could meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    under Private and Family life as stated in the following paragraphs".

19. He then went on to find that the appellant and Ms W have a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship in  that  they  remain  lawfully  married  and,
    although at that time living apart, intend to resume  cohabitation  and
    intend to live together permanently in the UK.

20. In relation to G, at [29] he  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he could meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in terms of the need to establish either sole responsibility  for
    G, or that she normally lives with him and not  with  her  mother  with
    whom she spends the majority of her time.

21. The  FtJ  then  considered  the  proportionality  of  the  respondent's
    decision in relation to G,  referring  to  s.117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act"),  in  particular
    s.117B(6).

22. At [33] he said as follows:

         "I find that it is probable that [G] is a British Citizen, based on
         the evidence of the Appellant and his wife. Even if she is not, she
         is now aged 11 and I was satisfied that she had been born in the UK
         and lived here throughout her life. I further found that  it  would
         not be reasonable to  expect  her  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,
         because if she did so, she would have  to  be  separated  from  her
         mother."

23.  He  concluded  therefore  that  "the  interference"   would   not   be
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

    The grounds and submissions

24. The respondent's grounds contend that the FtJ had erred  in  concluding
    that the appellant met the 'partner route' under the Immigration  Rules
    given the evidence from the appellant and his wife, and that  they  had
    not cohabited since April 2017. It was insufficient for the FtJ to have
    found that the  relationship  was  subsisting  simply  because  of  the
    willingness of the appellant's wife to  attend  the  hearing  and  give
    evidence.

25. Furthermore, it is argued that the FtJ  had  not  considered  that  the
    appellant would need to meet the requirements of paragraph EX.2 and the
    need to establish insurmountable obstacles to family life  between  the
    appellant and his  wife  continuing  in  Jamaica.  Ex.2  had  not  been
    addressed at all.

26. In relation to G, in essence the grounds argue that  the  FtJ  was  not
    entitled to find that she was  a  British  Citizen  or  to  accept  the
    appellant's evidence (which was based on what he had  first  said  four
    years ago) that G's mother was not prepared to provide  any  supporting
    evidence as to her citizenship or his paternity in circumstances  where
    the appellant had not provided evidence of the  legal  advice  that  he
    claims that he had sought, or received.  Further, the FtJ had erred  in
    assessing G's best interests when it was still not known whether or not
    she is British or related to the appellant.

27. In submissions, Mr Melvin relied on the grounds. It was submitted  that
    the appellant had not provided any evidence that he had  undertaken  an
    anger management course and no evidence that he had addressed the issue
    of domestic violence that had occurred in his relationship with Ms W.

28. Neither the appellant nor Ms W  gave  evidence  that  G  is  a  British
    Citizen. We were informed that she has discretionary  leave  to  remain
    along with her mother (although it was accepted that  this  information
    was not put before the FtJ). It was conceded that G was born in the UK,
    but there was nothing to show that the appellant was her father.

29. In her submissions, Ms Akusu-Ossai referred to various aspects  of  the
    evidence that was before the FtJ and his findings. He was aware of  the
    fact that there was no documentary evidence of G's British  Citizenship
    but he accepted the evidence given by the appellant and Ms W.

30. It was submitted that the FtJ was not required  to  consider  paragraph
    EX.2. There was evidence in  the  bundle  of  Ms  W's  health  problems
    although admittedly the FtJ did not refer to that evidence. Even if  he
    had been required to consider EX.2, had he done so  the  outcome  would
    have been the same.

31. Furthermore, the FtJ  concluded  that  if  G  had  to  leave  with  the
    appellant, she would be separated from her mother.

32. In reply, Mr Melvin argued that we were being asked to  read  into  the
    decision findings that had not been made. It  was  submitted  that  the
    finding that the appellant and Ms W were in a  subsisting  relationship
    was an irrational finding. In relation to G's status in the UK, we were
    referred to Oladeji (s.3(1) BNA 1981) [2015] UKUT 00326  (IAC)  to  the
    effect that G would need to  make  an  application  to  register  as  a
    British Citizen if she is not already one, and to show that she had not
    left the country, and there was no evidence of those matters.

    Assessment and Conclusions

33. At the conclusion of the hearing we announced that  we  were  satisfied
    that the FtJ had erred in law, but that the error(s)  of  law  did  not
    require his decision to be set aside.

34. We do not accept that there was any irrationality in the FtJ's  finding
    that the appellant and his wife are in a  subsisting  relationship  and
    intend to live permanently together in the UK. He was well aware of the
    fact that the appellant and his wife were not living  together  and  he
    accepted their evidence as to why.  He  made  clear  reference  to  the
    'anger management issues' that the appellant and his wife referred  to.
    He did not need to decide that the appellant had successfully completed
    a relevant course in relation to anger management  although  there  was
    some, albeit limited, evidence in  the  bundle  that  he  had  attended
    counselling  sessions  in  2015.  Having  seen  and  heard  them  given
    evidence, he was entitled to find that they both gave credible evidence
    in relation to their intention to resolve  the  difficulties  in  their
    relationship, and that their separation was, in effect, temporary.

35. The question of the subsistence of a relationship and the intention  of
    the parties is plainly a very fact-specific one. We do  not  find  that
    the mere fact of their having  lived  separately  in  the  five  months
    preceding the hearing before the FtJ meant that the FtJ was  prohibited
    from concluding that theirs was nevertheless a subsisting relationship,
    and taking into account that they had been married for 11 years at  the
    date of the hearing before the FtJ. There is no reason  in  law  or  in
    fact as to why a relationship that is subsisting may  not  nevertheless
    be one where the parties have separated out of choice to allow them the
    opportunity to resolve issues within the relationship, apart from  each
    other.

36. However, we do accept  that  the  FtJ  erred  in  not  considering  the
    application  of  paragraph  EX.2  which,  to  summarise,  requires  the
    appellant to establish that there would be insurmountable obstacles  to
    their family life continuing outside the UK; in this case Jamaica.  The
    FtJ did not refer to EX.2 at all and indeed there is no  assessment  at
    all of the extent to which they would be able to  live  together  as  a
    couple in Jamaica; neither within nor outside the Rules.  In  fact,  we
    would go further and say that it is not  even  clear  whether  the  FtJ
    concluded that the appellant's Article 8 rights would be  infringed  by
    his removal with reference to his relationship with his wife.

37. We do not accept the argument advanced on behalf of  the  appellant  to
    the effect that there was  evidence  from  which  the  FtJ  could  have
    concluded that there would be insurmountable obstacles to their  family
    life continuing in Jamaica, with  reference  to  the  evidence  in  the
    appellant's bundle of Ms W's health conditions. Not only  did  the  FtJ
    not refer to this evidence, this is not a case in which it  is  obvious
    that if he had considered it he would have concluded that she could not
    live in Jamaica with the appellant.

38. In relation to G, we are not persuaded that there is any merit  in  the
    contention that the evidence before  the  FtJ  did  not  establish  the
    appellant's relationship with his  daughter  (either  as  a  biological
    parent or in terms of the emotional relationship between them).

39. As to the finding that the appellant is G's father, the FtJ  was  again
    alive to the fact  that  there  was  no  documentary  or  DNA  evidence
    establishing that he is G's father but he found  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and his wife persuasive in this respect.  Although  no  birth
    certificate was produced, according to the appellant's evidence in  his
    witness statement his name is not  on  the  birth  certificate  anyway,
    stating that he was in Jamaica when she was born (she was born in  2006
    and he returned to the UK in 2008) and he and G's mother were separated
    before she was born.

40. As to G's citizenship, it is not correct as was suggested on behalf  of
    the respondent before us that neither the appellant nor his  wife  said
    that she was a British Citizen; they both  did  assert  that  in  their
    witness statements.

41. The FtJ did not have to be certain of G's citizenship. He said at  [24]
    that he found it "probable" that  she  was  a  British  Citizen,  after
    referring again to the lack of documentary evidence on  the  issue  but
    noting also the evidence of the lack of cooperation from G's mother.

42. The FtJ concluded at [29]  that  the  'sole  responsibility'  rule  (E-
    LTRPT.2.3(a)) was a bar to the appellant succeeding under the Rules  as
    a parent. He was undoubtedly correct to conclude that the appellant was
    not able to meet that distinct aspect of the Rules because even if  the
    appellant was able to establish that he met the  requirements  of  EX.1
    (genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying  child/not
    reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave   the   UK),   the   sole
    responsibility rule or its alternative  requirements  under  E-LTRP.2.3
    would need to be satisfied. EX.1 is an additional requirement  to  that
    aspect of the Rules.

43. However, the FtJ ought to have gone  on  to  consider  the  alternative
    requirement under E-LTRP.2.3(b), in particular whether the  G's  mother
    was a British Citizen or settled in the UK.  After  all,  he  concluded
    that G was a British Citizen and G's mother's status  was  relevant  to
    that issue. As noted above, Mr Melvin informed us that G's  mother  had
    discretionary leave to remain, but no evidence of that was  before  the
    FtJ, or indeed before us. Nevertheless, the error on the  part  of  the
    FtJ in failing to consider all elements of that aspect of the Rules  is
    not material because it could not have  affected  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal. Further, it is not a matter that was relied on on behalf of the
    respondent.

44. S.117B(6) of the 2002 Act states as follows:

         "117B  Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in  all
         cases:

         ...

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

45. The FtJ assessed the extent to which the appellant and  his  daughter's
    circumstances came within those provisions of the 2002  Act.  Even  if,
    contrary to our conclusions, the FtJ was not entitled to  find  that  G
    was a British Citizen, she  is  undoubtedly  a  'qualifying  child'  as
    defined in s.117D(1) of the 2002 Act by reason of being under  the  age
    of 18 and having lived in the UK for a continuous period of seven years
    or more. The FtJ found, and was entitled to find, that she has lived in
    the UK throughout her life. Contrary to what was submitted on behalf of
    the respondent before us, there was simply no basis upon which the  FtJ
    could have concluded that G had spent any time outside the UK  such  as
    to mean that her  residence  was  not  'continuous'.  The  respondent's
    decision does not advance such a proposition either.

46. The conclusion that it would not be reasonable to expect G to leave the
    UK, for the sole reason that the FtJ gave, namely  that  she  would  be
    separated from her mother, was an inevitable one in this  case  on  the
    evidence.

47. We do consider that the basis upon which the  FtJ  allowed  the  appeal
    could have been made more explicit, at least in  terms  of  whether  he
    allowed the appeal on the basis of the appellant's relationship with Ms
    W. However, it is at least clear that he allowed the appeal on  Article
    8 grounds in terms of the appellant's relationship with  his  daughter,
    and there is no error of law in his having done so.

48. The FtJ did not consider, in the alternative, the question of whether G
    would be entitled to British Citizenship on the basis of her length  of
    residence in the UK as a minor. S.1(4) of the British  Nationality  Act
    1981, to summarise, is to the effect that G would be entitled to  apply
    for registration as a British Citizen after attaining  the  age  of  10
    years subject to no absence from the UK for more than 90  days  in  any
    one year. Given that the FtJ found that G is a British Citizen  he  did
    not need to consider those provisions.

49. However, we consider that even if the FtJ was not entitled to find that
    G is a British Citizen, her entitlement  to  apply  to  register  as  a
    British Citizen would undoubtedly have been a  significant  feature  of
    any proportionality assessment in the appellant's favour.

50. Whist therefore, we are satisfied that the FtJ  erred  in  law  in  the
    respects to which we have referred, the error(s) of law are not such as
    to require the decision to be set aside because they are  not  material
    to the outcome of the appeal.

    Decision

51. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. However, its decision  is  not  set  aside  and  its
    decision to allow the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR is to stand.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 11/04/18




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because this decision involves a minor,  unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family.  This direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.
