
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/04280/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                HAROON JABBAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by JK Law,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appealed, on human rights  grounds,  against  refusal  of
    entry clearance as a spouse.  FtT Judge Doyle dismissed his appeal by a
    decision promulgated on 24 December 2018.

 2. The grounds of appeal to the UT are set out in an application  dated  5
    March 2019.

 3. Mr Bryce has provided a skeleton argument, dated  5  June  2019,  which
    firstly analyses how the evidence met the requirements of  appendix  FM
    and Appendix FM-SE of  the  immigration  rules.   At  paragraph  9  the
    argument then runs that the judge erred by not focusing on the relevant
    period, being the 6 months before the date of application on 25 October
    2017, and that if treating the sponsor's employment as genuine, as  the
    FtT appeared to have done, the financial requirements were met.

 4. The only point then  remaining  would  be  suitability,  on  which  the
    appellant states his position at paragraph 10.

 5. Mr Bryce acknowledged that this was a case which could succeed only  by
    showing that the requirements of the rules, designed in this respect to
    comply with human rights, were met, and not by showing a  case  outside
    the rules.

 6. Mr Whitwell accepted that there was  merit  in  the  analysis  for  the
    appellant, but submitted that the judge failed to decide  on  the  main
    point of the ECO's decision,  which  was  not  that  the  documentation
    failed to meet the rules, but that the underlying  employment  was  not
    genuine.

 7. Parties concurred that the outcome should be as follows.

 8. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  It is appropriate under  section  12  of
    the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for
    a fresh hearing.  The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the  case
    are not to include Judge Doyle.

 9. The tempus inspiciendi is 25 October 2017.

10. The case turns on two issues.  Firstly, was  the  sponsor's  employment
    genuinely as it was claimed to be at the date of application?  (If  so,
    the financial  and  evidential  provisions  of  the  rules  were  met.)
    Secondly, did  the  application  fall  to  be  refused  on  suitability
    grounds?

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            19 July 2019
            UT Judge Macleman




