
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04845/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On  6 December 2017                           |On 10 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 babar khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwalla, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Sharma, instructed by Bedfords Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Babar Khan, was born on 17 May 1982 and is a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Juss) against the decision of the  respondent  dated  5
    February 2016 refusing him leave to remain in the United Kingdom  under
    the ten year partner and private life routes (Appendix FM and paragraph
    276ADE of HC 395 (as amended)).  The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision
    promulgated on 8 March 2017, allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is problematic.  This was a case  in
    which the appellant's application under HC 395 had, in part, failed  on
    eligibility grounds the Secretary of State taking  the  view  that  the
    appellant  had  cheated  in  an  English  language  test.   The   judge
    acknowledged that he had a supplementary bundle before  him  [4]  which
    contained evidence adduced by the Secretary of State  in respect of the
    allegations of cheating in an ETS test.  However,  other  than  stating
    [13] that he had "given careful consideration to all the documents" the
    judge moved (without any intervening  analysis  or  reasoning)  to  his
    conclusion at [17]:

         Finally,  I  did  not   believe   there   was   anything   in   the
         unsubstantiated allegation of cheating in the ETS test and  so  the
         appellant does  meet  the  eligibility  and  suitability  Rules  in
         paragraphs R-LTRP1.1(d)(i) and (ii).

 3. The judge has conducted no analysis whatever of the evidence adduced by
    the Secretary of State in respect of the alleged cheating.  It  is  not
    enough that he  has  simply  referred  to  having  considered  all  the
    documents; if the judge considered the allegation  of  cheating  to  be
    "unsubstantiated" then it was necessary for him to provide his  reasons
    for reaching that finding.  The Upper Tribunal should  hesitate  before
    concluding that the First-tier Tribunal  (charged  with  the  difficult
    task of making robust  findings  of  fact)  has  provided  insufficient
    reasons for its decision but this is a case in which total  absence  of
    appropriate analysis vitiates the decision.

 4. The question remains as to whether the Upper  Tribunal  should  refrain
    from setting aside the decision.   Mr  Sharma,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant, submitted that  it  should  so  refrain.   The  respondent's
    refusal letter of 5 February 2016 contains the following paragraph:

         Although it is accepted that you meet the requirements of EX.1  due
         to the fact you have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with your British child, you  fail  to  meet  the  eligibility  and
         suitability Rules as required  by  paragraphs  R-LTRP1.1(d)(i)  and
         (ii) as stated above.

 5.  Mr  Sharma  submitted  that  the   appellant   was   bound   to   win,
    notwithstanding any finding as regards the  alleged  cheating,  because
    the respondent accepted that he had a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a British child.  In addition to satisfying EX.1, the
    appellant also satisfied the requirements of  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act (as amended) and also the requirements  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's policy (see SF and others  (Guidance,  post-2014  Act)  Albania
    [2017] UKUT 120(IAC).

 6. I do not agree with Mr Sharma's submissions.  First,  Section  117B(6),
    while stating that the public interest does not require the removal  of
    a person who has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a
    qualifying child also requires that it should  be  "not  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom." The Secretary of State's
    policy (which does not require a British  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom  where  such  a  relationship  exists)   may   not   apply   in
    circumstances where the Secretary of State  considers  that  there  are
    countervailing factors, such as a very poor immigration history or poor
    conduct on behalf of the applicant.  In the present appeal, it  is  not
    possible to state to what extent, if at all, any findings regarding the
    appellant's alleged cheating might have had  upon  the  analysis.   The
    "reasonableness" test imposed by Section 117B(6)  is  wide-ranging  and
    may potentially be influenced by findings regarding the conduct of  the
    applicant father.  Moreover, since there are no  satisfactory  findings
    in this case in respect of the allegations of cheating,  it  cannot  be
    assumed that the appellant would necessarily meet the  requirements  of
    the respondent's policy.  I do not accept, as Mr Sharma submitted, that
    the passage from the refusal letter which I have quoted  above  amounts
    to  an  acceptance  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  it  would   be
    unreasonable for the British children of the  appellant  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  The statement made in the refusal letter does no  more
    than indicate that the Secretary of State's acceptance of the appellant
    has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  British
    children.

 7. In the circumstances, therefore, I have decided to set aside the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision.  None of the findings of  fact  shall  stand.
    The evidence will need to be considered again with appropriate findings
    of fact made, including findings in respect of  the  reasonableness  of
    the  children  leaving  the  United  Kingdom.   That  task  is   better
    undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal  to  which  this  appeal  is  now
    returned.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  8
    March 2017 is set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact  shall  stand.
    The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Juss)  for
    that Tribunal to remake the decision.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 3 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

