

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04509/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 July 2017                           |On 11 July 2017                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MS R R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Shah, Taj Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For convenience, I refer to the parties as they were in the  First-tier
    Tribunal with the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 25 December 1967.  She
    appealed against the decision of the respondent on  6  August  2015  to
    refuse her leave to remain on human rights  grounds.   Her  appeal  was
    allowed on human rights grounds by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McIntosh ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 23 November 2016.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal.  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Robertson granted permission in the following terms:

         "... The submission that the Judge did not factor  the  Appellant's
         lack of  credibility  into  the  proportionality  assessment  lacks
         arguable merit because he clearly  did  at  [32]  -  [33].  It  is,
         however, arguable as submitted in the grounds,  that  although  the
         Judge  referred  to  the  provisions  of  s117A-B  [sic]   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act,  did  not  consider  its
         provisions when  assessing  proportionality  because  there  is  no
         reference within the assessment to the ability of the Appellant  to
         speak English or to whether financial independence was  established
         Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC)). He was  aware  that  she
         did not speak English and that she was  not  working  but  did  not
         state what weight, if any, he attached  to  these  factors  in  the
         proportionality assessment. Technically, it is also  arguable  that
         the Appellant's son, ...., should have been treated as a vulnerable
         adult rather than a child when his interests were  being  assessed,
         although it is unclear what, if any,  difference  this  would  have
         made to the outcome of the appeal."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me.

Submissions

 5. Mr Bramble, for the respondent, submitted the FTTJ  had  made  material
    misdirections of law. Having found  the  appellant's  case  not  to  be
    credible, the FTTJ had failed to take that finding into account her  in
    her assessment of proportionality. This was compounded by  the  failure
    to address the factors  in  s117B,  e.g.  the  appellant's  use  of  an
    interpreter at the hearing and the absence of any finding the appellant
    was financially independent. Whilst these were not a positive influence
    for the appellant, here they had a "negative pull on the case". No heed
    had been paid to the oral evidence  that  the  appellant  had  extended
    family in the UK or the ability of a family member to  supplement  care
    of the appellant's son who was disabled.  Mr Bramble submitted that the
    FTTJ  had  ignored  the  submissions  of  the  presenting  officer,  as
    summarised at paragraphs 26 and 27, particularly the  appellant's  poor
    immigration history, a public interest  factor.   Mr  Bramble  conceded
    that the FTTJ's erroneous reference to s55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 and the duty to assess the best  interests  of
    the child was a neutral point.

 6. For the appellant, Mr Shah noted the FTTJ had referred at paragraph  27
    to the public interest factors in s117B.  The reference to s55 was  not
    a material matter affecting the outcome of the appeal.   The  FTTJ  had
    made favourable findings with regard to the appellant's  two  sons  and
    the circumstances in which she had come to the  UK.   It  was  accepted
    there were credibility issues with regard to her evidence but the  FTTJ
    had not allowed  the  appeal  under  paragraph  276ADE(vi).   The  FTTJ
    considered that the appellant's circumstances as a full-time carer  for
    her  eldest  son  amounted  to  exceptional   circumstances   requiring
    consideration outside the Rules. She identified a family life with  her
    two sons. Even if the appellant did not speak English, this was  not  a
    negative issue but a factor to be taken into account.  As  regards  her
    financial circumstances, these were set out at paragraph  20.  Mr  Shah
    conceded that the FTTJ should have "expanded on the reasoning section".
     This was not, he submitted, a decision  where  the  FTTJ  had  totally
    ignored the s117B provisions. She was, he said, aware of them  "in  the
    back of her mind" when looking at proportionality.   He  accepted  that
    the appellant was not working and that she would not be  able  to  work
    because she was a full-time carer for her autistic elder  son.  If  she
    did work, Social Services would  have  to  take  over  care.  This  was
    relevant  to  the  application  of  s117B.  He   submitted   that   the
    deficiencies in the reasoning were not material.

 7. Both Mr Bramble and Mr Shah agreed that there  was  no  challenge  from
    either side with regard to the decision to dismiss the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules, including Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE. The sole
    issue was the quality of the reasoning, outside the Rules,  as  regards
    the proportionality of  the  interference  with  appellant's  protected
    Article 8 rights.

Discussion

 8. There is no challenge by either party to the decision of  the  FTTJ  to
    dismiss the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules.   Nor  is  there  any
    challenge as regards Article 3.  The sole issue for the  respondent  is
    the FTTJ's decision pursuant to the Article  8  jurisprudence,  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

 9. It follows the FTTJ  was  obliged  to  take  into  account  the  public
    interest factors in s117A-117D of the 2002 Act.   The  FTTJ  refers  to
    "Section 117(b) of the Immigration Act 2014"  in  her  summary  of  the
    respondent's  case  at  paragraph  27.  It  find  it  likely  that  the
    presenting officer referred to s117B of the 2002  Act  since  the  FTTJ
    goes on to refer to some of the public interest factors in that Act  in
    referring to the presenting officer's submissions. I do not  accept  Mr
    Shah's submission that, without more, the  mere  reference  to  s117(b)
    [sic] and some of the public interest factors can be taken to mean  the
    FTTJ took them into account in reaching her decision.  Paragraph 27  is
    no more than a summary of  the  respondent's  case  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10. The parties are in agreement that the FTTJ made no  specific  reference
    to the public interest factors in s117B in that section of her decision
    in which she made her findings of credibility and fact (paragraphs 31 -
    39).  There is, for example, no reference to the ability  or  otherwise
    of the appellant to speak English, despite the appellant having  spoken
    through an interpreter at the hearing.  It is also the  case  that  the
    FTTJ  made  no  finding  as  to  the  financial  circumstances  of  the
    appellant. I was referred by Mr Shah to paragraph 20  but  this  merely
    sets out the appellant's claim as regards her family supporting her  in
    the UK (as is clear from the heading to that section of the  decision).
    In any event and crucially, at paragraph 33 the FTTJ states "I did  not
    find any aspect of the appellant's case to be credible".  By inference,
    the FTTJ did not  accept  the  appellant's  evidence  that  her  family
    supported her in the UK.

11. In the absence of any reference either specifically or by inference  to
    the public interest factors in s117B I find that the  FTTJ  misdirected
    herself in law: s117A required her to take those factors  into  account
    in her decision-making.

12. I turn to the issue  of  whether  that  omission  is  material  to  the
    outcome.  The FTTJ found the appellant was not a credible witness.   In
    the absence of any specific findings on the issue, it is not  clear  to
    what extent, if at all, the FTTJ accepted the appellant's  evidence  as
    to her  financial  circumstances.   It  cannot  be  inferred  from  the
    findings that the FTTJ accepted the  appellant's  claim  that  she  was
    supported by family members in the UK. Such a finding  is  required  in
    order to consider the public interest question of whether the appellant
    was financially independent pursuant to s117B(3).

13. As has been said earlier, the appellant gave oral evidence  through  an
    interpreter in Bengali. It can be inferred she does not speak  English.
    This is a public interest factor yet the FTTJ has  not  taken  it  into
    account in her assessment of proportionality.

14. The adverse credibility  findings  are  also  relevant  to  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of effective immigration control, given the
    existence of a false immigration stamp in the appellant's passport: the
    FTTJ did not accept the appellant's explanation for  it.   The  use  of
    deception in such a context is of relevance to the public  interest  in
    the maintenance of effective immigration control (s117B(1))  yet  there
    is no indication from the decision that the  FTTJ  considered  this  in
    that context.

15. For reasons which are unexplained in the decision, the FTTJ has  relied
    on s55 to identify the best interests of the appellant's disabled  son.
    Irrespective of whether that is an error of law (and it  would  not  be
    material in any event), the FTTJ has not unreasonably  identified  that
    it is in the son's best interests for the appellant to remain in the UK
    to care for him full-time, as she does now.  The error  arises  in  her
    treating those interests as overriding, apparently to the exclusion  of
    all else. In the absence of any consideration of  the  public  interest
    factors, she has treated his interests as a trump card.  The  FTTJ  has
    not carried out a holistic examination of the evidence,  balancing  the
    degree of interference with protected  rights  as  against  the  public
    interest. Her assessment of proportionality is, as a result, flawed and
    amounts to an error of law which is material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  Had she carried out an appropriate analysis  of  the  evidence
    and made full findings of fact the outcome of  the  appeal  might  have
    been different.

16. The finding that the appellant does not meet the provisions of Appendix
    FM or Paragraph 276ADE  is  not  challenged  by  either  party  and  is
    therefore preserved.

17. The FTTJ's assessment of proportionality is  flawed  and  must  be  set
    aside. The findings of fact  are  incomplete  and,  given  the  adverse
    credibility findings, it is  not  possible  to  extrapolate  sufficient
    findings for the decision outside the Rules to be remade.  I  was  told
    that fresh evidence would be submitted and, given that the  appellant's
    son is disabled, I accept that updated evidence may be required. It  is
    in the interests of fairness and justice that the appellant  should  be
    given the opportunity with her advisers to consider whether that is the
    case.

18. In the circumstances it is appropriate for  a  fresh  hearing  to  take
    place in the First-tier Tribunal on the sole issue of  whether  or  not
    the  decision  of  the  respondent  is  incompatible  with   the   UK's
    obligations under Article 8, notwithstanding  the  appellant  does  not
    meet the criteria in the Immigration Rules with regard  to  her  family
    and private life.

19. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    the references to the disability of the appellant's eldest son, such  a
    direction is appropriate.

Decision

20. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision to allow the appeal
    on human rights grounds is set aside.

21. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
    afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    aside from FTTJ McIntosh. The sole issue to be decided is  whether  the
    decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  leave  to  remain  is
    incompatible with the UK's obligations under Article 8.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 10 July 2017




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
  Dated: 10 July 2017


