
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04953/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2016                            |On 22 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     LA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel, instructed by Apex
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 8 March  1965.   She  is
    said initially to have arrived in the UK on 9 March  1986,  then  later
    returning to the UK after having left.  She apparently has had no leave
    to remain since 1992.

 2. On 3 September 2015 a decision was made to make a  deportation  against
    her. That decision was made following the appellant's  convictions  for
    offences of obtaining property by deception, assault occasional  actual
    bodily harm, child cruelty, and assisting  unlawful  immigration.   She
    received a sentence of 11� years' imprisonment, reduced on appeal to 10
    years' imprisonment.

 3. Her appeal against the decision to make a deportation order came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe and  Miss  J  A  Endersby,  a  non-legal
    member, ("the FtT") on 3 August 2016 whereby the appellant's appeal  on
    asylum, Article 3 and Article 8 grounds was dismissed.

 4. The further background to the appeal is that  the  appellant  has  five
    children, born on 29 September 1987, 4 February 1991, 10 February 1996,
    27 July 1997, and 7 August 2000.  All of the children are adults except
    for one, J, who was born on 7  August  2000.   The  children  all  have
    mental or physical health problems of one  sort  or  another,  in  some
    cases very serious health problems.

 5. There were four grounds of appeal upon which permission to  appeal  was
    sought. It must be said that the grant of permission  is  not  entirely
    clear, but it amounts to permission having been granted  on  grounds  1
    and 4.  Although in the appellant's reply to the respondent's 'rule 24'
    response it was said that  the  appellant  maintained  all  grounds  of
    appeal, it was accepted on behalf of the appellant before me that  only
    the grounds upon which permission was granted could be  relied  on.  To
    that end Mr Ume-Ezeoke sought carefully to limit his submissions to the
    grounds upon which permission was granted, although  it  must  be  said
    that there is some arguable overlap in the grounds.

 6. For the sake  of  clarity,  I  set  out  all  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission was sought.

    The Grounds and Submissions

 7. Ground 1 refers to the fact that there was  a  considerable  volume  of
    evidence before the FtT in relation to the  health  conditions  of  the
    appellant's children.  It is argued that the FtT failed  to  take  into
    account the suicide attempt in January 2015 of S, who was  born  on  29
    September 1987.  It is further argued that the FtT failed to take  into
    account the reasons for her suicide  attempt,  being  the  position  of
    responsibility she  was  in  in  terms  of  caring  for  her  siblings.
    Permission was granted on this ground.

 8. Ground 2 asserts that the FtT was wrong to conclude that the burden  on
    S would be relieved over the passage  of  time.  All  of  the  siblings
    remained in the same household, with nothing to indicate  that  any  of
    them were going to leave the  family  home.  There  was  evidence  that
    social services would not assist the family.  JA, who  was  born  on  4
    February 1991, has spinal muscular atrophy,  sickle  cell  anaemia  and
    asthma.

 9. Ground 3, again refers to JA, who has "acute" health needs, but the FtT
    had failed adequately to consider her health conditions, and  the  fact
    that she had also attempted suicide, in  2013.  Her  medical  condition
    includes that she has weakness of her arms and difficulty  feeding  and
    swallowing.  It is argued that generally, there is family life  between
    the appellant and all of her children, whether adults or not.

10. Ground 4 is more specific  in  relation  to  J,  the  youngest  of  the
    children.  It is argued that it was insufficient for the FtT simply  to
    state at [40] that he has medical problems for which  he  is  receiving
    appropriate care. J has sickle cell anaemia which is not referred to in
    the FtT's decision.  It contended that the nature and  extent  of  that
    medical condition needed to be considered.  Reference is  made  in  the
    grounds to the medical reports. The impact of  his  being  without  the
    appellant is explained by him in a letter.

11. Ground 5 concerns reliance on additional medical evidence  in  relation
    to JA, that was not before the FtT.

12. Mr Ume-Ezeoke relied in his submissions on the grounds. I was  referred
    to various aspects  of  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  FtT,  in
    particular the medical evidence.  In relation to J,  the  evidence  was
    that he was not going to get better.  This was relevant to  the  burden
    on S who had attempted suicide.

13. A further argument was advanced in terms of the FtT's approach  to  the
    fact  that  the  appellant  had  received  consecutive   sentences   of
    imprisonment.  It was contended that in relation to  s.117D(4)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), the  FtT
    should  have  looked  at  the  sentence,  not  as  one  of  10   years'
    imprisonment but of five years because that was  the  longest  sentence
    that was imposed on her for any one single offence.

14. Mr Melvin submitted that the last contention on behalf of the appellant
    was wrong; the FtT was bound to take  account  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment.

15. With reference to  various  aspects  of  the  FtT's  decision,  it  was
    submitted that in all respects the  FtT  had  taken  into  account  and
    undertaken a proper assessment of the evidence before it, both in terms
    of the effect on S of having to care for  her  siblings,  but  also  in
    relation to the health of all the children.

16. It was similarly submitted that the FtT was entitled to  conclude  that
    because the children were gradually getting older, the burden  of  care
    on S would gradually reduce.  In any event, the  FtT's  conclusions  in
    this respect do not detract from the main findings, and  it  is  not  a
    matter that is of great significance to the issue to be determined.

17. In reply, Mr Ume-Ezeoke submitted  that  notwithstanding  the  offences
    that the appellant had committed in relation to the children  who  were
    the subject of the offences, the appellant had  herself  provided  care
    for her own children.  For example, she  had  taken  them  to  hospital
    appointments.




    My Conclusions

18. I deal firstly with the last of the arguments advanced  before  me,  in
    relation to the appellant's consecutive sentences, albeit that this  is
    not a matter that features in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The argument can be dealt with  shortly.   S.117D(2)  defines
    what is meant by "foreign criminal".  It includes a person who has been
    sentenced  to  a  period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  12   months.
    S.117D(4)(b) states that "foreign criminal" does not include  a  person
    who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment "of that  length  of
    time" only by  virtue  of  being  sentenced  to  consecutive  sentences
    amounting in aggregate to that length of time.  In  other  words,  what
    this means is that where a person needs to have  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment for a particular period, this does  not  include
    those whose sentences  are  made  up  of  consecutive  sentences.   For
    example, a person who receives a sentence of imprisonment of 12  months
    made up of consecutive terms, is not  defined  as  a  foreign  criminal
    within the meaning of the 2002 Act.

19. As I pointed out to Mr  Ume-Ezeoke,  the  provision  about  consecutive
    terms is only concerned with  who  is  to  be  defined  as  a  "foreign
    criminal".  That has no bearing whatsoever on the approach that a judge
    should take in  assessing  the  public  interest  where  a  person  has
    received a sentence of imprisonment that qualifies them  as  a  foreign
    criminal. The whole of the  sentence  plainly  has  to  be  taken  into
    account.

20. In relation to ground 1 and the contention that  the  FtT  had  wrongly
    failed to take  into  account  the  appellant's  daughter  S's  suicide
    attempt in January 2015 and the reasons  for  it,  and  the  ground  in
    relation to J's health, it is necessary to refer to various aspects  of
    the FtT's decision.

21. At [17] the FtT recorded as follows:

         "The Appellant's eldest daughter [S], born on  29  September  1987,
         was 27 and had been looking after her siblings since the  Appellant
         was imprisoned. This had  taken  a  toll  on  her  and  she  was  a
         vulnerable and fragile young woman.  [JA]  (4  February  1991)  has
         asthma, sickle cell anaemia and spinal muscular dystrophy.  She  is
         wheelchair bound and needs help with day  to  day  tasks.  [E]  (10
         February 1900) has ADHD and 'sickle  cell  traits'.  [A]  (27  July
         1997) has ADHD.  [J] (7 August 2000) has sickle cell anaemia  which
         sometimes requires hospital admission."

22. At [22]  the  FtT  referred  to  the  appellant's  evidence  where  she
    described the health problems suffered by her  children  "and  provided
    documentary evidence of their treatment".  At [26] there is  a  summary
    of S's evidence, including her confirmation of the health  problems  of
    her siblings and the arrangements for their care.  She  said  that  the
    responsibility had caused her stress and she feels alone and  helpless.
    She said in cross-examination that  she  had  been  looking  after  her
    siblings for most of her 20s and now needed her own life. She said that
    social services had not been involved, they having been asked  but  not
    having been willing to help.

23. At [39] it is stated that there is little dispute with  regard  to  the
    appellant's family's circumstances, and that  the  respondent  did  not
    challenge the evidence of their health problems "which are described in
    the documents before us". At [40] the FtT  stated  that  it  had  given
    particularly careful consideration to the effect of deportation  on  J,
    referring to the need to consider his best  interests.   In  that  same
    paragraph his date of birth was noted, and that  at  the  time  of  the
    writing of the FtT's decision he was 16 years of age.  The FtT went  on
    to state that he had been cared for by his oldest  sister  since  their
    mother's remand in custody, and it was stated  that  the  FtT  accepted
    "that he has medical problems" for which he  is  receiving  appropriate
    treatment.

24. At [41] the following is stated:

         "No one could fail to have sympathy for [S] who  was  placed  in  a
         difficult situation because of  the  Appellant's  crimes.  She  has
         succeeded in caring for her siblings and the youngest is now 16. We
         find it likely that the burden placed on her will reduce  with  the
         passage of time."

25. I cannot see that there is any merit in the  complaint  about  the  FtT
    having failed to have regard to the evidence in relation either to S or
    J.  The FtT made reference to the fact that none of the evidence as  to
    the family's circumstances or the health conditions of the children was
    disputed.  At [17] there is a summary of the health conditions of  each
    of the appellant's children.  In that paragraph there is reference to S
    being "vulnerable and fragile".  The burden on S was plainly recognised
    [41].  S's evidence about the effect on her of caring for her  siblings
    was summarised at [26].

26. It was not necessary for the FtT  to  refer  to  every  aspect  of  the
    evidence.  The failure specifically to refer to S's suicide attempt  in
    January 2015 is not significant in the context of the FtT's  assessment
    of the evidence, notwithstanding the fact that that event was obviously
    significant for S and her family.  The FtT  recognised  her  fragility,
    the burden on her and the sympathy that her  circumstances  undoubtedly
    attract.

27. Similarly, in relation to J and his significant health problems, again,
    that is summarised at [17], the medical evidence was not disputed,  and
    the FtT was aware of all of the medical evidence as demonstrated by its
    decision.  Specific consideration was given  to  J's  circumstances  at
    [40]. Again, it was not necessary for the FtT to set out in detail  J's
    condition, its effects and the treatment he  is  receiving.  Had  there
    been issues of fact to resolve in relation to his health or  treatment,
    more detail would have been necessary, but  in  the  circumstances  the
    FtT's consideration of that evidence was legally sufficient.

28. As to the argument in the grounds that the FtT was wrong to say that  J
    was receiving "appropriate treatment" because there is no cure for  his
    condition,  that  contention  is  misconceived.    The  fact  that  his
    condition is not curable  does  not  mean  that  he  is  not  receiving
    appropriate treatment or care.

29. I do consider that there is some measure of legitimate criticism of the
    FtT's conclusion at [41] that the burden placed on S will  reduce  with
    the passage of time.  That is a conclusion that is  not  reasoned.   On
    the one hand, it could be said that as the children get older they  may
    in some instances become more  independent  and  therefore  less  of  a
    burden on S. On the other hand,  age  may  make  some  conditions  more
    difficult  to  manage.   The  extent  of  any  future  social  services
    involvement may also be relevant to the question of whether S would  be
    relieved of some of the burden of caring for  her  siblings,  in  time.
    All these are matters that it seems to me ought to have  been  explored
    more fully if the FtT's conclusion in this respect at [41] can be  said
    to be a sustainable one.

30. However, I am not satisfied that what the FtT said about the likelihood
    of the burden placed on S reducing over time amounts  to  an  error  of
    law. It is not evident from the FtT's decision  that  this  conclusion,
    found in one sentence of a single paragraph, was a  significant  factor
    in its deliberations.

31. In any event, it is to be remembered that permission to appeal was  not
    granted on Ground 2 where this issue is argued.

32. Similarly, permission was not granted in relation to Ground 3 in  terms
    of JA's poor health, or her suicide attempt in 2013.  Insofar as Ground
    3 suggested a  failure  on  the  part  of  the  FtT  to  give  adequate
    consideration to the children's health conditions overall,  that  is  a
    matter which I have considered above.

33. It is important also, when  considering  the  challenge  to  the  FtT's
    decision, to bear in mind the  offences  of  which  the  appellant  was
    convicted. The circumstances of the criminal offending are set  out  by
    the FtT between [6] and [15].  The appellant assisted in  the  unlawful
    immigration of two girls, B and D, who had expected to come to  the  UK
    to further their education and have a better future.  They were in fact
    used by the appellant as "house servants". This  the  sentencing  judge
    found was so that she could save herself money. The  assault  and  ill-
    treatment offences arose from her abuse of those children.

34. The victim impact statement of D was to the effect that she was treated
    as nothing more than a slave to the appellant and her family. She  felt
    deceived and manipulated, used and exploited. She said  that  she  felt
    like a commodity and worthless as a person,  especially  when  she  was
    beaten by the appellant. She described it  as  torture,  and  being  so
    fearful and frightful of the appellant that she  never  knew  what  she
    would do to her next.

35. The sentencing  judge  referred  to  the  "sheer  hysterical  pain  and
    suffering" that the two girls had  gone  through.   He  referred  to  D
    screaming so badly during the course of the proceedings that the  trial
    had to be stopped for  the  rest  of  the  day.   He  described  it  as
    "terrible, terrible evidence to  hear".   However,  he  said  that  the
    appellant sat in the witness box and was completely and utterly unmoved
    by the evidence, which is why he described the appellant as "a complete
    and utter hypocrite". He said that she was an evil woman who  had  used
    two young ladies for her own personal ends.  She had sought to  present
    herself to the outside world as a lovable person, but he had absolutely
    no doubt, he said, that she had ruined the lives of B and D.

36. There is reference at [11] to the  pre-sentence  report  in  which  the
    sentencing judge noted that the appellant took  no  responsibility  for
    her actions and continued to deny any involvement in what had happened.
    The Probation Officer found her to be a violent and  controlling  woman
    against others, particularly those who are vulnerable in her care.  The
    sentencing judge found her to be a compete hypocrite, a liar,  shameful
    and shameless.

37. When describing the offences themselves, the judge  had  said  that  in
    relation to the assault occasioning actual bodily harm, B was  rendered
    unconscious and D thought that she had died.  She had been hit  with  a
    metal bar. As regards the offence of  cruelty  to  B,  she  was  beaten
    regularly, caused to be up at 4 or 5 am and  not  going  to  bed  until
    late.  It was described by the sentencing judge as either at  the  very
    top end of the second level of the sentencing guidelines or at the very
    bottom of the top level.

38. As to the assault on D, she was required to strip, kneel and be  beaten
    by the appellant and her  husband.   D  said  that  the  appellant  was
    laughing while she was doing this.  Although D managed to  escape,  the
    appellant's husband went and followed her, and tried to report  to  the
    police that she had been  kidnapped;  but  she  was  kidnapped  by  the
    appellant's husband.

39. The prosecution's opening note stated that B was employed  as  a  house
    girl for three or four years during  which  time  she  did  not  go  to
    school. Throughout that time  she  was  physically  mistreated  by  the
    appellant.  She was repeatedly beaten with a belt, stripped  naked  and
    had pepper put in her eyes and genitalia.  On one occasion she was  hit
    on the head with a meat cleaver, causing bleeding.

40. There is no distinct argument on behalf of the appellant to the  effect
    that the FtT failed to  apply  the  correct  test  in  terms  of  "very
    compelling circumstances" which could be said to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in deportation.  The public interest in  deportation  in  this
    case is plainly at a very high level, having regard  to  the  offences,
    apart from the fact of the appellant's sentence  of  over  four  years'
    imprisonment and the relevant statutory framework.

41. It is also plain from [39] of the FtT's decision, that even at the time
    of the hearing before the FtT there was  a  continued  failure  by  the
    appellant fully to acknowledge her culpability.

42. Accordingly, for the specific reasons that I have given, and taking the
    grounds in context of the appellant's offending,  I  am  not  satisfied
    that there is any error of law in the FtT's decision in any respect.



Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity, not for her sake  but  to  avoid  identification  of  the
vulnerable individuals who feature in  this  appeal.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant  or  any
member of her family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to
the respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            21/12/16
