
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04844/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 16th May 2019                     |On 29th May 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         Mr Chimanlal Damodar Thanki
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Norman (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Jessica Pacey, promulgated on 26th July 2018, following a hearing at
Nottingham on 18th July 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied
for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus
the matter comes before me.

The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born on 12th May 1943.
 He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 3rd February
2018, refusing his application to remain in the UK on the basis of his
family life with his wife, Mrs A. Thanki, a UK citizen.  The Appellant had
entered the UK on a visit visa in August 2015 which expired in May 2016.
He and his wife both had medical conditions and their son was assisting
with his care.  The Appellant had no family, assets or home in India, as he
claimed.  His wife suffered from severe osteoarthritis and was in receipt
of PIP.  She was cared for on a day-to-day basis by her husband.  He
himself was a heart patient.  He would need to readjust to life in India.

At the hearing before me on 16th May 2019, there was agreement between Ms
Norman and Ms Aboni that the judge had erred in law in not considering the
exceptional circumstances to the Appellant's claim under the Immigration
Rules before turning to Article 8.  Although the judge had cited the
factual background as well as the relevant case law, she had reached the
firm conclusion at the outset that, "the Immigration Rules have not been
met because the Appellant is an overstayer.  That being so, I turn to
consider Article 8 outside the Rules" (paragraph 30).

This was in error because it was part of the Immigration Rules that EX.1
should be considered in terms of any applicable exceptional circumstances
to the Appellant's claim.  Moreover, the judge had then gone on to consider
"the question of proportionality" on the basis of a decision which was a
deportation case, but taking the view that "in my view it is appropriate to
adopt the same decision-making process" (paragraph 31).

Furthermore, the judge was wrong to have treated the situation before her
as one involving a "precarious" family life because the Appellant and his
wife had a pre-existing family life at the time when they were already
married and living together in India.  Yet, the judge had approached the
matter on the basis that, "I note that the family life the Appellant had
built in the UK had been to some significant extent built whilst he had no
leave to be here" (paragraph 36).  It is well-established that where family
life has already been in existence before a person infringes the
Immigration Rules, the position may be materially different.

Ms Aboni submitted that the judge had not considered the Appellant's
position in relation to his wife properly and the medical evidence
applicable.  Ms Norman stated that since the decision by the judge the
Appellant had now undergone heart surgery and was not well.  These are
matters, however, which will need to be considered by another fact-finding
Tribunal upon remittal.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the
decision of the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This
appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by a
judge other than Judge Jessica Pacey, pursuant to paragraph 7.2(b) of the
practice statement because the nature or extent of any judicial fact-
finding which is necessary in order for the decision of the appeal to be
remade is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2,
it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity order is made.

The appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th May 2019

