
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Numbers:
HU/04052/2018

                                           HU/04053/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 July 2019                       |    On 16 July 2019                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                          mr md zazbir alam siddiki
                              mrs sultana jahan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr K. Mustafa, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on 8 March  1988.
    He is now 31 years old.  He appealed against the determination  of  the
    Secretary of State of 23 January 2018 following his application made on
    10 July 2017 for indefinite leave to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 27 September 2009.  He  was
    then aged 21.  He was given leave  to  remain  as  a  student  until  6
    September 2016.  Thereafter he applied for leave to remain outside  the
    Rules claiming that it would be a breach of his human rights to  remove
    him.  By then he had been in the United Kingdom for some seven years.

 3. The appellant was then studying for an MSc in Accounting and Finance at
    BPP University.  However, that category of student leave  was  not  one
    that in itself leads to settlement.   Consequently,  according  to  the
    decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  the  appellant  never  had  any
    expectation that he would be allowed to stay permanently in the  United
    Kingdom once his studies had been completed.

 4. The picture is further made complex by the fact that his wife  and  son
    were also in the United Kingdom. Their son had been born on 22  October
    2016.  He was 15 months old at the time the decision was made and he is
    now aged 2.  None of the members of the family is  a  British  citizen.
    All are Bangladeshi citizens.

 5. The factual matrix upon which the judge made  his  decision  took  into
    account the fact that the appellant had himself visited  Bangladesh  on
    two occasions in 2014 and 2016.  Both had post-dated the marriage which
    had  taken  place  in  September  2012.   The  wife  had  also  visited
    Bangladesh on at least one occasion.  It appears from the stamps in her
    passport that part of that period coincided with the time the appellant
    had spent in Bangladesh.

 6. It also has to be remarked that, in the decision letter, the  Secretary
    of State noted that when the appellant had first applied for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules on 5 September 2016, he had indicated that  it
    was his intention to return to Bangladesh and that the only purpose for
    the application then made was that he  wanted  to  have  more  time  to
    complete his studies.

 7. That was the basis upon which the current application was made.  I  say
    here at the outset there is simply nothing which could have amounted to
    a viable claim that the appellant should be permitted to remain in  the
    United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  of  there
    being circumstances which, in some way, might merit an exception  being
    made in his case because of their compassionate or compelling nature.

 8. This was a situation which occurs in many  such  cases.   There  is  no
    expectation that an individual who comes to the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student should be permitted to  remain  when  his  student  status  has
    expired.  This normally happens by his having qualified in  the  manner
    sought and, if an individual also has a wife and a child  born  in  the
    United Kingdom, the normal consequences will be that  the  family  will
    return as a family unit without adverse consequences.

 9. That was in essence the decision made in  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Young who heard  the  case  on  26  February  2019.   He
    recited the evidence of the first appellant beginning in  paragraph  10
    of the determination and noted that the appellant had not been able  to
    complete his MSc degree at BPP University due to sustaining  an  injury
    in a motorbike accident on 31 August 2015.  However, the university had
    promised him with a temporary Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies
    but, although promised, it did not actually materialise.

10. The appellant claimed that his circumstances had changed in  Bangladesh
    regarding  the  prospects  of  future  employment;  in  addition,   the
    appellant had married without the consent of his, or his wife's family,
    the members of which had  not  accepted  the  relationship.   That  was
    something that the judge had well in mind when he came to consider  the
    overall circumstances.

11. Notwithstanding  this,  the  judge  noted  in  paragraph  16  that  the
    appellant had successfully  completed  undergraduate  and  postgraduate
    degrees in the United Kingdom in accounting.   Needless  to  say,  that
    degree was directed towards accountancy rules as they  applied  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It was not a specific Bangladesh  qualification.  That
    is unsurprising since that is what the appellant signed up for.  Had he
    wanted  to  continue  his  studies  in  Bangladesh  using   Bangladeshi
    regulations, then that was a matter for him.  He was still studying for
    the ACCA examinations and was on the final level  of  that  course  but
    that was an independent course of study.  He confirmed that it could be
    taken in Bangladesh.

12. The circumstances as submitted by the appellant in his  appeal  to  the
    Immigration Judge were really no different from  the  circumstances  as
    had been considered by the Secretary of State some months before.   The
    judge noted that the appellant had managed successfully in  the  United
    Kingdom and the family had done so without  the  support  of  immediate
    family members.

13. The grounds of appeal suggest that there were two major difficulties in
    the determination of the judge.   The  first  was  the  point  made  in
    paragraph 4.1 of the grounds that the judge had  readily  assumed  that
    both would be employable in Bangladesh.  It  was  said  that  that  was
    speculative, unfounded and unsafe.  I reject that submission.

14. The judge was entitled to take into account the fact that the appellant
    was an educated man.  He was in good health.  He had  embarked  upon  a
    complex system of study in accountancy and it is simply  unarguable  to
    say that, as a result of this, he is unemployable in  Bangladesh,  even
    though it may be assumed (absent any direct evidence) that there has to
    be some adjustment made because of the different  regulatory  framework
    that exists in Bangladesh.

15. The judge dealt with that in his determination  in  paragraph  16.   He
    properly recorded the submission made that  it  was  it  would  not  be
    possible for him to get a job in the public sector in Bangladesh but he
    noted that the appellant was somebody who had continued  to  study  and
    the course that he was currently engaged upon was  one  that  could  be
    taken in Bangladesh.  The judge  was  required  to  do  no  more.   The
    suggestion that, somehow either he or his  wife  were  unemployable  is
    fanciful.

16. The second point made is that the judge failed to take into account the
    importance of family support  in  Bangladesh,  whereas  in  the  United
    Kingdom such support is not seen as so important.  Once again, I reject
    that submission emphatically.  It may be that it would  be  better  for
    these appellants to have the wholehearted  support  of  their  parents.
    Who would not wish that?  It may be that they would like the  financial
    support of their parents.  Who would not?  It may be  that  they  would
    like the domestic and private support that  is  provided  in  terms  of
    babysitting or family care.  All of these things may readily be seen as
    being an advantage.  But it is not possible to submit that they are  so
    essential that, in their absence, the appellant cannot be  returned  to
    Bangladesh.  Indeed, the obvious point made by the judge is a good one:
    namely, that they are working without such family support in the United
    Kingdom and are managing successfully; that situation would  simply  be
    replicated in Bangladesh were they to return there.

17. The two principal grounds of appeal are in my judgment  unarguable  and
    simply misconceived.  It is also said as an additional factor that  the
    judge therefore failed  to  conduct  the  correct  balance  as  far  as
    proportionality was concerned.  The problem  with  this  submission  is
    that there are no circumstances in the appellant's case (or the case of
    the appellant, his wife and his son) which merit  an  exception.    The
    appellant's circumstances do not  meet  the  requirements  for  further
    leave to remain or indefinite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Whilst searching for circumstances which might merit a  departure  from
    that, there is nothing that  can  be  identified  as  weighing  in  his
    favour.

18. Proportionality, by its very nature, requires  identifying  factors  in
    favour of  an  appellant  which  outweigh  the  factors  in  favour  of
    compliance with immigration control.  For the reasons  that  the  judge
    found in his determination, there were no factors which outweighed  the
    weight to be attached to immigration control.  As a result,  the  judge
    was inevitably led to conclude that there could be no viable Article  8
    claim.  Neither the appellant's private life, nor his family life, were
    such as should be protected from removal.

19. For these reasons I am satisfied that the judge made a lawful  decision
    and the appeal should be refused.

20. In doing so I comment upon the grant of permission that was made by the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He said  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    appellants were entitled to a full analysis to be conducted considering
    all the elements relevant to proportionality.  In my judgment  that  is
    not  an  accurate  reflection  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's
    determination.  There were no circumstances which  the  judge  did  not
    allude to in his determination which might have made  a  difference  in
    the proportionality balance.

21. The judge continues in his grant  of  permission  to  say  that  it  is
    arguable that the judge has attached insufficient  weight  to  features
    relevant to proportionality.  Whatever those features might have  been,
    they are neither identified in the grounds of appeal nor in  the  grant
    of permission made by the judge.  In those circumstances, I see nothing
    in the grant of permission that amounts to an arguable error of law.

DECISION

          i) I dismiss the appeal of the appellants in the Upper Tribunal.

         ii) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                          Date: 11 July 2019
