
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
HU/04241/2016

                                                    HU/04236/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3rd November 2017                      |  On 22nd November 2017           |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                            HALKHOREE SEWSUINKUR
                     HALKHOREE SEEREEMATEE PRABHAWOOTEE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Lay, Counsel instructed by Abbott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain allowing the  Appellants'
    appeals against the decision refusing to grant entry  clearance,  those
    appeals being allowed on human rights grounds.   The  judge's  decision
    was promulgated on 23rd February 2017.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    (hereafter "Respondent") appeals against that decision and was  granted
    permission to appeal by  Resident  Judge  Appleyard  on  the  following
    grounds:

         "The  Respondent's  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal   make
         particular reference to paragraph 21 of the Judge's decision  where
         there is a finding that the  Respondent's  decision  would  have  a
         disproportionate  effect  upon  family  life  for  the  Appellants,
         Sponsor  and  their  family.   It  is  argued  that  the   decision
         effectively does no more than maintain  the  status  quo.   Further
         that the potential breach is contrary  to  the  findings  that  the
         Judge makes at paragraph 16 of his decision where he concludes that
         adequate care by other family members is available and affordable."

 2. I was provided with a skeleton argument from Mr Lay on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants (who are in theory the Respondents in the current appeal but
    whom I will continue  to  refer  to  as  the  Appellants  for  ease  of
    comprehension).  All  parties  had  the  opportunity  to  consider  the
    skeleton argument before making their submissions.

Preliminary issue: permission to appeal on a new ground out of time

 3. The Respondent originally sought to  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Hussain, however only did so on the basis of the grounds outlined
    above.

 4. Mr Clarke made an application for permission to appeal upon  a  further
    ground not raised thus far.  He  submitted  that  the  drafter  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal did not have the benefit of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment in Britcits v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 368 when drafting  Grounds  of  Appeal,  those  grounds
    being drafted on  28th  February  2017  whereas  the  Court  of  Appeal
    delivered its judgment  on  24th  May  2017.   Mr  Clarke,  in  effect,
    submitted in his new putative ground that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    had not given significant weight to the public interest and  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's view.  It was said  in  preliminary  argument  that
    there was no reason why the application  to  amend  was  not  made  any
    sooner after the judgment in Britcits  but  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer apologised  for  not  doing  so.   I  indicated  after  hearing
    submissions that I refused to give permission  to  adduce  the  further
    ground, primarily due to the fact that the Britcits judgment  had  been
    handed down from the Court of Appeal and had been in the public  domain
    for almost six months at the date of hearing  and  that  there  was  no
    previous notice by the Respondent to adduce the  further  ground  other
    than it being raised this morning by Mr Clarke.  My decision to  refuse
    permission to adduce a further ground is  governed  by  the  terms  and
    strictures of the Tribunal (Upper Tribunal) Procedure  Rules  2008  and
    its time limit stipulated for bringing an appeal.  There is a wealth of
    authority that makes clear that reasons must be given for every  moment
    of delay that passes (see BO & Others (extension of time for appealing)
    Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00035  and  also  see  Samir  (FtT  permission  to
    appeal: time) [2013] UKUT 00003 (IAC)).   There  are  no  such  reasons
    given here.

 5. Furthermore, in my view the ground is without sufficient merit  as  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination clearly reflects that  weight
    was given to the public interest by virtue of reference to Section 117B
    of the 2002 Act, as amended and  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    determination  at  paragraph  20  merely  states  that  the  judge  was
    disinclined to give significant weight to the Entry Clearance Officer's
    view regarding proportionality, not that he  was  disinclined  to  give
    significant weight to the  public  interest.   There  is  of  course  a
    distinction to be drawn between the judge's independent  assessment  of
    proportionality and the public interest which is largely a  matter  for
    statute pursuant to Section 117B of the  2002  Act;  and  historically,
    judges  are  charged  with  forming  an   independent   assessment   of
    proportionality in any appeal and are not bound by the  view  taken  by
    the Respondent (see Huang v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2007] UKHL 11 for illustration).  Thus, having refused  permission  to
    entertain the new ground,  I  proceeded  to  hear  submissions  on  the
    existing two grounds.

Error of law

 6. At the close of  submissions  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give.  I do not  find  that  there  was  an
    error of law in the decision such that it  should  be  set  aside.   My
    reasons for so finding are as follows.

 7. Mr Clarke primarily relied upon Ground 2 of the extremely succinct  and
    narrow grounds (drafted by a colleague).  This ground argues  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's findings at paragraph 21 conflict with  paragraph
    16 in that the Appellants can be adequately cared for by other  members
    of the family, if necessary, and consequently there  was  no  potential
    breach of Article 8 nor were the family required to live  in  Mauritius
    to care for the parents.  I find that this ground does not  hold  merit
    in that whilst the judge  has  made  findings  of  fact  regarding  the
    ability of the Appellants to meet the adult dependent relative  ("ADR")
    Rules, that is quite apart from  the  assessment  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  must  perform  under  Article  8  from  an  independent
    standpoint.  Although the judge found against the Appellants under  the
    Immigration Rules, the Rules in relation to an ADR are, it is  fair  to
    say,  strict  and  narrow  in  their  requirement  and  as   such   the
    consideration under Article 8 is  one  which  takes  all  factors  into
    account and approaches the appeal assessing whether a fair balance  has
    been struck between the  competing  interests  of  the  state  and  the
    individual and whether the decision challenged is  disproportionate  as
    confirmed by the Supreme Court in the decision earlier this year of  R,
    (on the application of) Agyarko & Ikuga v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 (see in particular paragraph 60).

 8. Thus, in my  view  the  judge's  findings  are  not  inconsistent  with
    paragraph 16 but reflect a balancing of the evidence heard, taking into
    account, for example, the evidence from the family members, the  effect
    of potential separation and that in  practical  terms  the  Appellants'
    daughter had indicated she would relocate to Mauritius to care for  her
    parents if they were not given leave to remain in the  UK,  the  impact
    upon the Appellants' granddaughter (from whom evidence was heard at the
    First-tier Tribunal), the personal care needs of the Appellants  whilst
    on the other and taking into account  and  having  had  regard  to  the
    public interest considerations as mandated by statute in  the  form  of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

 9. In terms of Ground 1 and the complaint that the decision maintains  the
    status quo of the Appellants being cared for by other  members  of  the
    family in Mauritius at paragraph  16  and  the  consequent  failure  to
    explain how Article 8 rights would be interfered with  or  impacted  if
    the Appellants are to remain where they are in Mauritius,  in  my  view
    this ground is fundamentally flawed and has no merit whatsoever.   This
    ground displays a misconception of the  basis  of  an  entry  clearance
    appeal whereby family members  challenge  an  ongoing  disproportionate
    interference with their Article 8 rights.  This must follow, given that
    the only Ground of Appeal available in entry clearance appeals is  that
    a decision is inconsistent  with  the  Respondent's  obligations  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  As pointed out by Mr Lay,  the
    approach to be taken towards Article 8  in  entry  clearance  cases  is
    reflected in the  state's  positive  duty  to  secure  respect  for  an
    individual's family life,  the  essential  question  remaining  whether
    there is a disproportionate interference with that right  (see  R,  (on
    the application of Quila & Anor) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department) [2011] UKSC 45, in particular  Lord  Wilson's  judgment  at
    paragraph 43).  It is also clear from the Court of Appeal's decision in
    Britcits v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    368 at paragraph 61 that "whether or not there is family  life  at  the
    moment of the application will depend  on  all  the  facts  as  to  the
    relationship... and its history".  It is also noteworthy that the First-
    tier Tribunal can take into account prospective family life in its view
    (see R, (on the application of Ahmadi & Anor) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1721, in particular the judgment of
    Moses, LJ at paragraph 18).

10. Therefore, in light of the above, the Entry Clearance Officer's  appeal
    against the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge do not reveal  an
    error of law such that the decision should be set aside.

Notice of Decision

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby affirmed.

13. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date 21 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini






