
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04633/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 September 2019                 |On 23 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A MacKenzie, instructed by TRP Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION


 1. I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter
    likely to lead  members  of  the  public  to  identify  the  respondent
    (hereinafter referred to  as  the  claimant)  and  his  family  members
    pursuant  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
    Failure to comply with this order may result in contempt proceedings.


 2. In my decision dated 26 March 2019, I set aside an earlier decision  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp who had allowed the appeal by the
    claimant, a national of Afghanistan, against the decision to  refuse  a
    human rights claim dated 24 March 2015.  The reasons for doing so  are
    set out in my annexed decision,  which  has  been  anonymised  to  give
    effect to the above order.


 3. The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2001 and although refused
    asylum, he was nevertheless granted exceptional leave  to  remain.   He
    obtained indefinite leave to remain following a marriage in 2004.  On 5
    October 2007 he was convicted at Lincoln Crown Court of six  counts  of
    making false statements to obtain insurance, possessing documents  with
    intent to deceive, driving while disqualified, driving while in  excess
    of alcohol and using a  vehicle  whilst  uninsured,  and  sentenced  to
    eighteen months' imprisonment.  He was also convicted on the same  date
    for driving whilst being  in  excess  of  alcohol,  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to nine months' imprisonment to be served consecutively.


 4. The claimant unsuccessfully appealed against  an  earlier  decision  to
    deport him dated 9 October 2008.  On 29 April 2009 a deportation  order
    was  signed.   There  followed  judicial  review  proceedings   seeking
    revocation of the deportation order based on a pending appeal.  Matters
    at that point became rather complicated however it  is  unnecessary  to
    set the detail out other than to note that a further decision to make a
    deportation order was made on 14 October 2009 that gave the claimant an
    in-country right of appeal which was allowed on 10 January 2010.


 5. In May 2012 and August 2014, the  claimant  was  convicted  of  further
    offences although these did not lead  to  a  custodial  sentence.   One
    related to the sending of offensive/indecent/obscene/menacing  messages
    and the other to the production of cannabis.  These  were  the  trigger
    for the Secretary of State to make a decision dated 3 February 2015  to
    make a deportation order as conducive  to  the  public  good  and  thus
    making the claimant liable to deportation by virtue of section  3(5)(a)
    of the Immigration Act 1971.  A human rights claim  was  refused  in  a
    decision dated 24 March 2015 and a deportation order was made dated  23
    July 2015 which resulted in judicial review proceedings.  The  claimant
    made a further human rights claim on 1 October 2015 which  was  refused
    on 28 January 2016 (the 2016 decision)  which  is  the  focus  of  this
    appeal.  The claimant's relationship with Ms [L] (whom he  had  married
    on 15 October 2004) that had been the basis of the appeal being allowed
    in 2010 had ended due to domestic  violence  that  had  resulted  in  a
    restraining order against the appellant in 2012.  It appears that  this
    relationship had been the basis of the appeal being allowed in  January
    2010 and the reason for  the  refusal  in  March  2015.   In  the  2016
    decision, regard was had to the family life the claimant  had  by  then
    established with CL and their child R who had been born a year earlier.




 6. As explained in my error of law decision, the claimant's appeal against
    the 2016 decision (wrongly referred to as the March 2015 decision)  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal in June 2016.   This
    decision was set aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss resulting in
    a remittal of the case to the First-tier Tribunal, where it  was  heard
    by Judge Boylan-Kemp.


 7. On 21 August 2018, a  month  after  the  date  of  Judge  Boylan-Kemp's
    decision allowing the appeal, the claimant was convicted  by  Worcester
    Magistrates of causing injury by dangerous  driving,  driving  a  motor
    vehicle with the proportion of  specified  controlled  drug  above  the
    specified limit, driving a vehicle with excess alcohol, and failing  to
    stop after an accident.  He was committed to Crown Court  for  sentence
    (and granted unconditional bail).  On 5 October 2018 HHJ Cole sentenced
    the claimant to three years' imprisonment,  directing  that  he  should
    serve one half before being released on licence.  T


 8. The claimant remains in prison.  He was not produced  for  the  hearing
    and his partner CL declined to give evidence in the light of her mental
    health difficulties.  Mr Mackenzie was content to proceed  without  the
    claimant and Ms Willocks-Briscoe had no objection to the  appeal  going
    ahead in these circumstances.  Supplementary evidence  has  been  filed
    which, in addition  to  updated  statements  by  CL  and  her  parents,
    comprises reports on R in relation to his schooling, a  letter  from  a
    Paediatrician (Dr Garstang), medical records, an updated letter from an
    independent social worker (Ms Harris), a psychiatric report on CL by Dr
    Y Saleem, a Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist and a report on  R  by  Ms
    Holmes, a Speech and Language Therapist.


 9. Mr MacKenzie and Ms Willocks-Briscoe accepted that the sole  issue  for
    me to decide is whether the effect of the claimant's deportation on  CL
    and/or R would be unduly harsh with the focus on section  117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Mr  MacKenzie  made  it
    clear that he relied solely on the issue whether deportation  would  be
    unduly harsh and did not seek to advance a case that  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those captured by this issue.


10. Following the claimant's most recent conviction, the Secretary of State
    has made a further decision to deport dated 15 December 2018.   Neither
    party considered this had an impact on my jurisdiction  to  decide  the
    case which is a challenge to the earlier decision of refusing the human
    rights claim.  With the claimant having been sentenced  for  less  than
    four years, the legal framework remains the same.


11. Section 117C is as follows:


         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


             ..."


 1. Paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Immigration Rules provide:


         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and


             (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


             (b)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months; or


             (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
                  the public good and in the public interest because, in the
                  view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
                  serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
                  particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State
                  in assessing that claim will  consider  whether  paragraph
                  399 or 399A applies  and,  if  it  does  not,  the  public
                  interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other
                  factors where there are very compelling circumstances over
                  and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


             399. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                  applies if -


                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a child under the age of  18  years
                      who is in the UK, and


                      (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or


                      (ii) the child has lived in the UK  continuously  for
                           at least the 7 years  immediately  preceding  the
                           date of the immigration decision; and  in  either
                           case


                           (a)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                               live in the country to which the  person  is
                               to be deported; and


                           (b)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                               remain in the UK without the person  who  is
                               to be deported; or


                  (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
                      with a partner who is in the  UK  and  is  a  British
                      Citizen or settled in the UK, and


                      (i)  the relationship was formed at a time  when  the
                           person (deportee) was  in  the  UK  lawfully  and
                           their immigration status was not precarious; and


                      (ii) it would be unduly harsh  for  that  partner  to
                           live in the country to which the person is to  be
                           deported,  because  of  compelling  circumstances
                           over and above those described in paragraph EX.2.
                           of Appendix FM; and


                      (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to
                           remain in the UK without the person who is to  be
                           deported."


12. The Secretary of State did not accept in the  2016  decision  that  the
    claimant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  R  or
    that he a had a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  CL.   These
    relationships are no longer disputed.


13. The sentencing remarks by HHJ Cole explain the nature of the claimant's
    recent offending.  Observations are made as to  his  dangerous  driving
    and overtaking, crossing clearly marked double white lines without  any
    regard to the safety of vehicles  coming  the  other  way.   The  judge
    observed that the claimant  had  been  trying  to  travel  as  fast  as
    possible -


         "... without any regard to road conditions or the risk  to  others,
         all of this while you were unfit to  drive  through  a  mixture  of
         alcohol, cocaine and metabolite of cocaine which remained  in  your
         body.  This is in  no  doubt  in  my  mind  that  this  would  have
         seriously impaired your ability  to  drive  and  is  a  significant
         aggravating factor."


14. The  judge  also  observed  a  further  indication  of  the  claimant's
    unfitness to drive was that he had no  recollection  of  where  he  was
    going.  The driving resulted in a head  on  collision  with  a  serious
    injury and left with ongoing symptoms.  The claimant ran off.   He  was
    chased and apprehended when he was violent to  the  arresting  officers
    "kicking and hitting out".


15. The approach I am required by Parliament to take in deciding this  case
    was recently summarised by Hickinbottom LJ in  his  short  judgment  in
    SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1213  at  [46]  with  particular
    reference to children:


         "46. ... in section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act,  Parliament  has  made
             clear its will that, for foreign offenders who  are  sentenced
             to one to four years, only  where  the  consequences  for  the
             children are "unduly harsh" will deportation  be  constrained.
             That is entirely consistent with article 8 of the ECHR.  It is
             important that decision-makers and, when their  decisions  are
             challenged, tribunals and courts  honour  that  expression  of
             Parliamentary will."


16. This followed the  lead  judgment  of  Holroyde  LJ  who  explained  KO
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  UKSC  53
    with reference to the proportionality exercise which was the subject of
    the appeal as follows at [32]:


          "32.     However,  in  KO  (Nigeria)  the  Supreme  Court  took  a
             different view as to the interpretation in this context of the
             phrase "unduly harsh".  At paragraph 22, Lord  Carnwath  (with
             whom the  other  Justices  agreed)  said  that  on  its  face,
             Exception 2 in section 117C of the 2002 Act raises  a  factual
             issue seen from the point of view of the partner or child . At
             paragraph 23 he went on to say:


                  "23. On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems
                      clearly intended to introduce a  higher  hurdle  than
                      that  of  "reasonableness"  under  section   117B(6),
                      taking  account  of  the  public  interest   in   the
                      deportation of foreign criminals.  Further  the  word
                      "unduly"  implies  an  element  of  comparison.    It
                      assumes that there is a "due" level  of  "harshness",
                      that  is  a  level  which  may   be   acceptable   or
                      justifiable  in  the  relevant   context.    "Unduly"
                      implies  something  going  beyond  that  level.    he
                      relevant context is that set by section 117C(1), that
                      is the public interest in the deportation of  foreign
                      criminals.  One is looking for a degree of  harshness
                      going beyond what would necessarily be  involved  for
                      any child faced with the  deportation  of  a  parent.
                      What it does not require in my view (and  subject  to
                      the discussion of the cases in the next section) is a
                      balancing of  relative  levels  of  severity  of  the
                      parent's offence,  other  than  is  inherent  in  the
                      distinction drawn by the section itself by  reference
                      to length of sentence.  Nor (contrary to the view  of
                      the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica)  v  Secretary  of
                      State for the Home Department [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras
                      55 and 64) can it be equated with  a  requirement  to
                      show "very compelling reasons".   That  would  be  in
                      effect to replicate the additional  test  applied  by
                      section 117C(6) with respect  to  sentences  of  four
                      years or more"."


17. At [34] Holroyde LJ further explained:


         "34. It is therefore now clear that a tribunal or court considering
             section 117C(5) of  the  2002  Act  must  focus,  not  on  the
             comparative seriousness of the offence or  offences  committed
             by the foreign criminal who faces deportation, but rather,  on
             whether the effects of his deportation on a child  or  partner
             would  go  beyond  the  degree  of   harshness   which   would
             necessarily be involved for any child or partner of a  foreign
             criminal faced with deportation.  Pursuant to  Rule  399,  the
             tribunal or court must  consider  both  whether  it  would  be
             unduly harsh for the child  and/or  partner  to  live  in  the
             country to which the foreign criminal is to  be  deported  and
             whether it would be unduly harsh for the child and/or  partner
             to remain in the UK without him."


18. Accordingly the  seriousness  of  the  most  recent  offending  by  the
    claimant is not the focus of this appeal and my analysis of the  effect
    of his deportation on CL and R does not require  a  balancing  exercise
    against the severity of that offending when considering the  degree  of
    harshness of the effect on his family members.   The  circumstances  of
    the offending however has potential relevance to the assessment of  the
    effect of deportation on CL and R when measured in accordance with  the
    rules and section 117C.


19. Mr MacKenzie relied on two Court of Appeal decisions in support of  his
    submission that the threshold in section 117C(5) is  met  if  there  is
    evidence showing a harsh effect  on  a  child  or  partner  which  goes
    materially beyond what is normally to be expected  where  their  family
    member is to be deported.  He argues that it is not necessary that  the
    effect should go substantially or extensively beyond what  is  normally
    expected.  This was consistent  with  the  judgment  of  Lord  Carnwath
    regarding a need for rules to be "straightforward" and for the  court's
    area of discretion to be reduced rather than widened.  In his  argument
    in any given case to delve exactly how far the  effect  of  deportation
    goes beyond the norm, would be contrary to the principle established in
    KO (Nigeria).  SSHD v ZP (India) [2016] 4 WLR 35 was a decision  where,
    as explained by Mr MacKenzie, the Court of Appeal upheld a decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal against refusal to revoke  a
    deportation order where there was evidence from family  members  and  a
    child  psychologist  that  the  child   in   question   was   suffering
    "psychological harm" as  a  result  of  separation  from  his  deported
    parent.


20. In SSHD v JG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 982 the court similarly upheld a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow an appeal where there  was
    evidence of psychological and emotional damage to the respondent's son.
     Mr MacKenzie refers  to  a  specific  passage  from  the  judgment  of
    Underhill LJ at [20]:


         "20. At paras. 93-104 he reverts to the question of the  impact  of
             the Respondent's deportation on "the  children",  noting  that
             their best interests are a primary  consideration.   He  notes
             that it has not  been  argued  that  any  of  them,  or  their
             mothers, could reasonably be expected to move to Jamaica.   He
             makes clear that he is considering not only JG  but  also  the
             step-children  (and  their  children),  but  he  reserves  his
             detailed consideration to the impact on JG.  As  to  that,  JG
             had for some time been displaying symptoms  of  emotional  and
             psychological damage and was  under  the  care  of  the  North
             Bristol Child  and  Adolescent  Mental  Health  Service  ("the
             CAMHS").  The Judge refers to, and quotes from,  a  number  of
             letters from the local NHS Trust and/or the CAMHS and  to  two
             reports, the more recent  being  from  an  independent  social
             worker, Mr Robert Simpson.  Only short  passages  are  quoted,
             and we were not shown  the  documents  from  which  they  were
             extracted; I need not reproduce them in full here.   I  should
             note, however, that at para. 97 the Judge quotes a letter from
             the  Trust  which  refers  to   JG   suffering   from   "sleep
             difficulties and tempers, physicality  and  emotional  upset",
             with "oppositional behaviours and  threats  of  self-harming",
             and describes his bond with the Respondent as "intense".  (The
             self-harming is also referred to at para. 74, where it is said
             that the Respondent regards himself as responsible for it - as
             I understand it, because of his having been away  in  prison.)
             The Judge summarised the effect  of  Mr  Simpson's  report  as
             being that "there will be serious emotional harm to the  child
             if the appellant is deported at this time".  He concludes,  at
             para. 104:


                  "It is having considered all the circumstances that I find
                  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
                  without the appellant."


             The reference to "the child" is plainly to JG."


21. I reminded Mr MacKenzie that Holroyde LJ in PG (Jamaica)  explained  in
    [38] that in the circumstances of that  appeal  he  did  not  think  it
    necessary to refer to decisions pre-dating KO (Nigeria):


         "... because it is no longer appropriate, when considering  section
         117C(5)  of  the  2002  Act,  to  balance  the  severity   of   the
         consequences [for the parties  to  the  appeal  of  the  claimant's
         [deportation] against the seriousness of his offending.  The  issue
         is whether there was evidence on which  it  was  properly  open  to
         Judge Griffith to find that deportation of PG would result for  SAT
         and/or the children in a degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what
         would necessarily be involved for any partner or child of a foreign
         criminal facing deportation."


22. Ms Willocks-Briscoe argued in her submission that this approach  should
    be of wider application.  Nevertheless. I have considered ZP (India) to
    see if it can provide assistance free from any  balancing  exercise  of
    the public interest.  The appeal was against the decision  refusing  to
    revoke a deportation order in respect of an Indian national  who  as  a
    consequence of the deportation order had  been  returned  to  her  home
    country.  The offences of which she  had  been  convicted  resulted  in
    twelve months' imprisonment for obtaining leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom by deception and twelve months' imprisonment for which she  had
    been convicted in her absence with the two terms to run  consecutively.




23. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal.  The Upper Tribunal found
    error of law and re-made the decision allowing the appeal and  revoking
    the deportation order.  The evidence before the judge included a report
    from a child psychologist.  The context  was  evidence  of  behavioural
    problems by a child affected by the deportation.  An extract  from  the
    judge's decision is cited in the judgment of Underhill LJ as follows:


         "Here, there is evidence the child  has  behavioural  difficulties.
         The oral evidence to that effect is supported by letters  from  his
         school and from medical sources.  It was not suggested  that  these
         were solely the consequences of the absence of his mother.  He  has
         had problems since birth.  However I  find  of  some  assistance  a
         letter from a child psychologist at Homerton University Hospital (9
         August 2013) stating that the child is unsettled by living in  both
         countries, here and abroad with his mother.  Also,  a  letter  from
         the deputy head of his primary school in which  she  states:  'with
         regard to the impact of his mother not being with  him  is  having:
         this could only be my opinion, I do feel it would definitely have a
         positive impact to have his family back together'."


24. After a further review of the judge's findings, Underhill  LJ  observed
    that he regarded the cases  "very  near  the  borderline"  and  further
    observed that he was unsure that every tribunal would have reached  the
    conclusion that was reached in  this  case,  but  he  was  nevertheless
    satisfied the decision was not perverse.


25. To my mind the decision is of limited assistance, particularly in light
    of the observation by Underhill LJ in [31] that the court had not  been
    shown the witness statements or documents and that the  judge  had  not
    summarised their effect, although he had given some details.


26.  The  more  recent  decision  in  JG  (Jamaica)   also   involved   the
    consideration of a perversity and reasons  challenge.   The  respondent
    had been  sentenced  to  five  years'  imprisonment  and  thus  in  the
    "serious" category of offender identified by the Court of Appeal in  NA
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662.  Again, Underhill  LJ  gave  the
    judgment of the court and observed the evidence  before  the  judge  at
    [20] as follows.  (JG also being the initials given to JG's son)


         "... As to that, JG had for some time been displaying  symptoms  of
         emotional and psychological damage and was under the  care  of  the
         North Bristol Child and  Adolescent  Mental  Health  Service  ("the
         CAMHS"). The Judge refers to, and quotes from, a number of  letters
         from the local NHS Trust and/or the CAMHS and to two  reports,  the
         more recent being from an  independent  social  worker,  Mr  Robert
         Simpson.  Only short passages are quoted and we were not shown when
         the documents from which they were extracted: I need not  reproduce
         them in full here.  I should note, however, that at  para.  97  the
         Judge quotes a letter from the Trust which refers to  JG  suffering
         from "sleep difficulties and  tempers,  physicality  and  emotional
         upset", with "oppositional behaviours and threats of  self-harming"
         and describes his bond with the Respondent as "intense"..."


27. Underhill LJ observed that  the  judge  summarised  the  effect  of  Mr
    Simpson's report as being that there would be serious emotional harm to
    the child if the appellant were deported which led  to  the  conclusion
    that it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom without the appellant.


28. In the context of the perversity challenge, Underhill LJ concluded that
    the evidence before the judge was  "at  least  potentially  capable  of
    showing that there was in the present case  a  risk  of  harm  to  JG's
    mental health that reached the necessary threshold.  It did not rely on
    the "mere" impact of  separation  but  on  the  specific  psychological
    damage evidenced by the materials referred to ...


         "I have to  say  that  the  judge's  summary  of  the  medical  and
         professional evidence does not itself paint a very full picture  of
         the situation, or of the precise extent of  JG's  problems,  though
         the references to self-harm are striking; and it may be that if  we
         were making our own judgment  I  might  not  have  regarded  it  as
         compelling as the Judge did.  But that is  not  the  role  of  this
         Court:  we could only, so far  as  this  ground  is  concerned,  go
         behind the judge's decision if it was one which was not  reasonably
         open to him on the evidence."


29. This decision is of some assistance but it is limited having regard  to
    the scope of the Court of  Appeal's  enquiry  and  the  intensely  fact
    specific nature  of  any  appeal  such  as  this.   It  is  appropriate
    therefore to return to the evidence now before  me  and  of  particular
    relevance is the evidence that has emerged since the  family  unit  was
    split by the claimant going to prison on 5 October 2018.  As  submitted
    by Ms Willocks-Briscoe, the earlier reports were created at a time when
    the family were together.  She argued that particular regard had to  be
    given to the more recent material to  determine  how  the  parties  had
    managed.  Both she and Mr MacKenzie made detailed reference to that new
    material (and cross-referenced the former material).  I have taken  all
    their points into account in my own analysis of the evidence.


30.  The  most  recent  statement  from  CL  (described  as  the   "further
    statement")  explains  that  her  anxiety  has  increased  as  has  her
    medication, with the main support for her mental health problems  being
    provided by her GP.  She rarely leaves the house and only does so  when
    it is essential.  When she does it will  only  be  short  periods,  for
    instance, taking a twenty-minute trip to the park with R.  She saw  her
    parents every fortnight or so.  R will be starting school soon  and  it
    would be a struggle to take him there.  She found it hard to sleep  and
    had no appetite.  She explains:


         "It is extremely difficult for my son and I to  try  and  lead  the
         "normal" life that we had with [the claimant] but I have to try for
         the sake of [R].  I do feel guilty about the impact of all this has
         had on him.


         It's difficult to know how I would cope if [the claimant] were sent
         away permanently."


31. Specifically in respect of R, CL explains how he has struggled with his
    recent separation.  His speech is several years behind his  age  group.
    R has become very angry and violent which has only  started  since  the
    claimant has been imprisoned and it is always after seeing his  father,
    who misses him.  She describes the claimant as being,  and  has  always
    been, a great dad and partner, phoning every day and  writing  letters.
    CL refers to her financial circumstances and the recent advice from the
    Job Centre that she could begin claiming disability living allowance.


32. CL's parents in their statement refer to the  negative  impact  on  the
    parties of the court challenges.  They rarely  see  CL  as  she  is  so
    isolated and when R sees his  father  "you  could  see  from  his  body
    language that he is so excited...the family try to rally round as  much
    as [they] can but...[they] have their own lives to  lead  and  jobs  to
    do...both work long hours and try to support to CL where  [they]  can".
    They identify the "fault of the potential permanent  separation  purely
    at the government's doorstep...which tries to destroy a good and loving
    family unit".


33. The papers include earlier statements (described as "updated")  by  the
    claimant and CL prepared at the time  of  the  most  recent  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing before Judge Boylan-Kemp.  The claimant indicates that
    he had not drunk any alcohol or committed any crimes and did not intend
    to do so.  CL explains how hard the previous eighteen months had  been,
    and its  frustration.   She  refers  to  the  claimant  having  a  good
    relationship with her family whom they saw on  a  regular  basis.   Her
    relationship with the claimant was as strong as it  could  be  and  she
    loved him very much.


34.  I now turn to the recent medical and other evidence referred to in [9]
    above.  Dr Garstang, a Consultant Community Paediatrician  reported  on
    28 August 2018 that R is delayed in all areas of  development,  speech,
    understanding, playschools and self-care skills, but also that  he  has
    made significant  developmental  progress  since  starting  at  nursery
    school in January.  He explained in one of the un-numbered paragraphs:


         "[R] is your first  child.   He  was  born  at  term  following  an
         unremarkable pregnancy.  He was an undiagnosed breech birth.  He is
         fully immunised.  He has no physical health concerns.  There is  no
         developmental problems on Mum's side of the family.  His father has
         significant mental health problems.  There are many boys  on  Dad's
         side  of  the  family  with   developmental   delays   and   speech
         difficulties.  Dad is currently facing deportation."


35.  With  reference  to  CL's  reported  concerns  regarding   R's   early
    development, Dr Garstang reports:


         "With your consent, I had a brief telephone conversation with  Head
         Teacher at Highters Heath Nursery School.  She confirmed  that  [R]
         had made a very significant progress since he started there.  He is
         a very sociable little boy although often  does  not  know  how  to
         interact with other people.  He plays alongside other children.  He
         likes other children.  He is showing early pretend play.  He is now
         able to follow a one word command and routines within the  nursery.
         He remains quite self-directed."


36. Dr Garstang observed that R in the clinic was very  friendly  and  made
    good eye contact with a physical examination being entirely normal.   A
    review would be undertaken in clinic in  six  months'  time.   Extracts
    from a child observation sheet have  been  provided  from  the  nursery
    school recording R's behaviour and progress between  3  September  2018
    and 10 July 2019.


37. Lucy Prever, a Speech and Language Therapist,  has  provided  a  report
    dated 27 July 2018 setting out recommendations  for  future  management
    based on R's current communication needs.


38. A letter from NHS Birmingham Community Health Care dated 20 March  2019
    explains that R was on the speech and language therapy "caseload".


39. According to an undated  letter  from  Care  UK  HMP  Huntercombe,  the
    claimant has been accessing support from the Mental Health  Team  since
    December 2018 and had attended one-to-one sessions and psychology group
    work.  The letter was received on 16 August 2019.


40. A bundle of medical notes and GP letters relating to CL have also  been
    provided.  Dr Singh, a General Practitioner explains in a letter  dated
    23 May 2019 that CL had attended the Practice on 3 April 2019  and  had
    reported to another GP stress and panic attacks and that  she  did  not
    feel she would be able to  attend  the  Tribunal  for  her  partner  in
    London.  Dr Singh also explains that CL has been receiving support  for
    her mental health from her GP and had been previously referred  to  the
    local Mental Health Team regarding her symptoms.  She had been  offered
    cognitive behavioural therapy to help.  From the  records  it  appeared
    she was unable to attend her sessions due to them being group sessions.
     He concludes:


         "Of course it is impossible to predict how someone's mental  health
         could be affected by their partner being deported, but in the light
         of [CL's] history, her anxiety may worsen, although I say  this  is
         in the context of a General Practitioner and not  a  specialist  in
         mental health."


41. A report by Dr Saleem, a Consultant  Forensic  Psychiatrist,  dated  10
    August 2019 has also been provided in relation to CL.  Specifically  in
    respect of her relationship with the claimant, Dr Saleem  explains  at
    [2.8]:


         "2.8 She met her partner [HI] who is now 40  and  unemployed.   She
             told me that she met him online in 2012.  They lived  together
             for about two years.  She told me that [HI]  is  currently  in
             prison for  drink  driving  and  other  charges  such  as  not
             stopping and drug offences.  She described him as having  been
             "okay" at the beginning  and  subsequently  developing  "drink
             problem".  She told me that he had just broken up with his ex-
             wife when they met but "managed to sort it out".  She told  me
             that he attempted to obtain employment particularly around the
             time her son [R] was born and worked for a  few  months  as  a
             carpet fitter but added that the Home Office advised  him  not
             to work due to his  immigration  status.   She  told  me  that
             uncertainty about his ability to work legitimately went on for
             about two years.  Describing [HI} during this period she said,
             "he changed from having a purpose to becoming  frustrated,  he
             had I suppose, some responsibility to work and feed me and the
             child to be fair he was good at  what  he  did  but  then  the
             uncertainty the Home Office writing to us from  time  to  time
             just made it worse and he took to alcohol and we had arguments
             every time there was a letter from the  Home  Office  and  the
             relationship suffered.  There were  outbursts  and  arguments,
             not loads but there was tension and frustration  most  of  the
             time.  Looking back now I think it  was  all  stress,  we  are
             still together, I still love him and  I  cannot  imagine  life
             without him.  I will be with him as long as he can  assure  me
             that he doesn't take drugs.  Of course I want  a  relationship
             with him, he is after all the father of my son."


42. By way of diagnosis Dr Saleem explains at [11.2] and [11.3]:


         "11.2    It is my view that [CL] suffers from a depressive illness.
                 This is characterised by low mood, poor concentration,  low
                energy levels, erratic  appetite  and  sleep,  hopelessness,
                helplessness and a bleak view of the future.  At the time of
                my interview she  was  presenting  as  moderately  depressed
                (levels are mild, moderate and severe).  As stated above she
                is currently on appropriate anti-depressant  medication  and
                seems to be benefitting from them.


         11.3 It is also my view that she  suffers  from  anxiety  symptoms.
                Her anxiety disorder can be described as a panic disorder as
                defined in ICD10 (International Classification  of  Diseases
                10th edition).  She complains of palpitations,  chest  pain,
                choking sensations, dizziness, feelings of unreality, losing
                control, fear of something going wrong etc.  These  seem  to
                occur  in  paroxysms  and  intermittent  fashion.   She  has
                suffered from several severe attacks  of  autonomic  anxiety
                (which includes  physical  symptoms  such  as  palpitations,
                sweating etc).  The  attacks  appear  to  have  occurred  in
                circumstances where there has been no objective evidence  of
                danger  without  being  confined   to   normal   predictable
                situations.  It is also important to note that she has  been
                comparatively free of anxiety symptoms between the attacks."


43. In response to questions asked by the claimant's solicitors  Dr  Saleem
    explains at [11.5]:


         "11.5    You have asked me if [CL's] condition is linked to  [HI's]
                immigration struggles.  I can confirm that [CL's] depressive
                symptoms are independent of  [HI's]  immigration  struggles.
                However it has to be said that his struggles  have  impacted
                on the intensity and frequency of her depressive and anxiety
                symptoms.   It  appears  that  her  depressive  and  anxiety
                symptoms are worsened by the uncertainty she has in relation
                to [HI's] court case.  [HI's] immigration status and  threat
                of deportation makes her symptoms particularly  worse.   She
                is extremely worried about a situation where she has  little
                or no prospect of her and her child enjoying a normal family
                life as [HI] will not be able to return to UK.  She is  also
                worried that she would not  be  able  to  visit  Afghanistan
                without  putting  herself  and  her  child  at  risk.    The
                likelihood of [HI] being deported clearly is a destabilising
                factor for her.  At  the  time  of  the  interview  she  was
                clearly distressed by the prospect of him being deported."


44. And by way of conclusion at [11.7]:


         "11.7    In terms of your request to comment on the impact  of  the
                forced deportation of [HI] (to his  country  of  origin)  on
                [CL's] mental health, I can state that this will only worsen
                her mental health  symptoms  i.e.  that  of  depression  and
                anxiety.  It is my view that she will  undoubtedly  struggle
                which became clear at  the  interview.   The  separation  of
                these two individuals will have an impact over and above the
                impact one might normally  expect  when  separation  between
                partners occurs.  This is primarily due  to  the  fact  that
                [HI] will be sent to a  very  distant  country  with  little
                prospect of her meeting him  regularly  to  maintain  family
                ties.  Her child will clearly have little or no  input  from
                his father and this could have a negative impact  on  [CL's]
                mental health.  If her mental  health  deteriorates,  it  is
                undoubtedly detrimental to  her  ability  to  care  for  her
                child.  It is well known that  mothers  managing  their  own
                mental health are often unable to provide adequate care  and
                appropriate input into the upbringing of their children.  If
                her mental health deteriorates the  symptoms  of  low  mood,
                poor energy levels, poor concentration, tiredness,  thoughts
                of self-harm, panic attacks etc. will invariably affect  her
                ability to function as a mother caring  for  a  young  child
                with multiple needs.  [HI's] deportation would mean that the
                entire burden of care and upbringing  of  their  child  will
                fall upon her  which  in  my  opinion  can  destabilise  her
                significantly and affect her ability to care for their  son.
                [CL] is already finding being a  single  parent  challenging
                with her partner in  prison.   If  this  separation  becomes
                permanent her difficulties will be magnified multi-fold.   I
                am of the view that the impact of [HI's] deportation on {CL]
                and her child will be over and above what is expected  where
                separation between family members occurs.  [HI's]  inability
                to see his partner and child to fulfil his duties will in my
                view be the predominant factor for any future  deterioration
                in [CL's] mental health."


45. As to CL giving evidence, Dr Saleem explained at [11.8] that she  would
    struggle to do so however with support she might  by  video-link  where
    she might feel less threatened by the imposing appearance  of  a  court
    room environment and if  not  available  she  might  benefit  from  the
    support of a trusted friend or relative  and  if  cross  examined  with
    compassion and professionalism she would be able to cope and manage her
    anxiety with breaks if needed.


46. A report dated 1 September  2019  by  Soundswell  Speech  and  Language
    Therapy Solutions to whom R was referred in February 2019.  By  way  of
    diagnosis the author Nicki Holmes explains  that  speech  and  language
    assessment indicated that he has a severe speech and language delay and
    that he will need a range of strategies  and  support  to  develop  his
    speech and language skills.   As  to  the  impact  of  separation,  she
    explains:


         "I am unable to comment on how the relationship between [R] and his
         father might be impacted by  permanent  separation.   I  have  only
         known [R] since his father was sent to prison and therefore already
         separated from him.  I am unable to predict how their  relationship
         might be impacted by permanent separation.


         In terms of supporting the maintenance of a  relationship,  Mum  is
         integral to this with regard to providing opportunities  for  these
         interactions to take place. With appropriate advice  and  guidance,
         Mum might be able to support [R] to communicate with his father and
         also facilitate any conversations at a basic level through the  use
         of  visual  aids.   This  applies  to  the   maintenance   of   the
         relationship in whatever environment."


47. Diana Harris, an independent social worker, has provided a letter dated
    29 August 2019 in which she explains that she has had  the  opportunity
    of reviewing the psychiatric report and explained  that  she  confirmed
    her "... original conclusions and believe they  are  fortified  by  the
    findings of Dr Saleem".  Ms Harris  explained  in  her  earlier  report
    dated 19 October 2017 in respect of R's well-being and  best  interests
    of the child that the claimant and  CL  were  currently  providing  the
    necessary care, routine and stability for  their  son  to  develop  and
    thrive.


48. Lisa Davies, a registered psychologist, provided a psychological report
    dated 14 October 2017 in which she explained her view that the claimant
    presented a low level of risk for violent reoffending, a low  level  of
    risk for intimate partner violence and a low risk of  serious  harm  to
    the public in the UK.  She expressed  the  opinion  that  his  risk  of
    reoffending and risk of harm to the public was manageable should he  be
    permitted to stay.


ANALYSIS


49. The evidence points to CL having mental health  difficulties  for  some
    period and before she met the claimant in 2012.  It is significant that
    in November 2018 and so after the claimant went to prison she  reported
    to her GP that the anti-depressant medication  was  working  well.   It
    also appears that the developmental difficulties R has encountered have
    an early origin and these are not attributed to the current absence  of
    the  claimant.   The  earlier  evidence  refers  to  the  positive  and
    supportive role played by the claimant in their lives.


50. It is difficult to reconcile the conduct  recorded  in  the  sentencing
    remarks with the theme of CL's evidence on the positive aspects of  the
    claimant's reformed  role.   Furthermore,  her  remarks  to  Dr  Saleem
    suggests the relationship itself is being tested.  It is clear from the
    sentencing remarks that the claimant has a  problem  with  alcohol  and
    class A drug use yet this is not addressed in any meaningful way by  Dr
    Saleem in his assessment of the background  circumstances.   Dr  Saleem
    does not factor this aspect into the assessment of the strength of  the
    relationship and the impact of long term separation particularly in the
    light of the sentiments that CL expressed  as  to  the  future  of  the
    relationship.  Another aspect which was not  considered  by  Dr  Saleem
    relates to the evidence that CL himself suffers from  depression  or  a
    form of mental health difficulties and how this  would  impact  on  the
    future course of the relationship and how this aspect has affected  the
    relationship in the past.  In the circumstances of this case the weight
    I can give to his report is reduced by these aspects which  could  have
    been addressed if he had also interviewed the claimant.  To my mind  an
    assessment of  the  strength  of  a  relationship  and  the  impact  of
    separation requires both parties to be seen.


51. The concluding observations by Dr Saleem are couched in general  terms.
    He speculates that if CL's mental  health  deteriorates,  the  symptoms
    will invariably affect her ability to function as  a  mother  which  is
    explained by it being well-known that mothers "... managing  their  own
    mental health are often unable to provide adequate care and appropriate
    input into the upbringing of their children".  The evidence  points  to
    NHS intervention in relation to the management of  CL's  mental  health
    difficulties and so it is not the case that she  is  then  required  to
    manage her difficulties alone.  Whilst Dr Saleem observes that  it  "is
    well-known" that mothers are often unable to provide adequate care,  it
    is significant that he did not see R or carry out an assessment of  the
    impact on R of the claimant's absence since August 2018.  It would have
    been more helpful if he had assessed whether the claimant's absence  in
    prison had been detrimental to CL's ability to care for R.


52. The observation that if separation became  permanent  (by  deportation)
    CL's  difficulties  will  be  "magnified  multifold"  lacks  diagnostic
    precision.  Dr Saleem's observation that the  claimant's  inability  to
    see his partner and child "to fulfil his duties" is not well explained.
     The concluding remarks by Dr Saleem in relation to  the  impact  being
    over and above what is expected when separation between family  members
    occurs is repeated in [11.7]  and  in  its  initial  expression  is  by
    reference to the claimant being sent to a  very  distant  country  with
    little prospect of meeting regularly to maintain  ties.   He  does  not
    give consideration to the effect of contact  by  social  media  between
    contact that may be made on visits by CL and R to third countries where
    they all might meet up.  There was  no  evidence  that  this  has  been
    contemplated.  The reference to difficulties for  CL  being  "magnified
    multi-fold" strays from careful clinical analysis.  All  these  aspects
    also affect the weight which I can give to Dr Saleem's conclusions.


53. I accept that the CL's mental health will worsen  if  the  claimant  is
    deported.  The question I need to consider is  whether  the  degree  of
    undoubted harsh impact is sufficient to render  this  worsening  unduly
    harsh.  In my judgment it does not.   CL  has  mental  health  concerns
    independent of the claimant.  The  evidence  shows  that  her  moderate
    depression has been managed by medication.  There is  some  doubt  over
    the future of the relationship given the nature of the claimant's  most
    offending and CL's explanation given  to  Dr  Saleem  how  drugs  could
    impact.  Dr Saleem's report is  essentially  one  sided  since  he  has
    assessed the impact on CL of the deportation of someone whom he has not
    seen.  To that extent he is dependent upon her report of how she  would
    respond to the claimant's absence in the context of her  mental  health
    difficulties.  Dr Saleem's report is of assistance in  determining  the
    impact on CL in particular of the claimant's  absence  but  it  is  not
    determinative of the measurement of harshness should that  become  more
    permanent through deportation.


54.  R's developmental difficulties appear to have arisen when  the  couple
    were together and he had made significant developmental progress  since
    starting nursery school in January 2018 as explained in  Dr  Garstang's
    report.  The observations in the extracts from his school  records  for
    the period 3 September to  10  July  2019  show  that  R  continues  to
    progress well in what clearly is a stimulating environment despite  the
    absence of the claimant at home.  Ms Holmes  accepts  that  she  cannot
    comment on how R's relationship with his father  will  be  impacted  by
    permanent separation and she identifies the importance of the  role  CL
    has in helping R develop his speech and language skills.  Although  R's
    difficulties mean that communication by telephone would be unsuccessful
    without the use of additional visual support.  She considers that there
    would be more success interacting and communicating by  skype  provided
    the claimant is trained  how  to  use  the  right  methods  to  help  R
    understand.  Such a form of communication will remain possible even  if
    the claimant is outside the UK.


55. Taking into account all the evidence in my judgment the deportation and
    thus permanent separation of the claimant from CL and R will  be  harsh
    (and seen as harsh  by  CL)  but  not  unduly  harsh.   The  claimant's
    deportation will undoubtedly cause distress.  That  is  inevitable.   R
    will be without the presence of a male figure in the household and  his
    mother will have to deal with matters alone  although  her  family  and
    social and medical services  will  be  able  to  provide  support.   In
    assessing the impact of deportation I am bound to give  weight  to  the
    behavior that led to the claimant's conviction which undermines  or  at
    the very least does not sit well with the evidence of him being such  a
    positive role in the lives of CL and R.  Taking proper account of their
    personal difficulties, the evidence does not support a finding that his
    absence  would  result  in  those  difficulties   being   significantly
    compounded.   CL has been able to manage despite the claimant's absence
    in prison and the evidence does not point to there being such a  marked
    decline in her mental health were he to be  deported  that  the  effect
    would be unduly harsh nor do I consider that such a result would  ensue
    for R in terms of his development.  I am not persuaded that it would be
    unduly harsh on the facts of this case for that deportation to ensue.


56. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 18  October 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
