
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04911/2017
                                                               HU/04913/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 April 2019                     |On 27 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 S K and A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
It is appropriate to make an  anonymity  order  because  the  case  involves
protection and child welfare issues. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellants are granted anonymity. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family. This direction applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr E. Fripp, instructed by Morden Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellants appealed the respondent's decision  dated  27  February
    2017 to refuse a human rights claim in the context  of  an  application
    for entry clearance as the adult dependent children of a refugee.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey dismissed the  appeal  with  reference
    to the immigration rules and Article 8 outside  the  rules.  The  Upper
    Tribunal set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision on 15 January  2019
    (annexed). The appeal was listed for  a  resumed  hearing  before  this
    panel to remake the decision.

3.    The panel heard  evidence  from  the  appellants'  parents  and  their
    younger sister. It is not necessary to set  out  the  evidence  in  any
    detail because the family circumstances are not in any serious  dispute
    and their evidence is a matter of record. Where it is necessary to make
    findings of fact we shall give reasons for our findings with  reference
    to the evidence.

4.    The background was summarised at [3] of the  previous  Upper  Tribunal
    decision:

         "3.      ... The appellants' father was  recognised  as  a  refugee
         because he had a well-founded fear of  persecution  as  an  Ahmadi.
         After he was granted refugee status he applied  for  his  wife  and
         five children to be reunited with him in the UK. His wife  and  the
         three children who were still under 18 years old were granted entry
         clearance. The two older children  (the  appellants)  were  refused
         entry clearance because they were over 18  years  old.  The  family
         took the difficult decision to join the sponsor in the  UK  leaving
         the appellants behind [5].  The  judge  went  on  to  consider  the
         evidence given by the appellants and  the  other  witnesses  as  to
         their situation in Pakistan and the effect  of  family  separation.
         The appellants are living with their elderly grandmother and attend
         university in Pakistan. They both claimed to have received  threats
         from members of the Khatme Nabuwat group at university  because  of
         they are Ahmadi [6-7]."


Legal Framework

5.    The immigration rules make provision for  a  refugee  to  be  reunited
    with family members who formed part of their family  unit  before  they
    fled their country of origin. The rules distinguish between close  pre-
    flight family members and other pre-flight family members. In the  case
    of close family members such as a spouse or children under 18 years old
    a refugee does not have to show that they can adequately  maintain  and
    accommodate  family  members  (paragraph  352D  of  Part  11   of   the
    immigration rules). In the case of other dependent family members,  the
    rules  require  them  to   meet   additional   requirements   including
    maintenance and accommodation (paragraph 319V of Part 8).  A  range  of
    post-flight family members can apply for leave to enter (but not  leave
    to remain) under the immigration rules but  must  meet  the  additional
    requirements contained in the rules (paragraph 319L-319U  of  Part  8).
    Other post-flight family members must apply for leave to remain through
    the usual immigration rules for family members (Appendix FM).

6.    The appellants' younger siblings were granted  entry  clearance  under
    paragraph 352D of the immigration rules. It may be  worth  setting  out
    the requirements to place the other considerations in context.

         '352D.   The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
                enter or remain in the United Kingdom in order  to  join  or
                remain with the parent who currently has refugee status  are
                that the applicant:


                (i)    is the child of a parent who  currently  has  refugee
                    status granted under the Immigration Rules in the United
                    Kingdom; and


                (ii)   is under the age of 18; and


                (iii)  is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
                    is  not  a  civil  partner,  and  has  not   formed   an
                    independent family unit; and


                (iv)   was part of the family unit  of  the  person  granted
                    asylum at the time that the person granted  asylum  left
                    the country of their habitual residence in order to seek
                    asylum; and


                (v)    the applicant would not be excluded  from  protection
                    by virtue of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of  these  Rules
                    or Article 1F of the Refugee Convention if they were  to
                    seek asylum in their own right; and


                (vi)   if seeking leave  to  enter,  holds  a  valid  United
                    Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity.'


7.    It is accepted that the appellants did not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 352D of the immigration rules  for  entry  clearance  as  the
    children of a refugee because they were over 18  at  the  date  of  the
    application.

8.    Paragraph 319V contains provisions allowing entry of  other  dependent
    relatives of a refugee in certain specified circumstances. The relevant
    parts are as follows:

         '319V.   The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
                enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  parent,
                grandparent or other dependent relative  of  a  person  with
                limited leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom as  a
                refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian protection  are  that
                the person:


                 i) is related to a refugee or beneficiary  of  humanitarian
                    protection with limited leave to enter or remain in  the
                    United Kingdom in one of the following ways:


                    ...


                    (f)      the son, daughter, sister,  brother,  uncle  or
                        aunt over the age of 18 if living alone outside the
                        United   Kingdom   in    the    most    exceptional
                        compassionate circumstances; and


                (ii)   is joining a refugee or beneficiary  of  humanitarian
                    protection with limited leave to enter or remain in  the
                    United Kingdom; and


                (iii)  is financially wholly  or  mainly  dependent  on  the
                    relative who has limited leave to enter or remain  as  a
                    refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian protection in the
                    United Kingdom; and


                (iv)   can, and will, be accommodated  adequately,  together
                    with any dependants, without recourse to  public  funds,
                    in accommodation which  the  sponsor  owns  or  occupies
                    exclusively; and


                (v)    can, and will,  be  maintained  adequately,  together
                    with any dependants, without recourse to  public  funds;
                    and


                (vi)   has no other close relatives in his  own  country  to
                    whom he could turn for financial support; and


                (vii)  if seeking leave  to  enter,  holds  a  valid  United
                    Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity,  or,
                    if seeking leave to remain, holds valid leave to  remain
                    in another capacity.'


9.    Paragraph GEN 1.1. of Appendix  FM  of  the  immigration  rules  makes
    clear that the rules contained in Appendix FM reflect the  respondent's
    position as to how the balance will be struck  between  an  applicant's
    family and private life and relevant  public  interest  considerations.
    However, the provision makes clear that the rules  relating  to  family
    and private life under Article 8 contained in Appendix FM only apply to
    family members of a refugee when they do not meet the  requirements  of
    Part 11 i.e. the rules relating to refugee family reunion.

         'GEN.1.1.     This route is for those seeking to enter or remain in
         the UK on the basis of their family life with a  person  who  is  a
         British Citizen, is settled in the UK, or is in the UK with limited
         leave as a refugee or person granted humanitarian  protection  (and
         the applicant cannot seek leave to enter or remain  in  the  UK  as
         their family member under Part 11 of these rules). It sets out  the
         requirements to be met and, in considering applications under  this
         route, it reflects  how,  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, the balance will be struck between the right to respect
         for private and family life and the legitimate aims  of  protecting
         national security, public safety and the economic well-being of the
         UK; the prevention of disorder and crime; the protection of  health
         or morals; and the protection of the rights and freedoms of  others
         (and in  doing  so  also  reflects  the  relevant  public  interest
         considerations  as  set  out  in  Part  5A  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002). It also takes  into  account  the
         need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the UK, in
         line with the Secretary of State's duty under  section  55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.' [emphasis added]


10.   The observation made by the Upper Tribunal at  [10]  of  the  previous
    decision needs  to  be  amended  slightly  because  paragraph  319V  is
    contained in Part 8  of  the  immigration  rules  relating  to  'family
    members' and not Part 11. Nevertheless, paragraph 319V  is  a  discrete
    area of the immigration rules providing entry for certain categories of
    dependent family members of a refugee which pre-dated the  introduction
    of Appendix FM. Paragraph 319V was inserted into the immigration  rules
    on 04 July 2011 (HC 1148). Appendix FM was not  introduced  until  July
    2012 (HC 194). Although Appendix  FM  contained  provisions  for  adult
    dependent relatives, paragraph 319V  provides  a  separate  scheme  for
    dependent relatives of a person who had been recognised as  a  refugee.
    For this reason, in our assessment, it is still  correct  to  say  that
    paragraph 319V is not one of the provisions identified by  Appendix  FM
    of the rules as reflecting the Secretary of State's view of  where  the
    balance should be struck for the purpose of Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention.

Decision and reasons

11.   The appellants can only appeal on the  ground  that  the  decision  to
    refuse entry clearance was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
    Act 1998. Following changes  made  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014  the
    Tribunal is no longer restricted to considering  evidence  appertaining
    to the date of the decision in an entry clearance appeal (section 85 of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA 2002")). We
    consider the position as it stands at the date of the hearing.

Best interests of the children

12.   The best interests of children are a primary  consideration,  but  not
    the only consideration. The appellants  have  three  siblings  who  are
    under 18 years old. Their  parents  provide  them  with  the  care  and
    support they need. The children are not dependent upon  the  appellants
    for support. However, the children are used to the appellants  being  a
    part of the family unit.  Naturally  they  are  upset  by  the  ongoing
    separation from their  siblings.  The  oldest  of  the  minor  children
    attended the hearing to give evidence. She was  clearly  upset  by  the
    separation from her brother and sister. Although  we  do  not  consider
    that the appellants have a key role to play in  the  care  and  support
    provided to the other children, as members of  the  family  unit,  they
    form an important part of their lives. For  this  reason,  we  conclude
    that it is only marginally in the best interests of the minor  children
    to be reunited with their siblings.

Article 8(1) - family life

13.   The appellants must show that their right to family life  with  family
    members in the UK is engaged within the meaning of Article 8(1) of  the
    European  Convention.  An  adult  usually  needs  to  show  that  their
    relationship entails something more than the normal emotional ties  one
    might expect between adult relatives: see Kugathas v SSHD  [2003]  INLR
    170.

14.   The Court of Appeal in Singh v SSHD  [2016]  Imm  AR  1  reviewed  the
    domestic and European case law relating to family  life  between  adult
    relatives. Sir Stanley Burnton came to the following conclusion in  the
    leading judgment.

         "24.     I do not think that the judgments to which I have referred
             lead to any difficulty in determining the correct approach  to
             Article 8 in cases involving adult children. In  the  case  of
             adults, in the context of immigration  control,  there  is  no
             legal or factual presumption as to the existence or absence of
             family life for the purposes of Article 8. I  point  out  that
             the approach of the European Commission for Human Rights cited
             approvingly in Kugathas did not  include  any  requirement  of
             exceptionality. It all depends on  the  facts.  The  love  and
             affection between an adult and his parents  or  siblings  will
             not of itself justify a finding of a family life. There has to
             be something more. A young adult living with  his  parents  or
             siblings will normally have a  family  life  to  be  respected
             under Article 8. A child  enjoying  a  family  life  with  his
             parents does not suddenly cease  to  have  a  family  life  at
             midnight as he turns 18 years of age. On  the  other  hand,  a
             young adult living independently of his parents may  well  not
             have a family life for the purposes of Article 8."


15.   The context in which this assessment is  made  is  slightly  different
    because it involves refugee family reunion. In the past,  the  Tribunal
    has recognised that the disruption to family  life  caused  by  someone
    having to flee persecution is of a different nature to a person who may
    leave their country voluntarily or the natural changes to  family  life
    that occur as children grow up and form independent lives: see H v  ECO
    (Addis Ababa) [2004] UKIAT 00027.

16.   The appellants are the  adult  children  of  a  person  who  has  been
    recognised as a refugee. The first  appellant  is  21  years  old.  The
    second 20 years old. Before their father left Pakistan to  seek  asylum
    in the UK they formed part of a close family unit  with  their  parents
    and younger siblings. As with many young  adults  of  their  age,  they
    continued to be dependent upon their parents as they moved from  school
    to university. They lived in the family  home  with  their  mother  and
    siblings while studying.  The  evidence  given  by  the  witnesses  was
    consistent in saying that the  appellants  continued  to  live  in  the
    family  home  with  their  grandmother  after  their  mother  took  the
    difficult decision to join their father in  the  UK  with  the  younger
    children. Their father continues to send what money he  can  for  their
    upkeep and says that other  relatives  in  Pakistan  are  not  able  to
    provide additional financial support. There is no evidence  to  suggest
    that either of the appellants  have  established  an  independent  life
    through work or marriage.

17.   We are satisfied that the circumstances of this  case  are  such  that
    the appellants continue to maintain a family life  with  their  parents
    and younger siblings within the meaning of Article 8(1). But for  their
    father  having  to  flee  Pakistan  due  to  a  well-founded  fear   of
    persecution the appellants would still be living with their parents  in
    the family unit. It seems clear that the  intention  was  for  all  the
    remaining family members to travel together to  be  reunited  with  the
    refugee sponsor. Even though the appellants  have  now  been  separated
    from their close  family  members  they  remain  dependent  upon  their
    parents for support  and  accommodation.  We  are  satisfied  that  the
    appellants continue to maintain a family life with  their  parents  and
    younger siblings.  We  conclude  that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance showed a lack of respect for their right to family life which
    was  sufficiently  grave  to  engage  Article  8(1)  of  the   European
    Convention.

Article 8(2) - proportionality

18.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to family  and
    private life.  However,  it  is  not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
    interfered with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law
    that the state has a  right  to  control  immigration  and  that  rules
    governing the entry and residence of people into the  country  are  "in
    accordance with the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference
    with the right to private or family  life  must  be  for  a  legitimate
    reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.

19.   The immigration rules relating to refugee family reunion contained  in
    paragraphs 352D and 319V are  not  said  to  reflect  the  respondent's
    position relating to Article 8 of the European Convention. However,  it
    is unlikely  that  any  weight  could  be  placed  on  public  interest
    considerations  if  the  appellants  meet  the  requirements   of   the
    immigration rules for entry clearance as family  members:  see  OA  and
    Others (human rights; 'new matter'; s.120) Nigeria [2019] UKUT 00065.

20.   We turn to consider whether the appellants meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 319V. The Entry Clearance Officer  (ECO)  was  not  satisfied
    that they were financially wholly or mainly dependent on  their  father
    (paragraph  319V(iii)).  The  ECO  was  not  satisfied  the  appellants
    produced  enough  evidence  to  show  that  they  would  be  adequately
    maintained and accommodated without recourse to public funds (paragraph
    319V(iv)-(v)).

21.   Having heard from the appellants' father and mother, and after  having
    reviewed the documentary evidence, we are satisfied on the  balance  of
    probabilities that the appellants are likely to  be  wholly  or  mainly
    financially dependent on their father. The appellants were part of  the
    family unit before their father left the country and up until the  time
    their mother and younger siblings joined him in the UK.  They  continue
    to live in the family home in Pakistan with their  grandmother.  It  is
    not disputed that both appellants are students in Pakistan. There is no
    evidence to suggest that they have any income of their own. The  bundle
    contains evidence to show that their parents send remittances from  the
    UK. This is consistent with the evidence given by the witnesses,  whose
    evidence on this issue was unchallenged. We have been given  no  reason
    to doubt the evidence given by their  parents,  who  told  us  that  no
    financial assistance is provided by other relatives  in  Pakistan.  For
    these  reasons  we  are  satisfied  that  the   appellants   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 319V(iii) of the immigration rules.

22.   The evidence relating to the availability of adequate maintenance  and
    accommodation is less clear. Paragraph  319V  does  not  form  part  of
    Appendix FM, which includes specified financial requirements. As  such,
    we find that the principles  outlined  in  KA  &  Others  (Adequacy  of
    Maintenance) Pakistan [2006] UKAIT 00065 apply.

23.   Little evidence or argument was put forward to explain how or why  the
    accommodation would be adequate within the 'room' and 'space' standards
    of the Housing Act 1985. It is likely that a three-bedroom house with a
    sitting room is just sufficient to  accommodate  two  adults  (man  and
    wife), two adults (not man and wife) and three girls (who are  said  to
    share one bedroom). However, no evidence has been  produced  about  the
    accommodation to show that the sponsor owns or occupies it exclusively.
    There is no copy of the tenancy agreement and little evidence about the
    property. For these reasons, we conclude that the appellants failed  to
    produce sufficient evidence to show on  the  balance  of  probabilities
    that  they  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  319V(iv)   of   the
    immigration rules.

24.   The evidence shows that the appellants' father is the only  member  of
    the family who works. His witness statement provides nothing more  than
    a bare statement that he would be able to maintain and accommodate  his
    children. At the hearing, he told us that he  works  in  an  electrical
    wholesale shop. He is in training and plans to start his own  business.
    His P60 shows that he  earned  a  gross  income  of  �16,825  from  his
    employment in the year ending 05 April 2018. His up to date wage  slips
    indicate  an  average  monthly  net  income  of  around   �1,260.   The
    appellants' father said that he pays �1,750 a month rent for the three-
    bedroom property where he lives with his wife and three children, which
    clearly exceeds his monthly income. He told us  that  he  supports  his
    family with additional  assistance  from  public  funds.  Even  if  the
    sponsor is  entitled  to  additional  support,  no  details  have  been
    provided. There is no bank statement or any  schedule  to  explain  the
    household income and expenditure to assess whether it  is  adequate  to
    maintain two additional adults in the household. For these reasons,  we
    conclude that insufficient evidence has been produced to  show  on  the
    balance of probabilities that the appellants meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph 319V(v) of the immigration rules.

25.   At the hearing, Ms Isherwood  argued  that  the  appellants  were  not
    living alone in the most exceptional  compassionate  circumstances.  We
    note that this was not one of the reasons given by the ECO for refusing
    the application. We do not consider it necessary to  make  findings  on
    this issue because, for the reasons already given, we conclude that the
    appellants do not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  319V  of  the
    immigration rules in any event.

26.   Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("the NIAA 2002") sets out a number of public  interest  considerations
    that a court or tribunal must take into account in assessing whether an
    interference with a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
    life is justified and proportionate. In AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015]
    UKUT 260 the Upper Tribunal found that the  duty  to  consider  section
    117B only extended to the provisions that were relevant to the facts of
    the case. Many of the provisions outlined in section 117B are  directed
    towards those who apply for leave to remain while in  the  UK  and  are
    less relevant to those applying for entry clearance  from  outside  the
    UK.

27.   Section 117B(1) states that the maintenance of an effective system  of
    immigration control is in the public interest. The  appellants  do  not
    meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  for  refugee  family
    reunion.

28.    The  public  policy  considerations  relating  to  English   language
    (section 117B(2)) and financial independence (section 117B(3)) apply to
    those who seek to "enter and remain" in the UK i.e. the public interest
    considerations apply to applications for entry clearance as well as in-
    country applications for leave to remain.

29.   Although there is no direct  evidence  to  show  the  exact  level  of
    English the appellants speak, we take judicial notice of the fact  that
    English is an official language in Pakistan and  that  both  appellants
    are educated to degree level where they are likely  to  be  taught,  to
    some extent, in English. Although their father used an interpreter when
    he gave evidence at the hearing, it was clear that he  understood  many
    of the questions before they were interpreted and that he had a working
    knowledge of English. The appellants' sister, who is not  much  younger
    than them, attended the hearing and said that  she  did  not  need  the
    assistance of the interpreter. We find that it is reasonable  to  infer
    from this overall picture that the appellants are likely to be able  to
    speak a minimum level of English such that they  would  be  less  of  a
    burden of tax payers  and  would  be  better  able  to  integrate  into
    society.

30.   We have already noted that the evidence  relating  to  their  father's
    income is rather limited. However, we are satisfied that  there  is  no
    evidence to suggest that the  appellants  would  become  an  additional
    financial burden on the tax  payer.  As  a  refugee,  their  father  is
    entitled to any  additional  support  he  already  receives  at  public
    expense. Both appellants are young people who are  educated  to  degree
    level. The cost of absorbing two additional  adults  into  an  existing
    household is not likely to be wholly unaffordable for their father, the
    expenses would largely consist of some  additional  food  and  periodic
    expenses for clothing and other  personal  needs.  The  appellants  are
    educated to degree level and are likely to be able  to  find  work,  if
    permitted, to contribute towards the family income.  The  rest  of  the
    public  interest  considerations  outlined  in  section  117B  have  no
    application to the facts of this case.

31.   We turn  to  consider  whether  there  are  any  other  compelling  or
    compassionate  circumstances  that  might  justify  a  grant  of  entry
    clearance on Article 8 grounds outside the rules.

32.    The  fact  that  the  application  is  made  in  the  context  of  an
    application for refugee family reunion  is  relevant.  The  appellants'
    father entered the UK on 06 May 2016 and claimed asylum. A letter  from
    the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK dated 14 July 2016  confirmed  that
    enquiries were made with their headquarters in Pakistan.  The  District
    President of Lahore confirmed that their  father  was  attached  to  an
    auxiliary organisation called Majlis Ansarullah, which looked after the
    affairs of male members from the age of 40 years old. He also served in
    the community  as  the  zonal  leader  of  Majlis  Ansarullah  and  was
    responsible  for  organising  various  activities  such  as  preaching,
    reformation, education and finance. He was the Vice  President  at  the
    local level and Secretary  Maal  at  the  local  level  (organiser  for
    raising funds and keeping accounts of the donors). The evidence  showed
    that the appellants' father had some prominence at a  local  level  and
    was involved in activities to support the Ahmadi faith.  As  a  result,
    the  respondent  recognised  that  he  had  a  well-founded   fear   of
    persecution in Pakistan.

33.   The appellants are the children of a person who is likely to be  known
    as an active member of the Ahmadi faith in Lahore. They are Ahmadi  but
    it is not suggested that they hold any particular position in the  same
    way as their father. Although the evidence contained in  their  witness
    statements is not particularly detailed,  it  is  plausible  that  they
    could have faced threats and harassment  from  Islamic  groups.  It  is
    likely that people in the  local  community  will  be  aware  of  their
    father's activities as a local organiser.

34.   The appellants both describe an incident in November  2018  where  the
    second appellant was stopped and threatened by members  of  an  Islamic
    group (Khatme Nabuwat). The second appellant says that the men  grabbed
    him by the collar and started to slap him. They called him  an  infidel
    and an unbeliever. They threatened to kill him if he did  not  denounce
    his faith. The men seemed to be aware of the appellants'  father.  They
    accused him of receiving religious training in the UK. They would teach
    him a lesson by targeting the appellant instead.  Both  appellants  say
    that they were shocked  and  scared  by  this  incident.  Their  father
    considered whether he might have to return to Pakistan to support them.
    In the end, their  mother  decided  to  return  to  provide  them  with
    emotional support. The appellants have produced evidence to  show  that
    their mother booked a flight to travel to Pakistan on 28 December 2018.
    A copy of her passport shows an entry stamp on 29 December 2018  and  a
    return stamp for entry to the UK on 11 February 2019.

35.   In her statement, the appellants'  mother  says  that  she  found  her
    children in a state of despair. While she was in Pakistan  she  noticed
    that they had a loss of appetite  and  would  often  skip  meals.  They
    wanted to sleep in the same room as her. Her son woke up  a  few  times
    feeling frightened. He told her that  he  had  nightmares  that  Khatme
    Nabuwat were after him.  She  found  it  difficult  to  leave  them  in
    Pakistan but she had to return to her other children in the  UK.  Since
    she returned to the UK  her  health  has  worsened.  She  suffers  from
    emotional trauma knowing that her children are alone  in  Pakistan  and
    may be in danger. The whole family feels "broken  and  torn  apart".  A
    letter from her GP dated 22 March 2019 states  that  she  has  "ongoing
    problems with anxiety" relating to her continuing separation  from  her
    children who are in Pakistan. Her GP said that they have  attempted  to
    reduce the severity of these symptoms, but it  did  not  alleviate  the
    underlying problem, which was the continuing stress  caused  by  family
    separation.

36.   The letter  written  by  the  appellants'  sister,  who  attended  the
    hearing, also provides compelling evidence of the effect of the  family
    separation. She said that she is close in age to her siblings and  they
    used to spend a lot of  time  together.  She  could  not  explain  "how
    painful and difficult journey of our lives we [are] going through as  a
    family". It is affecting their mental health and  wellbeing.  When  she
    looks at her mother  crying  and  feeling  helpless  it  is  "the  most
    heartbreaking situation you can ever go though."  Our  observations  of
    the witness at the hearing bore  out  her  written  evidence.  She  was
    tearful and obviously deeply upset by the situation throughout the time
    she spent in the hearing. We are satisfied that the evidence shows that
    the continued separation of appellants from the  core  family  unit  is
    affecting all members of the family in a negative way.

37.   In MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions  -  risk)  Pakistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00389 the Upper Tribunal found that  Pakistani  legislation
    restricts the ability of Ahmadis to openly practice their faith and  is
    used by non-state actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis.  The  Tribunal
    found that those Ahmadis who wished to express their faith openly  were
    likely to be at risk of  prosecution  for  blasphemy.  Those  who  were
    willing to practice their faith on a restricted basis in private  could
    do so without infringing Pakistan law. Even if an Ahmadis was found  to
    be in the category of persons whose  behaviour  was  not,  in  general,
    likely to put them at risk on return to Pakistan,  consideration  still
    needed to be given to whether that person might still  be  targeted  by
    non-state actors on return for reason  of  their  prominent  social  or
    business profile.

38.   We note that the Court of Appeal in WA (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 302 recently considered the guidance outlined in the headnote of MN
    (Pakistan) and observed that it did not stimulate the reader to address
    the question of "why" a person may choose to practice the Ahmadi  faith
    discreetly: see HJ  (Iran)  v  SSHD  [2011]  1  AC  596.  Although  the
    amendment to the guidance by the Court of Appeal is  important,  it  is
    not  strictly  relevant  to  our  assessment  given  that  we  are  not
    determining protection claims. However, the background relating to  the
    treatment of Ahmadis in Pakistan, described by the Court of  Appeal  as
    an "oppressed religious minority", is relevant  to  our  assessment  of
    whether there are compelling compassionate circumstances to be  weighed
    in the balance under Article 8.

39.   This is not a protection claim. The appellants  could  not  show  that
    they meet the requirements of Article 1A(2) of the  Refugee  Convention
    or Article 2(c) of the  Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC)  because
    they are not outside their country of origin. The Article  8  claim  is
    being considered in the context of an application  for  refugee  family
    reunion in circumstances where their father has been recognised to have
    a well-founded fear of persecution as an active Ahmadi. The purpose  of
    refugee family reunion is not only to maintain the unity of the family,
    but in certain circumstances, to ensure that  family  members  are  not
    left behind who may be placed at risk by the  activities  of  the  main
    applicant. It is possible to  found  a  refugee  claim  based  on  risk
    arising from membership of a family as a particular social  group:  see
    SSHD v K and Fornah v SSHD [2006] UKHL 46.

40.   In assessing  whether  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  is
    justified  and  proportionate  we  take  into  account  the  individual
    circumstances of the case, which indicate that the children are  likely
    to be known in the local area  as  the  family  members  of  an  active
    Ahmadi. The account of the second appellant being threatened by members
    of an Islamic group is plausible in light of  the  background  evidence
    and the country guidance.

41.   We also take into account the evidence showing  that  all  members  of
    the family are distressed by their continuing separation. In part,  the
    distress is caused by the severing of family ties. However, the root of
    the separation is not because of a natural process  of  the  two  adult
    children moving away from the core  family  unit  to  lead  independent
    lives. The root of the separation was the need for their father to flee
    the country because he had a well-founded fear of persecution. The rest
    of the family did not choose to move to the  UK  for  economic  reasons
    thereby taking the chance that they could  not  continue  their  family
    life with the appellants. They were forced into the  current  situation
    through no fault of their own because the main applicant is a refugee.

42.         Having weighed the public interest  considerations  against  the
    circumstances of the appellants and their family  members  we  conclude
    that the circumstances giving rise  to  the  father's  refugee  status,
    including recent threats from Islamic groups, give rise  to  compelling
    compassionate circumstances that render the decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance as the dependent family members of a refugee disproportionate
    even though they do not meet the strict requirements of the immigration
    rules. We conclude that the decision shows a lack of  respect  for  the
    appellants' right to family and private life that  does  not  strike  a
    fair balance under Article 8 of the European Convention.

43.   We conclude that the decision  to  refuse  a  human  rights  claim  is
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

44.   Given the length of time since the  entry  clearance  application  was
    made, and the precarious situation the appellants are in, we  encourage
    the respondent to give effect to this decision as soon as possible.



DECISION

The appeals are ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date 26 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan





ANNEX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04911/2017
                                                               HU/04913/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 15 January 2019                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 S K and A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr E. Fripp, instructed by Morden Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellants are brother and sister. They appealed the  respondent's
    decision dated 27 February 2017 to refuse a human rights claim  in  the
    context of an application  for  entry  clearance  for  the  purpose  of
    refugee family reunion.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Davey ("the judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated  on  21  June  2018.  The  judge  noted  that  the
    appellants  appealed  the  respondent's  decision   to   refuse   their
    applications for entry clearance  with  reference  to  paragraphs  352D
    (refugee family reunion) and  319V  (other  dependent  relatives  of  a
    refugee) of the immigration rules [2]. The  applications  were  refused
    because they were over 18 years old and  therefore  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 352D(ii). The applications were also  refused
    under paragraphs 319V(iii)-(v) because they failed to  submit  evidence
    of the sponsor's financial situation to show that they  were  dependent
    on the sponsor and that adequate maintenance and accommodation would be
    available [3]. At [4] the judge stated:

         "4.      At the hearing no  issue  was  taken  over  the  issue  of
             maintenance and accommodation, given  the  evidence  that  had
             been provided and the fact that the  Appellant's  Sponsor  had
             refugee status. What was essentially asserted  was  that  they
             were not living independent lives, they had not married,  were
             not away  from  the  family  circumstances  and  were  not  in
             relationship with third parties. They were entirely  supported
             by their adult Sponsor and mother and  they  were  emotionally
             dependent upon them as well."

3.    At [5] he outlined the background to the application. The  appellants'
    father was recognised as a refugee because he had a  well-founded  fear
    of persecution as an Ahmadi. After he was  granted  refugee  status  he
    applied for his wife and five children to be reunited with him  in  the
    UK. His wife and the three children who were still under 18  years  old
    were granted entry clearance. The two older children  (the  appellants)
    were refused entry clearance because they were over 18 years  old.  The
    family took the difficult decision  to  join  the  sponsor  in  the  UK
    leaving the appellants behind [5]. The judge went on  to  consider  the
    evidence given by the appellants and the other witnesses  as  to  their
    situation  in  Pakistan  and  the  effect  of  family  separation.  The
    appellants  are  living  with  their  elderly  grandmother  and  attend
    university in Pakistan. They both claimed to have received threats from
    members of the Khatme Nabuwat group at university because of  they  are
    Ahmadi [6-7].

4.    The judge found that the provisions  of  the  immigration  rules  were
    intended to be compliant with Article  8  of  the  European  Convention
    [12]. He stated that it was accepted  that  the  appellants  could  not
    succeed under the rules [14]. However, no clear statement is made as to
    whether the appellant's legal representative made an express concession
    on this point. The judge went on to make the following findings:

         "14.     The position therefore is that it  is  accepted  that  the
             Appellants cannot succeed under the  Rules  and  the  question
             raised is whether or not the circumstances in the light of the
             case law, particularly that of Agyarko [2017] EWCA Civ 11  and
             Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 471 are such that is shows this is  the
             kind of case of which there will always be  a  few  which  can
             succeed under Article 8. Having  considered  those  matters  I
             find that the concerning circumstances  are  not  sufficiently
             significant, looking at this matter through the prism  of  the
             ECHR compliant Rules, to engage with  Article  8  outside  the
             Rules.  It  is  a  hard  decision  but  that  is  simply   the
             consequence of the way in which the  Secretary  of  State  now
             seeks to apply Article 8 and to challenge  any  decision  made
             upon it.

         15.       Having  looked  at  the  matter  I  appreciate  that  the
             anxieties of the Sponsor and his wife are genuine.  They  came
             to  the  United  Kingdom  in  the   circumstances   with   the
             limitations that were put  upon  them  by  choice  or  limited
             choice so far as the Sponsor's wife is concerned. I  similarly
             understand that the Appellants' siblings in the UK would  like
             to be reunited with their older brother and sister.  Whilst  I
             fully understand those matters and the submissions made as  to
             what can happen to them if they get to the United  Kingdom  it
             did not seem to me that those are sufficient to show that  the
             ECO's decision is disproportionate.

         16.      I accept that the  Appellants  and  their  parents  had  a
             family life and private life together in Pakistan  some  years
             ago and that has  been  broken.  The  Appellant's  have  their
             ageing grandmother, accommodation, university studies and each
             other for moral support. It is plain that they have others who
             are concerned about them and presumably know  the  family.  It
             does not seem to me that the Sponsor and his wife and children
             could have come to the United Kingdom from a total  vacuum  of
             contact  with  their  local   area   or   families.   In   the
             circumstances I do not regard the Appellants as likely  to  be
             isolated in the circumstances where they  currently  live.  On
             the face  of  it  I  do  not  see  that  their  circumstances,
             accepting their evidence as to  threats  of  unspecified  kind
             that they have received from KN are concerning  and  troubling
             but it  did  not  seem  that  those  are  significant  in  the
             assessment of proportionality."

5.     The  appellants  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal failed to make findings as to  whether  the
         appellants  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph   319V   of   the
         immigration rules.

     ii)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  mischaracterised  the  relevant   rules
         relating to refugee family reunion as rules intended to reflect the
         respondent's position in relation to  Article  8  of  the  European
         Convention.

    iii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to conduct a  structured  assessment
         of Article 8 outside the rules  and  failed  to  consider  relevant
         matters such as (i) country guidance relating to the  treatment  of
         Ahmadis in Pakistan and (ii) the significance of the refugee family
         reunion context of the appeal.

     iv) The First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the  best  interests  of
         the other children in  the  family  i.e.  the  appellants'  younger
         siblings.

Decision and reasons

6.    After having considered the grounds  of  appeal  and  the  submissions
    made by both parties I conclude that there is  merit  in  some  of  the
    grounds of appeal although others are  not  made  out.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law  and  must  be
    set aside.

7.    The respondent did not serve a  rule  24  response  to  the  grant  of
    permission. On the morning of the hearing Ms Isherwood handed up a copy
    of the Home Office Presenting Officer's note of the proceedings  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  indicated   that   the   appellants'
    representative, Mr Janjua  of  Morden  Solicitors,  conceded  that  the
    appellants "do not meet the Immigration rule namely provisions relating
    to family re-union, because they were over the age of 18. Rep  will  be
    relying on Article 8."  His  submissions,  which  appear  to  be  noted
    incompletely, because no mention is made of submissions on  Article  8,
    were summarised as follows: "The Rep accepted that the family's  income
    is below the required rent, and hence they are struggling financially."

8.    I considered whether it was appropriate to adjourn in order  to  allow
    time for the appellants to  respond  to  this  evidence  by  way  of  a
    statement from the representative who was  present  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, but after having considered the other points, it  was
    not necessary to delay matters further given that there was  sufficient
    merit to other grounds. I only note that the  judge's  summary  of  the
    arguments put forward at [4] of the decision are  somewhat  opaque  and
    did not clearly summarise what concessions were made by the appellant's
    representative in relation to  the  rules,  if  any.  Although  it  was
    properly conceded by Mr Fripp that the appellants could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 352D of the immigration  rules  because  they
    are over 18 years of age, the  requirements  of  paragraph  319V  allow
    adult children living  alone  in  the  most  exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances to join a refugee in  the  United  Kingdom  if  they  are
    financially wholly or mainly dependent on the refugee sponsor and  will
    be maintained and accommodated adequately. No clear findings were  made
    on these matters to  explain  why  the  appellants  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 319V of the immigration rules.

9.    I find that there is force to the argument that  the  judge  erred  in
    considering the immigration rules relating to  refugee  family  reunion
    and other dependent relatives  of  refugees  as  a  reflection  of  the
    respondent's position under Article 8 of the European  Convention.  The
    Refugee Convention and the European Convention are distinct  mechanisms
    although they may intersect. Paragraph GEN 1.1. of Appendix FM  of  the
    immigration rules makes clear that the rules contained in  Appendix  FM
    reflect the respondent's position as to how the balance will be  struck
    between an applicant's family and  private  life  and  relevant  public
    interest considerations. However, the provision makes  clear  that  the
    rules relating to family and private life under  Article  8  will  only
    apply to family members  of  a  refugee  when  they  do  not  meet  the
    requirements of Part 11 i.e.  the  rules  relating  to  refugee  family
    reunion and other dependent family members of a refugee:

         "GEN.1.1.     This route is for those seeking to enter or remain in
         the UK on the basis of their family life with a  person  who  is  a
         British Citizen, is settled in the UK, or is in the UK with limited
         leave as a refugee or person granted humanitarian  protection  (and
         the applicant cannot seek leave to enter or remain  in  the  UK  as
         their family member under Part 11 of these rules). It sets out  the
         requirements to be met and, in considering applications under  this
         route, it reflects  how,  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, the balance will be struck between the right to respect
         for private and family life and the legitimate aims  of  protecting
         national security, public safety and the economic well-being of the
         UK; the prevention of disorder and crime; the protection of  health
         or morals; and the protection of the rights and freedoms of  others
         (and in  doing  so  also  reflects  the  relevant  public  interest
         considerations  as  set  out  in  Part  5A  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002). It also takes  into  account  the
         need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the UK, in
         line with the Secretary of State's duty under  section  55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009." [emphasis added]

10.   This is consistent with  international  refugee  law,  which  makes  a
    distinction between family reunion for existing  family  members  of  a
    refugee and 'post-flight' family members. Paragraphs 352D and  319V  of
    Part 11 of the immigration rules provide for existing family members of
    a refugee to enter the UK if they meet  the  relevant  requirements.  A
    'post-flight' family member would have to apply  for  leave  to  remain
    under Appendix FM e.g. the spouse of a refugee where  the  relationship
    began after the refugee entered the UK.  For these reasons  I  conclude
    that the judge was wrong to begin, as  his  starting  point,  with  the
    statement that the immigration rules relating to family reunion were  a
    reflection of the respondent's position relating to Article  8  of  the
    European Convention. This error  may  not  have  been  material  if  an
    adequate assessment outside the rules was then undertaken, but for  the
    reasons given below, I conclude that those findings were also flawed.

11.   Dr H.H. Storey, who granted  permission  to  appeal,  found  that  the
    grounds relating to the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of  Article  8
    outside the rules were arguable and noted that the  statement  made  at
    [14] that the appellants' case did  not  even  engage  with  Article  8
    outside the rules "is particularly problematic". I agree.

12.   The judge did  not  conduct  a  structured  assessment  of  Article  8
    according to the five-stage approach outlined by the House of Lords  in
    Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349. No findings were made as to whether  the
    appellants' relationship with  their  family  members  in  the  UK  had
    additional elements of dependency over and above the usual relationship
    between adult relatives in order to engage their right to  family  life
    under Article 8(1): see Kugathas v SSHD [2003] INLR 170.  Although  the
    appellants are over 18 years old the evidence given  by  the  witnesses
    was that they remained part of the family  unit  and  continued  to  be
    financially dependent on their parents.  Although  the  judge  accepted
    (after  he  had  already  concluded   that   the   decision   was   not
    disproportionate) that the appellants had  a  family  life  with  their
    parents "some years ago", this took the form of a statement rather than
    a clear finding as to whether the nature of the  relationship,  at  the
    date of the hearing, was such that it engaged Article 8(1).

13.   In assessing the proportionality of the decision the judge  took  into
    account what was said  about  the  problems  the  appellants  faced  in
    Pakistan.  Both  appellants  said  that  they  received  threats   from
    supporters of the Khatme Nabuwat group at university. Despite the  fact
    that they had legal representation, this aspect of their case  was  not
    prepared  properly.  The  witness  statements  were  confined  to  bare
    statements with no detail as to when  the  threats  were  made  or  the
    nature of the incidents. Nor was any background  evidence  put  forward
    about the nature of the Khatme Nabuwat group.  No  other  evidence  was
    included in the appellants' bundle about the situation faced by Ahmadis
    in Pakistan. In light of the rather vague  evidence  contained  in  the
    appellants' witness statements it was clearly open to the judge to find
    that the threats were of an "unspecified kind" [16].

14.    However,  despite  the  deficiencies  in  the  preparation   of   the
    appellants' case, I accept that the judge erred in failing to  consider
    the import of the appellants' situation and the overall context of  the
    case as an application for refugee family reunion  when  assessing  the
    proportionality of the decision.

15.   It was not disputed that the appellants' father was  recognised  as  a
    refugee because he had a well-founded fear of persecution as an Ahmadi.
    This was a highly relevant factor in assessing what the appellants said
    about the difficulties they  faced  at  university.  It  is  not  clear
    whether the appellants' representative put forward  arguments  relating
    to the general situation facing Ahmadis in Pakistan. There  is  nothing
    in the evidence or the First-tier Tribunal decision to suggest that  he
    did.  However,  an  experienced  First-tier  Tribunal  judge   of   the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber, as the judge is in this case, would  be
    fully aware of the situation faced  by  Ahmadis  in  Pakistan  and  the
    relevant country guidance. The Upper Tribunal in MN & Others (Ahmadis -
    country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 389  concluded  that
    legislation is used to threaten and harass Ahmadis and  that  they  are
    also subject to attacks from  non-state  actors  from  sectors  of  the
    majority Sunni Muslim population.

16.   This was not an appeal brought  on  Refugee  Convention  grounds,  nor
    could it be because the appellants are not  outside  their  country  of
    nationality. Despite the lack of evidence, there were important factors
    that  were  capable  of  being  given  weight  in  the  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8. Firstly, the appellants' father has a well-
    founded fear of persecution as an Ahmadi. Consideration might needed to
    have been given to whether this fact might give  rise  to  a  potential
    risk to family members remaining in Pakistan. Secondly, the appellants'
    account of threats made by  non-state  actors  from  a  Sunni  majority
    group, albeit general in nature,  was  at  least  consistent  with  the
    evidence relating to the treatment  of  Ahmadis  in  Pakistan  and  the
    relevant country  guidance.  Having  noted  that  the  appellants  were
    "extremely scared and worried that they  would  be  targeted"  [7]  the
    judge needed to give adequate reasons to explain why he concluded  that
    these factors were not significant to  the  proportionality  assessment
    having accepted that the threats were "concerning and  troubling".  The
    reasoning at [16] fails to  engage  with  the  serious  nature  of  the
    situation for Ahmadis in Pakistan in the  context  of  this  particular
    case, which involved an application for family reunion as  a  dependent
    adult family member of a refugee where the appellants also  claimed  to
    have been threatened.

17.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not engage properly with the legal framework and there was
    a lack of reasoning relating  to  relevant  factors.  On  the  evidence
    currently before the Upper Tribunal it is not clear whether there was a
    full concession relating to the immigration  rules  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, but given the lack of clarity surrounding this  issue
    the whole decision is set aside and will be remade at a resumed hearing
    in the Upper Tribunal.

Directions

18.   The parties are given permission to serve any further evidence  relied
    upon, including up to date detailed witness statements.  Bundles  shall
    be filed (in duplicate to the Upper Tribunal) at least two weeks before
    the next hearing.

19.   The appellant's representatives shall confirm which witnesses will  be
    called to give evidence and whether they require the assistance  of  an
    interpreter at least two weeks before the next hearing.

20.   The parties shall file skeleton arguments (in duplicate to  the  Upper
    Tribunal) at least seven days before the next  hearing.  The  arguments
    shall include:

      i) Submissions on the nature  and  scope  of  paragraph  319V  of  the
         immigration rules and its  interaction  with  Article  8,  if  any,
         including submissions on the respondent's policy  "Family  Reunion:
         for refugees and those with humanitarian protection".

     ii) Submissions on the interaction of refugee family reunion issues and
         Article 8 outside the rules, in  particular,  how  the  context  of
         refugee family reunion should be assessed as part of an  Article  8
         proportionality assessment.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside

The appeal will be listed for a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal


Signed   [pic]   Date 12 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

