
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                     |                                   |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   |Appeal Number: HU/04473/2019       |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype)    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 March 2021                    |On 24 March 2021                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                       Iman mohammedien hussein idris
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, of  counsel,  instructed  by  All  Nations
                  Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Sudanese national whose date of birth is given as  1
    January 1997.  She appeals against a decision which was issued by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Monaghan on 22 November 2019.   By  that  decision,
    the judge dismissed the appellant's human  rights  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal of her application  for  entry  clearance  as  the
    spouse of a recognised refugee.

Background

 2. The appellant and the sponsor are non-Arab Darfuris.  She  states  that
    she has lived in a camp for internally displaced persons (the  Nifasher
    Camp) in Darfur since 2004.  She and  the  sponsor  are  said  to  have
    married in Darfur in 2013.  I shall refer to the  sponsor  as  IH.   He
    made his way to the United Kingdom, arriving on 25 April 2014.   On  19
    August 2014, he underwent an asylum screening  interview  in  which  he
    stated that he had been married since 2013 and named the  appellant  as
    his spouse.  I have no further information about his asylum  claim  but
    it is not in issue between the parties  that  he  was  granted  limited
    leave to remain as a refugee in August 2014.

 3. The appellant has applied for entry clearance as IH's  spouse  on  four
    occasions.  The previous applications were refused on 6 February  2018,
    26 April 2018 and 26 September 2018.  I do not understand her  to  have
    appealed against any of those decisions.   She  made  her  most  recent
    application for entry clearance on 31 October  2018.   The  application
    form was completed by her current advisors.  Amongst other  information
    disclosed in that form, the appellant stated that she had travelled  to
    Ethiopia in October 2018 in order to spend time with the sponsor.

 4. The application was refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  10
    February 2019.  The ECO was not satisfied that the  applicant  was  the
    partner  of  a  person  who  had  refugee  status  granted  under   the
    Immigration Rules or that  the  relationship  had  existed  before  the
    sponsor left Sudan (paragraphs 352A(i) and  (iii)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules refer).

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. An appeal was lodged on 8 March 2019.  The grounds of appeal  responded
    to the ECO's decision in robust terms and invited  an  Entry  Clearance
    Manager to review the decision.  A review did take place on 20 May 2019
    but the ECM maintained the decision, noting that there was no  evidence
    from the UN or the Red Cross to show that the appellant and the sponsor
    had lived together in the IDP camp.

 6. So it was that the appeal came before the judge, sitting  in  Bradford,
    on 11 November 2019.  The appellant was represented by Mr  Holmes,  the
    respondent by a Presenting Officer.  The judge heard oral evidence from
    the appellant and submissions from both advocates before reserving  her
    decision.

 7. In her reserved decision, the judge noted the reasons given by the  ECO
    for refusing the application at [3]-[10] and the reasons given  by  the
    ECM for maintaining the decision at [12]-[16].  She  noted  Mr  Holmes'
    reliance on two of the respondent's published  policies  regarding  the
    significance, in a subsequent family reunion application, of a  sponsor
    naming the applicant as their spouse during  their  asylum  claim.   At
    [19]-[39], the judge set out the appellant's claim, including a summary
    of the oral evidence given by the sponsor.  At [40]-[43], she  detailed
    the documentary evidence before her.  The judge turned to her  findings
    at [44].

 8. At [45], the judge observed that the appellant had provided a number of
    documents to substantiate the  claim  that  she  and  the  sponsor  had
    married in June 2013 and had lived in an IDP camp  together  before  he
    came to the United Kingdom.  The judge stated at [46] that  she  had  a
    number  of  concerns  about  those  documents.   There  was   a   joint
    certificate from the Camp Director and the Camp Mayor (of Nifasha Camp)
    but inadequate details (dates, names and signatures)  appeared  on  the
    document.  The judge noted that the certificate was  also  inconsistent
    with the sponsor's oral evidence as regards the date on  which  he  had
    moved to Nifasha Camp (2005 or 2006): [47].  It was concerning that the
    author of the (separate) Certificate of Residence had stated  that  the
    sponsor was presently living in the Abu Shouk Camp although he had left
    Sudan in 2014: [48].

 9. At [49]-[54], the  judge  addressed  issues  in  relation  to  the  two
    marriage certificates which were relied upon by the appellant.  She was
    concerned about the hesitant and reluctant manner in which the  sponsor
    had given evidence about the way in which he had obtained the  original
    certificate  from  2013.   The  judge  then  considered  the  sponsor's
    explanation  for  the  existence  of  two  marriage  certificates.   In
    response  to  the  ECO's  concern  about   the   coexistence   of   two
    certificates,  the  sponsor  had  said  that  they  had  been  given  a
    certificate by the sheikh who conducted the marriage ceremony  in  2013
    and that the appellant had taken that certificate to court in  2017  to
    get an official marriage certificate which was  'used  when  travelling
    abroad': [51].  The judge noted Mr Holmes' reliance on this explanation
    in his skeleton argument but  she  was  concerned  that  there  was  no
    background material in support of it: [52]-[53].   At  [54],  she  said
    this:

         Therefore I find that there is nothing, other  than  the  sponsor's
         evidence to substantiate this point.  I find that it is  reasonably
         likely that the sponsor puts forward this  explanation  to  explain
         firstly why there are two marriage documents and secondly why  they
         are so far apart  in  date.   I  do  not  find  his  explanation  a
         plausible one and it is not supported by background evidence.

10. At [55], the judge stated that  she  did  not  share  the  respondent's
    concern about the absence of registration documents (perhaps  from  the
    UNHCR) showing that the appellant and the sponsor had lived together in
    an IDP camp before he left to  seek  asylum.   It  was  plausible,  she
    thought, that the appellant and the sponsor would have been focused not
    on obtaining such documentation but  on  dealing  with  the  harsh  and
    difficult  conditions  in  the  camp.   At  [56],  however,  the  judge
    considered  that  the  sponsor's  evidence  that  there  was  no   'big
    organisation' running the camp cast further doubt  on  the  certificate
    from the Camp Director.


11. At [57]-[58], the judge set out what she considered to be the 'greatest
    credibility concern' in the case.  The point occupies most of the ninth
    page of the judge's decision but might  be  summarised  quite  shortly.
    There was a discrepancy in the evidence about the  camp  in  which  the
    appellant and the sponsor were said to have  married  and  lived.   The
    marriage certificates and the documents from the  camp  officials  gave
    the name of the camp as  Abu  Shouk,  whereas  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor had consistently given the name of the camp  as  Nifasha.   The
    sponsor maintained that the  camps  were  one  and  the  same  but  the
    background material did not support that assertion.

12. The judge then addressed the  fact  that  the  sponsor  had  named  the
    appellant as his wife when he claimed asylum.  She  recalled  what  was
    said in the two policy documents upon which Mr Holmes relied.  At [60],
    she noted that the appellant's date of birth was given in the course of
    her application for entry clearance as 1 January 1997, whereas  it  had
    been given as 22 January 1997  in  the  sponsor's  asylum  claim.   She
    continued:


         Even if I were to reach a finding that this is  a  mere  error  and
         that I can  rely  on  this  document  as  evidence  the  pre-flight
         relationship, I have decided that the plausibility and  credibility
         concerns I have identified  above  and  the  unreliability  of  the
         documents before me do outweigh the evidence in the SEF form.

13. The judge was nevertheless  prepared  to  accept,  at  [61],  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor were in a genuine and subsisting relationship
    (although it is to be recalled that this part of the Immigration  Rule,
    sub-paragraph (v), was not placed in issue by the ECO).   She  was  not
    satisfied that the Rules were met because the appellant had  failed  to
    persuade her that the marriage did not take place after the sponsor had
    left Sudan in order to seek asylum: [62].  She noted that it  was  open
    to the appellant to make a fifth application for entry clearance if she
    could present evidence that Abou Shouk and Nifasha were the same  camp.




14. In the final paragraphs of her decision, the judge  considered  whether
    the appellant's ongoing exclusion was in breach of Article 8  ECHR.   I
    reproduce those short paragraphs in full:


         [65] I find that there is evidence before me that the appellant and
         the sponsor exercising family life  (although  I  make  no  finding
         about when it started).  The decision to refuse the appellant entry
         clearance interferes with her and the sponsor's family life and the
         interference is of sufficient gravity  potentially  to  engage  the
         operation of Article 8.  The interference is in accordance with the
         law and  is  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  a  firm
         immigration control.  Therefore  the  question  to  be  decided  is
         whether  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance   in   this   case   is
         proportionate to the legitimate end sought to be achieved.


         [66] The fact that the appellant did not satisfy  the  requirements
         of the Immigration Rules in relation to Family Reunion at the  date
         of the decision must be given significant weight in  my  assessment
         of proportionality in this case.  It is in the public  interest  to
         maintain a fair and firm immigration  control.   There  is  nothing
         disproportionate about the respondent's decision  to  refuse  entry
         clearance as the Rules have not been met.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

15. There are four grounds of appeal,  each  of  which  found  favour  with
    Designated  Judge  Shaerf  in  his  decision  on  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  They may be summarised as follows:


      i) The judge  failed  to  undertake  any  meaningful  Article  8  ECHR
         assessment.
     ii) The judge misdirected herself  in  law  in  finding  the  sponsor's
         explanation for the two marriage certificates to be implausible.
    iii) The judge had made a mistake  of  fact  which  had  given  rise  to
         unfairness in relation to the two certificates.
     iv) The judge failed to consider the evidence in the round or fell into
         the error described in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367, [2005] INLR 377
         in her treatment of the naming of the appellant  in  the  sponsor's
         asylum claim.

16. I should note that the third ground was  supported  by  an  application
    under rule 15(2A) (to rely upon documents which had not been before the
    FtT) and copies of documents from the Norwegian Landinfo department and
    the US Department of State.


17. 'Covid-19' directions were issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen in July
    2020,  seeking  to  progress  the  appeal  without  a  hearing.   Those
    directions elicited a lengthy skeleton  argument  from  Mr  Holmes  and
    rather shorter written submissions from Ms Wilcocks-Briscoe, on  behalf
    of the respondent.   The  respondent  indicated  that  the  appeal  was
    opposed in its entirety.


18. On 25 November 2020, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Keith  directed  that  the
    appeal should be heard remotely.

Submissions

19. With my permission, Mr Holmes addressed the grounds in the order he had
    chosen in the skeleton argument.  At the outset, he made a short  point
    in development of ground four, which was that the sponsor was a man  of
    good character and that this had not been borne in mind  by  the  judge
    when assessing his credibility.  I asked what the evidential foundation
    for this submission was, and Mr Holmes confirmed that  it  was  nothing
    more than the fact that the sponsor is accepted on all sides  to  be  a
    refugee.

20. In further development of ground four, Mr Holmes referred to the policy
    documents  which  had  been  before  the  judge.   She  had  erred,  he
    submitted, in 'compartmentalising' her credibility  assessment  in  the
    manner prohibited by Mibanga.  She had also taken a point which was not
    raised by the ECO or the Presenting Officer, regarding the  appellant's
    date of birth.  The 'Mibanga error' was apparent, Mr Holmes  submitted,
    from the judge's use of the word 'outweigh' in [60] of her decision and
    from the fact that she had overlooked the sponsor's  identification  of
    the appellant in his SEF at [54] of her decision.

21. As regards the  second  ground,  which  focused  on  the  two  marriage
    certificates, Mr Holmes submitted that the judge had erred in  treating
    the sponsor's account as implausible.  The two-staged process which the
    sponsor described was supported to a certain extent  by  the  documents
    adduced by the appellant. The dangers of  such  an  approach  had  been
    highlighted by the Court of Appeal in cases such as HK  (Sierra  Leone)
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 but the judge had  nevertheless  fallen  into  the
    'familiar trap' considered in those decisions.  The judge was  required
    to assess the oral evidence on its own merit and the  sponsor  had  not
    given evidence in this respect which was in any way surprising.  It was
    to be recalled that it was not uncommon - even in the UK context -  for
    a couple  to  have  two  different  ceremonies  of  marriage.   It  was
    dangerous, he submitted, for the judge to 'delve into' what  might  and
    might not be plausible as regards marriage registration in Sudan.

22. Mr Holmes submitted that ground  three  and  the  evidence  adduced  in
    support of it established that the judge had fallen into a  mistake  of
    fact of the type considered in MM [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC).  The documents
    from Landinfo and the US Department of State showed  clearly  that  the
    two-staged process which the judge had  considered  so  suspicious  was
    exactly the process which was followed in  Sudan.   The  stamp  on  the
    second certificate, which showed that it  had  been  validated  by  the
    Sudanese Department of Foreign Affairs, corresponded with  the  process
    described by the sponsor and the background material.

23. I indicated that I did not need to hear from Mr Holmes on his complaint
    about the judge's treatment of Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

24. In response, Mr Avery submitted that  the  appellant's  real  complaint
    amounted to nothing more than one of weight, whereas it was trite  that
    matters of weight were for the trial judge.  The judge was not required
    to state that the sponsor was of good character and then work backwards
    from that point; the reliability of a witness was always a  matter  for
    the judge.

25. Mr Holmes had made much of the sponsor's declaration of the appellant's
    name in his asylum claim but the  point  had  been  considered  by  the
    judge.  She had borne in  mind  the  respondent's  policy.   Mr  Holmes
    merely disagreed with the judge's weighing  of  the  various  competing
    considerations but this established no legal error on the part  of  the
    FtT.  The judge's concern about the marriage certificates being  issued
    in 2013 and 2017 was not a new point; it had  been  identified  by  the
    ECO.  It was wholly unclear why  the  appellant  had  not  adduced  the
    Landinfo and USDOS documents before the judge, in the circumstances.

26. In any event, Mr Avery submitted, the appellant had  not  attempted  to
    take issue  with  the  most  significant  point  taken  by  the  judge,
    regarding  the  Abou  Shouk  and  Nifasha  Camps.   The  judge's  other
    conclusions were all to be considered through that prism.

27. Mr Avery did not wish to advance any oral submissions  in  response  to
    the Article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal.  He relied solely on the  written
    submissions previously filed.

28. In reply, Mr Holmes accepted that the  Landinfo  and  USDOS   documents
    could have been before the judge but that was nothing to the point,  he
    submitted.  The critical point was that the judge had made a mistake of
    fact without these documents and that unfairness had arisen.  Mr Holmes
    was without instructions on the question of why these documents had not
    been before the judge, although he took it to  be  the  case  that  the
    appellant's representatives had assumed that they  had  met  the  point
    taken by the ECO and that background material was not required.

29. Mr Holmes underlined that his primary submission was made  in  reliance
    on Mibanga and the compartmentalisation of the credibility  assessment.
    That was not a matter of weight; it was well established to represent a
    matter of law.  Responding to a point I had considered with  Mr  Avery,
    he invited me to  consider  carefully  whether  there  was  a  specific
    Immigration Rule dealing with post-flight spouses.

30. At the conclusion of the submissions, I was  able  to  indicate  to  Mr
    Holmes that I was with him in relation to his first  ground  (regarding
    the adequacy of the Article 8 ECHR assessment outside  the  Rules)  but
    that I would need to reflect further on the remaining matters.  On  the
    question of relief, both advocates submitted that I should  retain  the
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal in the event that only ground one was made
    out and that the appeal should be remitted de novo to the  FtT  in  the
    event that the other grounds were made out.

31. Subject to the indication I had given in  relation  to  ground  one,  I
    reserved my decision.


Analysis

     Ground One
32. As I announced after the submissions, I am  quite  satisfied  that  the
    judge erred in law in her assessment of  Article  8  ECHR  outside  the
    Rules.  I have reproduced the entirety of her consideration above.  The
    final sentence of [66] is of particular concern, suggesting as it  does
    that the judge's Article 8 ECHR assessment started  and  finished  with
    her conclusion that the Immigration Rules were not met.  Insofar as  it
    is necessary to refer to authority to establish that it was an error to
    adopt such an approach, it only necessary to recall what  was  said  by
    Lord Bingham at [6] of Huang [2007] UKHL 11; [2007] 2 AC 167:  that  an
    applicant's failure to qualify under the Rules is the point at which to
    begin, not end, consideration of the claim under Article 8.


33.  That  dictum  is  obviously  to  be  read  alongside  its   subsequent
    qualification in cases such as R  (Agyarko)  v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11;
    [2017] 1 WLR 823, in which Lord Reed noted, at [8], that  Lord  Bingham
    was considering a framework in which  the  Rules  did  not  reflect  an
    assessment of the proportionality of decision  making  in  relation  to
    Article 8.  But paragraph 352A is not part of the group  of  provisions
    to which that qualification relates; unlike Appendix FM of  the  Rules,
    it was not designed to reflect an assessment  of  proportionality.   It
    was designed, instead,  to  reflect  the  recommendation  made  by  the
    Conference of Plenipotentiaries which adopted the Refugee Convention to
    ensure  'that  the  unity  of  the  refugee's  family  is   maintained,
    particularly in cases where the head of the family  has  fulfilled  the
    necessary conditions for admission to a particular country'.  The  same
    principle, differently worded,  is  reflected  in  Article  23  of  the
    Qualification Directive.  The paragraphs of  the  Rules  which  reflect
    these objectives do not purport to reflect a structured Article 8  ECHR
    assessment, which must therefore be undertaken after  a  conclusion  is
    reached under those Rules, in compliance with Huang.


34. As noted by Mr Holmes in his  first  ground  of  appeal,  the  approach
    adopted by the judge in respect of Article 8 ECHR  demonstrably  leaves
    material matters out of account.  It is  correct  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to attach weight - on one side of the balance sheet  suggested
    in Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60; [2016] 1 WLR 4799 -  to  the  fact
    that the appellant could not meet the  Immigration  Rules.   But  there
    were necessarily other matters which featured on the  appellant's  side
    of that balance sheet, not least the fact that there is a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship which cannot continue in Sudan due to the  fact
    that the sponsor is a  recognised  refugee  from  that  country.   Also
    relevant on that side of the scales was the judge's conclusion that the
    camp in which  the  appellant  lives  is  characterised  by  harsh  and
    difficult living conditions.  It  might  be  that  these  matters  were
    insufficient to tip the scales in the appellant's favour  in  light  of
    the judge's finding that  she  could  not  meet  the  Rules.   That  is
    particularly so when, as  Ms  Wilcocks-Briscoe  noted  in  her  written
    submissions for the respondent, the judge apparently concluded that the
    appellant and the  sponsor  had  entered  into  a  relationship  (or  a
    marriage) after he had fled to the UK.  On the basis of  that  apparent
    finding, they must have known, or must be deemed to  have  known,  that
    they were entering into a difficult or long-distance  relationship.   I
    accept the submission made by the respondent that this was all relevant
    to the assessment of proportionality but I am unable to  conclude  that
    there was no claim which was capable of succeeding outside  the  Rules.
    The judge's brief consideration of  that  issue  was  inadequate  as  a
    matter of law, even when the decision is read as a whole.


    Ground Four
35. Mr Holmes's main oral submission was that  the  judge  had  misdirected
    herself   in   law   in   undertaking   what   he   described   as    a
    'compartmentalised' assessment of the sponsor's identification  of  the
    appellant in his asylum claim.  On this point, I agree with Mr Avery.


36. It is simply not correct to assert that the  judge  'compartmentalised'
    her assessment and that she fell into the error recognised by the Court
    of Appeal in Mibanga and reconsidered recently by a senior constitution
    of the Upper Tribunal in QC [2021] UKUT 33 (IAC).  The judge's decision
    shows no such 'structural failing'.  Mr Holmes submits that the judge's
    use of the word 'outweigh' in [60] (as above) illustrates the error  in
    her approach but it does no such thing.  By her use of that  word,  the
    judge demonstrates that she was doing what  was  required  of  her,  by
    considering all that told for and against the appellant's  account  and
    weighing the competing considerations.  She was clearly  aware  of  the
    respondent's policy, which recognises  that  the  identification  of  a
    family member during an asylum claim is a 'strong indication that  they
    formed part of the pre-flight  family  unit'  because  she  cited  that
    policy at [59] of her decision.  Given the concerns she had  previously
    expressed about  the  account,  however,  she  considered  that  strong
    indication to be  'outweighed'  by  the  negative  pull  of  the  other
    considerations.  She did not treat the sponsor's declaration as an 'add-
    on' (Mibanga refers, at [24]), which was to be  dismissed  because  she
    had previously reached an  adverse  view.  Instead,  she  reviewed  the
    evidence as a whole and reached a holistic view  that  it  was  not  be
    accepted.  I reject Mr Holmes' main submission for these reasons.

    Ground Three
37. Nor do I accept that  the  judge  made  a  mistake  of  fact  when  she
    concluded  that  the  sponsor's  account   about   the   two   marriage
    certificates was unsupported by the background evidence.  As  Mr  Avery
    noted, the point had been identified by the ECO and the  appellant  had
    failed to place any background material before the judge about it.   Mr
    Holmes made an application under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 for the admission of evidence which was not
    before the FtT.  In compliance with that rule,  he  has  indicated  the
    nature of the evidence and has explained why it was  not  submitted  to
    the FtT (as above).  But it is to  the  decision  in  Ladd  v  Marshall
    [1954] 1 WLR 1489 which I must turn in considering whether to admit the
    Landinfo and USDOS material.  I recognise that  the  approach  in  that
    Ladd v Marshall is applied with additional flexibility  in  public  law
    proceedings: E & R v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49; [2004] QB 1044 and  Kabir
    v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1162 refer.


38. On the facts of this case, that additional flexibility cannot, however,
    justify departure from the first of the Ladd v Marshall criteria  (that
    the evidence could not with reasonable diligence have been produced  at
    trial).  Mr Holmes acknowledged that the ECO raised the  dates  of  the
    two certificates in the notice of decision, and that the evidence could
    readily  have  been  obtained  and  adduced  before  the   judge.    He
    acknowledges at [35] of his skeleton argument  that  the  evidence  was
    obtained in response to the judge's decision, in an attempt  to  answer
    the conclusions she had reached.  In my judgment, there was  a  failure
    on the part of the appellant's representatives to consider  in  advance
    of the hearing before the FtT  the  evidence  which  should  have  been
    adduced in support of the sponsor's witness statement and there  is  no
    proper reason to admit that evidence on appeal.  Without it, Mr  Holmes
    is unable to establish any mistake of fact on the part of the judge.

    Ground Two
39. Having rejected the second way in which Mr Holmes  seeks  to  criticise
    the judge's findings regarding the two marriage certificates, I turn to
    the first.  By ground two, he submits that the judge fell into error in
    concluding that the marriage certificate  procedure  described  by  the
    sponsor was implausible.  He submits that the process of  reasoning  by
    which the judge reached that conclusion was impermissible as  a  matter
    of law.


40. My first impression of  this  complaint  was  in  accordance  with  the
    respondent's written and oral submissions: the judge had  simply  drawn
    on the absence of background evidence and it was for the  appellant  to
    discharge the burden of proof to  show  that  the  two  documents  were
    reliable.  On reflection, however, I consider Mr Holmes'  criticism  of
    the judge's approach to be well-founded.

41. The sponsor maintained that there were  two  certificates  because  the
    first was issued contemporaneously with the marriage in  2013  and  the
    second was only obtained, in 2017, in order to support the applications
    for entry clearance which  were  to  be  made  by  the  appellant.   He
    suggested that the second was 'the official marriage certificate to  be
    used when travelling abroad': witness statement, paragraph  2.   As  Mr
    Holmes submits, there was  nothing  inherently  surprising  about  this
    assertion, not least when it is noted that the later certificate  bears
    a stamp from the Department of Foreign Affairs.  This was certainly not
    an account which could properly be said to be 'contrary to common sense
    and experience of human behaviour', which the  judge  was  entitled  to
    reject on that basis (Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223  refers,  at  [26].
    In the circumstances, the judge was  required  to  adopt  the  approach
    which was set out by Keene LJ at [27]  of  Y  v  SSHD:  "he  must  look
    through the  spectacles  provided  by  the  information  he  has  about
    conditions in the country in  question".   The  absence  of  background
    information on the specific point did not entitle the judge to conclude
    that the appellant's account was positively implausible and  there  was
    no proper evidential foundation for this important conclusion.  In this
    respect, therefore, I consider that the  judge  also  fell  into  legal
    error.

     Materiality
42. Mr Avery submitted persuasively that the real  thrust  of  the  judge's
    concern about the timing of the marriage was to be found at  [57]-[58],
    in which  she  attached  weight  to  the  difficulty  in  the  evidence
    regarding the camp(s) in which the appellant and the sponsor were  said
    to have lived.  The submission was, ultimately that any  failings  such
    as that which I have found immediately above  were  peripheral  matters
    which were immaterial to the outcome.


43. On reflection, however, I have come to the conclusion that this is  not
    a case in which I can properly uphold the assessment undertaken by  the
    judge as a result of those findings which remain  unchallenged  or  not
    successfully challenged.  The point about the name of  the  camp  is  a
    serious one, and was said by the  judge  (quite  properly)  to  be  the
    'greatest credibility concern' but I am not able to conclude  that  she
    would have come to the same conclusion but for  her  error  in  finding
    that the issuance of certificates  in  2013  and  2017  was  in  itself
    implausible.  That conclusion was clearly  an  important  part  of  the
    judge's decision that the sponsor's identification of the appellant  in
    his asylum claim did not show that she formed part  of  his  pre-flight
    family unit and I do not consider that the other  credibility  concerns
    would  necessarily  have  justified  the  same  conclusion.      I   am
    satisfied, in other words, that the judge's error at [50]-[54] vitiates
    her conclusion that the appellant was not part of  the  sponsor's  pre-
    flight family unit.


44. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the relief suggested by  both
    advocates is appropriate.  The appeal is accordingly  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for consideration afresh  by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Monaghan. (I should add  that  there  can  be  no  suggestion  of
    preserving the  judge's  finding  that  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor is a genuine and subsisting one,  since  that
    was never a point raised by the ECO.)

45. Upon remittal, the appellant will be at liberty to adduce the  Landinfo
    and the USDOS material, which might properly be  thought  by  the  next
    judge to provide an answer to the concern about the issuance of the two
    marriage certificates.  As I have noted above, it  is  surprising  that
    this evidence was not adduced before the  judge.   The  other  evidence
    which is notable by its absence is anything to do  with  the  sponsor's
    asylum claim.  There is a two-page excerpt from his screening interview
    in the appellant's bundle but there is no copy of his asylum  interview
    or  of  any  witness  statement.   Nor  is  there  any  record  of  the
    respondent's consideration of his asylum claim (whether in an  internal
    minute or a refusal letter)  or  any  decision  which  was  reached  on
    appeal.  Any such evidence is likely to have a significant bearing, one
    way or the other, on the question of  whether  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor did indeed spend time living together  in  the  same  IDP  camp
    before his departure from Sudan.  Either  side  should  also  take  the
    opportunity to consider what evidence might be brought to bear  on  the
    prima facie logical conclusion by Judge Monaghan that the  Nifasha  and
    Abou Shouk camps are not one and the same.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by legal  error  and  is
set aside in its entirety.  The appeal is remitted to the FtT  to  be  heard
afresh by a judge other than Judge Monaghan.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                               07 April 2021





















