
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04908/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 07 March 2018                              |On 05 April 2018              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                 Mr ilir [E]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Knight, Counsel instructed by Sterling Chance
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal.  No
application was made to me for anonymity of the Appellant.  There is no
reason to make such a direction.  I have however anonymised the names of
the children affected by these proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

 1. By a decision promulgated on 17 January 2018, I found an error  of  law
    in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Asjad  itself  promulgated
    on 23 March 2017.   I  therefore  set  that  decision  aside  and  gave
    directions for a resumed hearing to take place before me to re-make the
    decision.  My error of law decision is appended to  this  decision  for
    ease of reference.

 2. The essential background facts are as  follows.   The  Appellant  is  a
    national of Albania.  He is an illegal  entrant.   He  entered  the  UK
    clandestinely in May 2014.  His asylum claim was refused  on  17  April
    2015.  On 6 August 2015, he made an application to  remain  in  the  UK
    based on his family life.  He is  in  a  relationship  with  a  British
    national,  now  known  as  [CE]  (formerly  [CU]  nee   [CB]).    Their
    relationship began in around June 2014. The couple have  one  child  of
    that relationship, A, who is also a British citizen. She was born on  [
    ] 2016.  The Appellant is also the stepfather of another child, L.   He
    is also a British citizen.  He was born in [ ] 2015.

 3. The Respondent's decision under appeal is dated 16 June 2016.  Although
    L was born  prior  to  the  Respondent's  decision  under  appeal,  the
    Respondent sought DNA evidence to show  the  Appellant's  paternity  of
    that child which was not forthcoming.  As it now transpires, L  is  not
    the Appellant's child. As a result, and because A was not born  at  the
    time  of  either  the  application  made  by  the  Appellant   or   the
    Respondent's decision under appeal, the Appellant's family  life  as  a
    parent was not considered by the Secretary of State.

 4. This is an appeal which proceeds under the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014.   The  new
    provisions require the express consent of the Respondent to the raising
    of any "new matter".  The Respondent has consented to  the  raising  of
    the Appellant's relationship with A and L in  this  appeal  and  to  my
    determination of the issue whether the Appellant ought to be  permitted
    to remain based on that relationship.

 5. The appeal is for the above reasons firmly focussed now on whether  the
    Appellant should be permitted to remain as the partner of [CE] and  the
    parent of A and L.  That issue is  to  be  considered  both  under  and
    outside the relevant Immigration Rules ("the Rules").

 6. I heard evidence from the Appellant and [CE].  I  also  heard  evidence
    from [GG] who is the adult son of [CE] from a previous relationship.  I
    do not record all the evidence which I  heard.   The  parties  will  be
    aware of that evidence as they were present  at  the  hearing  and  the
    evidence is contained in the note of  proceedings.   I  have  therefore
    referred in what follows only to that evidence which is relevant to the
    issues which I need to determine.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The Position under the Immigration Rules

Relationship as a partner

 7. In order to satisfy the Rules in this regard, the Appellant has to show
    that he meets R-LTRP.1.1 of Appendix FM to the Rules. That requires him
    to satisfy either all of the requirements in E-LTRP.1.2. to 4.2. or  to
    meet paragraphs E-LTRP.1.2-1.12. and  E-LTRP.2.1.  if  paragraph  EX.1.
    applies. Although the Appellant's partner, [CE], is a  British  citizen
    and therefore meets E-LTRP.1.2., she is unable to meet  the  definition
    of "partner" under Gen.1.2. of Appendix FM because the couple  had  not
    been cohabiting in a relationship akin to marriage for a period of  two
    years at the date of  application.   By  August  2015,  they  had  been
    together for only about one year, having met first  in  June  2014  and
    moved in together at some point between then and August 2015. As  such,
    the Appellant cannot meet the Rules for that reason.

 8. Even leaving aside the failure to satisfy  the  primary  definition  of
    partner, the Appellant's immigration status is such that he  could  not
    meet all the relevant criteria under the Rules  for  limited  leave  to
    enter as a partner.  As such, he can only meet E-LTRP.2.  if  paragraph
    EX.1. also applies. There is also a question mark  whether  the  couple
    could meet the minimum income threshold. Paragraph  E-LTRP.3.  is  also
    not satisfied on the evidence.  However, again, the Appellant would not
    be required to meet that criterion if paragraph EX.1. applies.

 9. Before turning to consider whether paragraph EX.1. is met, I deal first
    with the prior issue whether the relationship between the Appellant and
    [CE] is a genuine and subsisting one and whether they  intend  to  live
    together permanently in the future.  Those are  requirements  under  E-
    LRPT.1.7. and E-LRPT.1.10. and must be  met,  as  a  matter  of  common
    sense, for the application to succeed at all on this basis.

10. I begin by saying that I found [CE] to be a truthful witness.  I accept
    that she views her relationship with the Appellant as  genuine  and  is
    committed to its success.  She has had relationships in the past  which
    have failed including one with a Kosovan national who left her as  soon
    as he had obtained his  indefinite  leave  to  remain  based  on  their
    relationship.  She said in evidence that she thought that she had  been
    used by him.  I would therefore expect  her  to  be  somewhat  cautious
    about accepting as a partner someone who has a benefit to gain from the
    relationship in immigration terms as does the Appellant.  I accept  her
    evidence that she genuinely believes that the Appellant is different to
    her former Kosovan husband, that she believes the relationship with the
    Appellant to be a genuine one and that she believes that the  Appellant
    is as committed to her as she appears to be to him.

11. [CE]'s evidence was supported by her son, [GG].  Although he has  since
    moved out of the household  with  the  Appellant  and  his  mother,  he
    continues to visit them regularly and  believes  the  Appellant  to  be
    genuine  in  his  intentions.   He   considered   that   his   mother's
    relationship with her Kosovan husband was also  "real"  but  "not  very
    healthy" and he "did not like the guy".  He said though that he was not
    concerned that his mother  was  about  to  commit  to  another  similar
    relationship because he thought the Appellant to be genuine.  He  could
    talk to the Appellant and had bonded with him more  than  he  had  done
    with his previous stepfather.

12. I do though have some doubts about whether the relationship is  genuine
    and subsisting notwithstanding [CE]'s assertions.  First, the Appellant
    had a family in Albania.   He  left  his  wife  and  children  in  2012
    although he was not divorced from  his  ex-wife  until  2014.   He  has
    children in Albania now aged ten and six years.  This is probably  more
    relevant to the Appellant's relationship with his  children  than  with
    [CE] but does show that the Appellant has no compunction about  walking
    away from a relationship even if there are children involved.

13. Second, I have concerns  due  to  the  timing  and  way  in  which  the
    relationship was formed and developed.  The Appellant  had  arrived  in
    the country illegally just over  one  year  before  he  met  [CE].   He
    claimed asylum at some point thereafter and his claim  was  refused  in
    April 2015.  Since the Appellant himself gave evidence that he came  to
    the UK "for a better life", the asylum claim appears not to  have  been
    genuine.  It was not in any event accepted by  the  Respondent  and  it
    does not appear that the Appellant appealed that decision.

14. About two months after the Appellant was refused leave and when  he  no
    longer had any basis to stay in the  UK,  the  Appellant  met  [CE]  by
    chance when he went to do some work for her at  the  direction  of  his
    friend.  The evidence I was  given  is  that  the  couple  got  on  and
    exchanged telephone numbers.  The Appellant then, within  a  few  days,
    contacted [CE] to ask her out for a drink  and  the  relationship  then
    developed very quickly to the extent that [CE] thought that her son, L,
    born in April 2015, was the  son  of  the  Appellant  and  was  on  her
    admission, slightly shocked that he  was  not.   The  relationship  had
    therefore developed very quickly indeed.

15. Of course, it is not the case  that  just  because  a  relationship  is
    formed quickly that it is not genuine or that it  should  not  continue
    successfully.  The fact that a couple  can  form  a  mutual  attraction
    within a few weeks and make a lasting commitment to each other in  such
    a short space of time is not of itself implausible.  As I have  already
    indicated, I accept [CE]'s evidence that she genuinely committed to the
    relationship very quickly.  She did so she said because she  found  the
    Appellant to be "friendly, happy and positive".   She  said  that  they
    wanted to spend all their time together.

16. Conversely, when the Appellant was asked the same question  about  what
    it was that attracted him to [CE], he said that he did not  know,  that
    they got on "well and very quickly", that they had  "liked  each  other
    very quickly" and that when he had been detained, he had that day  been
    with her.  In re-examination when asked how much he liked [CE], he said
    that "the first week, it was me and her together,  the  second  week  I
    accept as wife and she accept me as husband. It was love.  She came  to
    see me for three months in detention.  Why would she  do  that  if  she
    didn't love me."  The Appellant appeared not  to  understand  that  the
    issue is not whether [CE] is genuinely committed to him but whether  he
    is really committed to her. The Appellant's  answers  gave  no  insight
    into any emotional relationship between  him  and  [CE].   I  recognise
    however that not everyone is able to express emotions in the  same  way
    and  that  cultural  differences  may  also  explain  the   Appellant's
    reluctance to discuss his feelings for [CE].  The Appellant  also  gave
    evidence in English which is not his native language and  he  may  have
    found it difficult to find the right words to express his feelings.

17. The third and final reason for my doubts about the relationship is  the
    limited supporting evidence from friends and  family.   Notwithstanding
    the Appellant's evidence that [CE]'s family have accepted him  as  part
    of the family and that he has been invited to family functions  as  her
    partner, there was no evidence, whether in writing or orally  from  any
    of those family members apart  from  [GG]  to  whose  evidence  I  have
    already referred. The Appellant and [CE] were asked about what they had
    done together at Xmas.  There were some discrepancies in their evidence
    to which I will refer later but one thing worthy of note is  that  they
    spent Xmas together as a family with a visit from [GG] but there was no
    reference to seeing any wider  family  or  attending  Xmas  lunches  or
    parties with, for example, [CE]'s parents or siblings. There are a  few
    brief letters in the bundle from a few friends and a neighbour who  say
    that the couple appear to be happily living together but little  detail
    is given.  None of the friends provided a statement  or  came  to  give
    evidence about the relationship.

18. I note that [CE] has  changed  her  name  to  include  the  Appellant's
    surname.  As I have already indicated,  though,  I  do  not  doubt  her
    commitment to the Appellant.  It is his to her about which I have  some
    doubts.

19. Against those doubts, however, it is  undoubtedly  the  case  that  the
    couple are living together and have a child together which suggests  an
    ongoing relationship as partners.  I  will  come  on  to  look  at  the
    Appellant's relationship with his children below.

20. The relationship can only be  a  genuine  and  subsisting  one  with  a
    genuine intention to live together permanently if  both  partners  have
    that genuine commitment to one another.  For the reasons I have  given,
    I have some doubts about the credibility of the Appellant's  motivation
    and commitment to the relationship.

21. However, even if the relationship is a genuine and subsisting  one  and
    both partners intend to live together permanently, the Appellant  would
    still need to satisfy paragraph  EX.1.  of  Appendix  FM.   So  far  as
    concerns the relationship as a partner, that reads as follows:-

         "EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         ...

             (b)  the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen,
             settled in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or
             humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside
             the UK.

         EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
         life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or
         would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their
         partner."

22. When [CE] was asked what she would do if the Appellant was  removed  to
    Albania, she said that she had not really thought about  it  but  would
    probably go and visit him and then come back to the UK  or  they  could
    meet up, for example in France.  She said she had never been to Albania
    so she would have to see what it was like.  She would probably go for a
    couple of months.  However, she could not imagine giving up her  house.
    Whilst understandably reticent about a move to a foreign  country  that
    she does not know, [CE]'s evidence did not disclose that there are  any
    obstacles to her relocating if she chose to do so.  Certainly,  nothing
    she said shows that there are any "insurmountable obstacles".

23. For those reasons, even if the relationship is genuine  and  subsisting
    and otherwise meets the requirements of the relevant  Rules  (which  it
    does not due to the length of the relationship at date of application),
    the Appellant's application based on his relationship with  [CE]  fails
    based on his illegal immigration status coupled with the  lack  of  any
    insurmountable obstacles  to  continuation  of  their  family  life  in
    Albania.

Relationship as a parent

24. I can deal with this aspect of the appeal more shortly.  The  Appellant
    is undoubtedly the father of A, who is a British citizen and  therefore
    meets the Rules to that extent  (E-LTRPT.2.2).   The  question  whether
    that is a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  is  disputed  by  the
    Respondent.  I do not though need to consider  that  at  this  juncture
    because, due to his immigration status, the Appellant can only meet the
    Rules to qualify for leave as a parent if he can show that he meets  E-
    LTRPT.2.3 and E-LTRPT.2.4 as well  as  EX.1.(a).   E-LTRPT.2.3  and  E-
    LTRPT.2.4 provide as follows:-

         "E-LTRPT.2.3.

         Either-

             (a)  the applicant must have sole parental responsibility for
             the child or the child normally lives with the applicant and
             not their other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in
             the UK), and the applicant must not be eligible to apply for
             leave to remain as a partner under this Appendix; or

             (b)  the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives
             must be-

                  (i)  a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

                  (ii)     not the partner of the applicant (which here
                  includes a person who has been in a relationship with the
                  applicant for less than two years prior to the date of
                  application); and

                  (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to apply for
                  leave to remain as a partner under this Appendix.

         E-LTRPT.2.4.

             (a)  The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-



                  (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child, or that
                  the child normally lives with them; or

                  (ii)     direct access (in person) to the child, as agreed
                  with the parent or carer with whom the child normally
                  lives or as ordered by a court in the UK; and

             (b)  The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,
             and intend to continue to take, an active role in the child's
             upbringing."

25. It is clear to me that those provisions are directed  at  the  position
    where a parent relies only on that relationship  to  obtain  leave,  in
    other words where there is no other parent with continuing  contact  or
    where the relationship between parents has broken down and  one  parent
    seeks contact.  It is not intended for the position where, as here, the
    Appellant relies on a continuing relationship with the other parent and
    where it is said that both parents and the child or  children  continue
    to live as a family unit.

26. The Respondent's policy guidance on family and private life is now  set
    out in a document entitled "Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b:
    Family Life (as a Partner or  Parent)  and  Private  Life:  10  -  Year
    Routes" and was revised as at 22 February 2018  ("the  Guidance").   At
    page 19 of the Guidance, the position as a parent under  the  Rules  in
    the circumstances here is summarised as follows:-

         "The parent route is not for couples with a child together who are
         in a genuine and subsisting partner relationship together.
         Applicants in this position must apply under the partner route
         where or once they are eligible to do so, or under the private life
         route.  An applicant cannot apply under the parent route if they
         are or will be eligible to apply under the partner route, including
         where the applicant is in a partner relationship but the couple
         have not yet been living together for two years."

27.  Of course, the Guidance is  the  Respondent's  interpretation  of  the
    Rules and is not determinative of  the  way  in  which  the  provisions
    should be interpreted by the  Courts.   However,  the  summary  in  the
    Guidance  accords  with  my  interpretation  of  the  relevant   Rules.
    Accordingly, the Appellant cannot succeed under the Rules as a  parent.
    I do not  therefore  need  to  consider  paragraph  EX.1.(a)  on  which
    provision the Appellant relies.

Private life

28. The Appellant has lived in the UK now for only about  five  years.   As
    such, he cannot meet the residence requirements under paragraph  276ADE
    unless he can show, applying paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi),  that  there  are
    very significant obstacles to his integration in Albania.  There is  no
    evidential basis for such a claim.  The  Appellant  was  born  and  has
    lived most of his life in that country. He speaks the language and will
    understand the customs of that country. He still has  relatives  there,
    including the children of his previous marriage.  Although he says that
    he came to the UK for a "better life" suggesting that  such  things  as
    employment may not have been that easy for him in Albania, there is  no
    evidence of any difficulties which would meet the very  high  threshold
    implicit in the wording "very significant obstacles".

The Position Outside the Rules

Partner relationship

29. In light of the findings made at [9] to [23] above,  I  can  deal  with
    this aspect of the appeal very shortly.  Even if the relationship is  a
    genuine and subsisting one to which both  parties  are  committed,  the
    evidence is that there are no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
    continuing in Albania  (subject  of  course  to  the  position  of  the
    children which is separately considered below).  Based on what is  said
    by the Supreme Court in Agyarko and Ikuga v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC  11  ("Agyarko"),  in  circumstances  where
    there are no insurmountable obstacles to the  British  citizen  partner
    going  to  live  abroad,  a  decision  to  refuse  leave  will  not  be
    disproportionate unless there are other exceptional circumstances which
    render  the  decision  unjustifiably  harsh.    There   are   no   such
    circumstances here.

30. Having regard to the fact that the Appellant and [CE]  entered  into  a
    relationship when they knew that he was here unlawfully,  to  the  need
    for maintenance of effective immigration control, and that family  life
    could be continued between the Appellant and [CE] in Albania,  if  they
    so choose, the decision to refuse the Appellant leave as the partner of
    [CE] is not disproportionate.

Parent relationship

31. The position arising from the relationship between the Appellant and  A
    (and to a lesser extent L) is though very different outside the  Rules.
    I begin by considering the disputed issue whether there  is  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship between the  Appellant  and  those
    children before  moving  on  to  consider  what  their  best  interests
    require.

32. It is not disputed that A is the Appellant's daughter.  L  is  not  his
    son.  However, it is also not disputed that the Appellant lives in  the
    same house as [CE] and the two children.

33. There was some discrepancy between the evidence of  the  Appellant  and
    that of [CE] about  the  relationship  between  L  and  his  biological
    father.  The Appellant says that L sees nothing of his father who  does
    not have any interest in him.  [CE] said, on the other hand,  that  L's
    father does see him from time to time albeit infrequently.  She takes L
    to the park every couple of months so that L's father  can  spend  time
    with him.  It is of course possible that the Appellant  is  unaware  of
    this arrangement if it takes place outside the  home.   In  any  event,
    [CE]'s evidence was at one with  the  Appellant's  about  L's  father's
    interest in L.  She says that there is  no  court  order  in  place  in
    relation to L's father's access to his child and that she did not think
    it would bother the father if he did not see L.

34. The Respondent sought to show by cross-examination that,  although  the
    Appellant is A's biological father and L's stepfather  and  lives  with
    them, he does not enjoy a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with
    them.

35. I have already mentioned that the Appellant has children of a  previous
    relationship living still in  Albania.   He  has  apparently  had  some
    contact with them since leaving Albania, although that  appears  to  be
    undermined to some extent by the divorce document  from  Albania  dated
    2015 in which the Appellant's ex-wife says that the Appellant  had  not
    maintained contact with the children since coming to the UK  two  years
    earlier.  I recognise however that the  Appellant's  relationship  with
    his ex-wife had by that stage clearly broken down and she may  wish  to
    give the impression to the Court that  the  Appellant  is  not  a  good
    father in order to retain custody of the children.  The  Appellant  was
    not represented in those proceedings.

36. [CE] spoke of the Appellant having contact with his children in Albania
    via Skype at some point after their relationship started.  However, she
    and the Appellant both said that he does not have contact with them  at
    present because of a breakdown in communication between  the  Appellant
    and  his  ex-partner.   The  Appellant  did  not  appear   particularly
    distressed in his evidence about this breakdown of contact.  He said he
    had no plans to contact those children because he was "stuck" (although
    he did go on to say that he intended to see them again).   However,  he
    also pointed out that just because he had left one family did not  mean
    that he would leave another one.

37. There was a further discrepancy between the evidence of  the  Appellant
    and [CE] regarding what the family did at  Xmas.   The  Appellant  said
    that the children waited until  after  breakfast  on  Xmas  day  before
    opening their presents whereas [CE] was firm in her evidence  that  the
    children opened their presents on Xmas Eve because they were unable  to
    hide the presents and  the  children  therefore  wanted  to  open  them
    because they could see them.  I believed her evidence over that of  the
    Appellant.  However, I do not consider this to be a  major  discrepancy
    and appears to me to  be  symptomatic  of  the  general  tenor  of  the
    Appellant's evidence about his relationship with the children which  Mr
    Avery described as showing a "lack of interest".

38. It is fair to say that the Appellant's evidence was quite vague  as  to
    the part he plays in the lives of A and L or the  interest  he  has  in
    their development.  For example, when the Appellant was asked about his
    hopes for the future for his children in the UK, he said he had  "some"
    but it was "not going to change anything".  He "hoped to get a visa and
    go on holiday in summer." He hoped to stay in the UK.  That answer  did
    not demonstrate an interest or involvement in the  development  of  his
    children.  It may be though that he did not understand the question.

39. The Appellant and [CE] gave evidence about what they do  as  a  family.
    The Appellant's evidence was, as I have noted, quite general in nature.
     He feeds the children, plays  with  them,  gives  them  medicines  and
    occasionally picks them up and takes them  to  school.   However,  [CE]
    developed on that evidence. She said that  the  Appellant  occasionally
    takes the children out to give her a break and plays  and  reads  books
    with them.  She also spoke about family outings together.  There  is  a
    good deal of photographic evidence of the Appellant with  the  children
    and some of him with [CE] and the children.

40. A is of course still quite young and L is only just over a  year  older
    so it is perhaps unsurprising that the children's mother  will  have  a
    greater involvement, particularly since,  as  Mr  Knight  put  it,  the
    Appellant admitted that he is not a "hands on" father when it comes  to
    some of the more mundane chores such as nappy changing.

41. Similarly, I do not consider that the  Appellant's  admission  that  he
    does not attend parents' evenings at  L's  school  has  any  particular
    importance or relevance.  As the Appellant pointed out, English is  not
    his first language and he leaves such things to [CE].

42. The Appellant is not of course the biological father  of  L.   However,
    [CE]'s evidence is that L considers the Appellant to be his father.  As
    I have already noted, her evidence is that L's own father shows  little
    interest in him.  As [CE] attested, therefore,  L  does  not  know  any
    other father.  She said that the Appellant treats L and A the same.

43. Overall, when the evidence is  considered  in  the  round  and  in  the
    context of the Appellant living in the same house and as  part  of  the
    family unit with [CE] and the children, I accept that he has a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with the children.  That is so not just  in
    relation to A, who is his biological daughter, but also in relation  to
    L.  I accept [CE]'s evidence that L sees the Appellant  as  his  father
    because he does not really know his biological father.

44. I turn then to the children's  best  interests,  which  are  a  primary
    although not the only or the paramount consideration when it  comes  to
    weighing the proportionality of removal of the Appellant.

45. I have very little  evidence  about  the  children.   That  is  perhaps
    unsurprising given their very young age.   A  is  only  about  eighteen
    months old.  As such, she only goes to nursery one day per week.  L  is
    aged nearly three years.  He attends nursery. However,  at  their  very
    young ages, education and friendships outside  their  family  unit  are
    unlikely to hold any particular significance for them.  At  their  age,
    their most important relationship is with their parents.  I  accept  it
    is in the best interests of children to have a relationship  with  both
    parents.  Although that includes in L's case also his own  father,  the
    evidence I was given is that his own father shows no real  interest  in
    him.  For that reason, I consider it is in the best interests of both A
    and L to continue to live with both [CE] and the Appellant.

46. Although there is no or very limited evidence that the children's  best
    interests are served by remaining in the UK, I take into  account  that
    they are both British citizens.  [CE] said that if the  Appellant  were
    to leave and she chose to relocate to Albania with him,  she  would  of
    course take the children with her.  Were she to  do  so,  the  children
    would of course be deprived of the benefit of their rights  as  British
    citizens to an education here. They would also be deprived  of  contact
    with their wider family on their  mother's  side.   The  importance  of
    British citizenship was underlined in the speech of Lady Hale  (as  she
    then was) in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2011] UKSC 4 ("ZH (Tanzania)") in the following terms:-

         "30. Although nationality is not a "trump card" it is of particular
             importance in assessing the best interests of any child ...

         31.  ... all of these considerations apply to the children in  this
             case. They are British children; they are  British,  not  just
             through the "accident" of being born here, but by descent from
             a British parent; they have  an  unqualified  right  of  abode
             here; they have lived here all their  lives;  they  are  being
             educated here; they have other social links with the community
             here; they have a good relationship with their father here. It
             is not enough to say that a young child may readily  adapt  to
             life in another country. That may well be so, particularly  if
             she moves with both her parents to a country which  they  know
             well and where they  can  easily  re-integrate  in  their  own
             community ... But it is very different in the case of children
             who have lived here all their lives and are being expected  to
             move to a country which they do not know and will be separated
             from a parent whom they also know well.

         32. Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship  be  played
             down. As citizens these children have rights which  they  will
             not be able to exercise if they move to another country.  They
             will lose the advantages of growing up and being  educated  in
             their own country, their own culture and their  own  language.
             They will have lost all this when they come  back  as  adults.
             ..."

47. In ZH (Tanzania) the facts included also the separation of the  British
    child from one of her parents.  That is not the position  here  if  the
    children were to leave with both their mother and  father.  As  I  have
    already noted, the evidence is that L sees the Appellant as his  father
    and that L's father shows no  great  interest  in  his  son.   However,
    having regard to what is said in that case about the importance to  the
    child of being brought up in the country of its nationality,  I  accept
    that, as British citizens, the best interests of both A and  L  are  to
    remain in the UK.

48. On the basis of those findings, I  turn  to  whether  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and A and L should entitle him to remain  outside
    the Rules.

49. As the Respondent points out, the Rules now  provide  at  GEN.3.2.  how
    applications which cannot succeed under the Rules should be approached.
     That reads as follows:-

         "GEN.3.2.(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (4), where an application for
         entry clearance or leave to enter or remain made under this
         Appendix, or an application for leave to remain which has otherwise
         been considered under this Appendix, does not otherwise meet the
         requirements of this Appendix or Part 9 of the Rules, the decision-
         maker must consider whether the circumstances in sub-paragraph (2)
         apply.

         (2) Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the decision-maker must
         consider, on the basis of the information provided by the
         applicant, whether there are exceptional circumstances which would
         render refusal of entry clearance, or leave to enter or remain, a
         breach of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights,
         because such refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh
         consequences for the applicant, their partner, a relevant child or
         another family member whose Article 8 rights it is evident from
         that information would be affected by a decision to refuse the
         application."

50. The Rules are of course primarily  directed  at  the  Respondent's  own
    decision-makers.  In any event, GEN.3.2(2) goes  no  further  than  the
    accepted legal position. If an application does not meet the Rules,  it
    is still necessary to  consider  whether  a  refusal  would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for an affected party.  If that  would
    be the case, then leave should be granted (see [45] of the judgment  in
    Agyarko).

51. I am bound to take into account when looking at  the  position  outside
    the Rules also section 117B Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("Section 117B") which provides as follows:-

         "Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom."

52. I begin by considering the application of Section 117B(6).  As  I  have
    already found, the Appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with A and L who, as British citizens, are both qualifying
    children.  As such, I have to determine whether it would be  reasonable
    to expect those children to leave the UK.  I have already found that it
    is in their best interests to remain in  the  UK  as  British  citizens
    entitled to the  benefit  of  that  citizenship  and  that  their  best
    interests favour remaining with both their mother and the Appellant.

53. I have referred at [26] above to the Guidance issued by the  Respondent
    to her caseworkers dealing with  applications  made  on  the  basis  of
    family and private life. I was directed by  the  Respondent's  skeleton
    argument  to  the  Respondent's  revised  policy  on   the   issue   of
    reasonableness in this context and in particular to the section  headed
    "EX.1.(a) - Reasonable to expect (page 35 of the Guidance) which it  is
    said applies equally to the position under Section 117B(6).  I  do  not
    need to refer to EX.1.(a) because as I have concluded at [25]  to  [27]
    above, the Appellant cannot  succeed  under  the  Rules  based  on  his
    relationship as  parent  where  he  claims  to  be  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting partner relationship with the children's mother.

54. The section of the Guidance to which I was referred re-directs decision
    makers to the section of the Guidance which is  headed  "Reasonable  to
    expect a child to leave the UK?" which appears at page  74  onwards  of
    the Guidance.  That begins with the following statement:-

         "If the effect of the refusal of the application would be, or is
         likely to be, that the child would have to leave the UK, the
         decision maker must go on to consider whether it would be
         reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK."

55. Immediately prior to that section, is a section dealing with whether it
    is reasonable to expect a child to leave when considering the  position
    under the Rules.  That makes the  point  that  prior  consideration  is
    required of the consequence of refusal of an application.  If the child
    will not in fact leave the UK because the child will  remain  with  the
    other parent in the UK, it is suggested that a decision maker does  not
    reach the position of needing to consider whether it is  reasonable  to
    expect the child to  leave  as  the  child  will  not  in  fact  leave.
    However, as is also said in the section at page 73 "...where there is a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship between the applicant  and
    the child, the  removal  of  the  applicant  may  still  disrupt  their
    relationship with that child. For that reason, the decision maker  will
    still need to consider whether, in the round, removal of the  applicant
    is appropriate in light of all the circumstances of  the  case,  taking
    into account the best interests of the child as a primary consideration
    and the impact on the child of the applicant's departure from  the  UK.
    If it is considered that refusal  would  lead  to  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the applicant, the child or their family,  leave  will
    fall to be granted on the basis of exceptional circumstances."

56. Insofar  as  one  reaches  the  stage  of  considering  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK, the Guidance goes on to
    say this (at page 76):-

         "Where the child is a British citizen

         Where the child is a British citizen, it will not be reasonable to
         expect them to leave the UK with the applicant parent or primary
         carer facing removal.  Accordingly, where this means that the child
         would have to leave to the UK because, in practice, the child will
         not, or is not likely to continue to live in the UK with another
         parent or primary carer, EX.1(a) is likely to apply.

         In particular circumstances, it may be appropriate to refuse to
         grant leave to a parent or primary carer where their conduct gives
         rise to public interest considerations of such weight as to justify
         their removal, where the British citizen child could remain in the
         UK with another parent or alternative primary carer, who is a
         British citizen or settled in the UK or who has or is being granted
         leave to remain.  The circumstances envisaged include those in
         which to grant leave could undermine our immigration controls, for
         example the applicant has committed significant or persistent
         criminal offences falling below the thresholds for deportation set
         out in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules or has a very poor
         immigration history, having repeatedly and deliberately breached
         the Immigration Rules."

57. The Guidance appears to reflect in large part  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    guidance in MA (Pakistan) and others v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705  ("MA  (Pakistan)").  Those  cases  were
    concerned with qualifying children who were foreign nationals  who  had
    been in the UK for more than seven years rather  than  British  citizen
    children.  However, what is said at [46] of the judgment  that  "strong
    reasons" are needed to refuse leave once the qualifying requirements of
    the Rules (or here the legislation) are met applies equally.

58. It may be suggested by  the  Respondent  that  this  appeal  is  to  be
    distinguished from the position in MA (Pakistan) because, in accordance
    with what is said in the Guidance, I  am  required  first  to  consider
    whether A and L will or are likely to be required to leave the UK  with
    the Appellant and their mother or whether it is more likely  that  they
    will remain here with their mother.   If  that  is  the  submission,  I
    disagree that this is what is required by Section  117B  (6).   Section
    117B (6) on its  face  requires  only  that  there  be  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child (which I  have
    accepted applies here) and an assessment whether it  is  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.

59. By contrast, the consideration under section 117C (5) is  whether  "the
    effect of [the parent's]  deportation"  is  unduly  harsh  which,  read
    together with the relevant paragraph of the Rules means  that  a  Judge
    should consider whether it would be unduly harsh for a child  to  leave
    with a foreign criminal parent or for the child to  remain  in  the  UK
    without that parent.  The consideration under Section 117B(6)  is  only
    whether it is reasonable to expect  the child to leave the UK  and  not
    whether it is reasonable to expect  the  child  to  remain  in  the  UK
    without one parent.  If the latter were the wording of the legislation,
    then I can see the relevance of whether the child would in  fact  leave
    before one can determine the effect on that child.   However,  that  is
    not what the legislation says.  As such, in my judgement, the  Guidance
    in this regard imports words into the sub-section which  do  not  there
    appear and/or puts an impermissible gloss on the statutory language (if
    indeed that section of the Guidance is intended  to  apply  to  Section
    117B (6) at all).

60. The wording of Section 117B (6) is  also  a  reason  why  the  question
    whether the Appellant could be expected to return to Albania to  obtain
    entry clearance as either a partner and/or as a parent does not  arise.
    Mr Knight urged me not to dismiss the  appeal  on  that  basis  in  any
    event.  He pointed out that, since [CE] would be  unable  to  meet  the
    minimum income threshold and the Appellant has an  adverse  immigration
    history, the Appellant would still need to fall back on Article 8  ECHR
    to succeed.  As he put  it,  the  outcome  would  be  either  that  the
    Appellant would be refused entry clearance and the  family  could  then
    only be together if [CE] and  the  children  joined  the  Appellant  in
    Albania (in which case either the children would have to leave  the  UK
    or would be separated from their father/stepfather)  or  the  Appellant
    would be granted entry clearance in which case his removal  would  have
    been a pointless exercise.

61. I do not accept that final submission.  There is a public  interest  in
    the maintenance of effective immigration control  which  would  support
    the need for an applicant to comply with the Rules if he is able to  do
    so. However, in the end I have decided that it is  not  appropriate  to
    consider whether the Appellant could return  to  Albania  for  a  short
    period to obtain entry clearance because, in  circumstances  where  the
    Appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with two  British
    citizen children, the only question is  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect them to leave the UK.  It is not whether  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect them to do so in the short term while the Appellant seeks  entry
    clearance or to remain with their mother while the Appellant returns to
    Albania for this purpose.

62. Having assessed that the children's  best  interests  require  them  to
    remain with their mother and the Appellant and to remain in the  UK,  I
    turn therefore to consider  whether  there  are  "strong  reasons"  for
    removal of the Appellant in the context of whether it is reasonable  to
    expect A and L to leave the UK.

63. Although not a conclusion which the Court of Appeal  reached  with  any
    great enthusiasm in MA (Pakistan), as the Court held  at  [45]  of  the
    judgment in  that  case,  Section  117B  (6)  is  not  a  free-standing
    provision when assessing  what  the  public  interest  requires.   When
    considering whether it is reasonable to expect A and L to  relocate  to
    Albania with their mother and the Appellant, I should take into account
    other public interest factors.

64. Here, the Appellant is an illegal entrant.  Although he claimed  asylum
    on arrival, he gave evidence that he came to the UK to  seek  a  better
    life.  As such, it appears that  his  asylum  claim  was  not  genuine.
    Clearly the Respondent found it not to be well-founded as she  did  not
    recognise him as a refugee.  I have no information to suggest that  the
    Appellant appealed against that decision which  suggests  that  he  was
    prepared to accept this as the right outcome.

65. The Appellant said that when he went to carry out some work at the home
    of [CE], he did so for no payment.  I do not accept his evidence  about
    this.  [CE] confirmed that she paid him for the work.  As such, I  also
    find that the Appellant was working when he had no permission to do so.



66. All of those factors weigh against the Appellant and in favour  of  the
    public interest in removal based on  the  need  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control.

67. In addition, in this case, [CE] is not working and  is  in  receipt  of
    benefits.  Although she gave evidence that she worked before having her
    children and "would not mind" returning  to  employment  now  that  the
    children are beginning education, it is far from clear that the  family
    will not continue to have recourse to public funds if the Appellant  is
    permitted to remain.  [CE] was working in what appears to have  been  a
    low-paid job. Although the  Appellant  has  worked,  it  appears  as  a
    general handyman/decorator and gives his  profession  in  some  of  the
    documents as a builder, again, that is  unlikely  to  pay  particularly
    well.  As such, the Appellant may be a burden on the  taxpayer  if  the
    family continue to rely on benefits to support themselves.

68. When considering whether it is reasonable to expect A and L to relocate
    to Albania, I have regard to what is said in the Guidance.  As cited in
    the extract to which I refer at [56] above, the circumstances in  which
    it is envisaged that it might be  reasonable  to  expect  a  qualifying
    British citizen child to leave the UK are those in  which  the  foreign
    national parent  has  "committed  significant  or  persistent  criminal
    offences ... or has a very poor immigration history, having  repeatedly
    and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules."

69. The Appellant has not committed any offences (apart  from  the  obvious
    one of entering the UK illegally). Although the Appellant's immigration
    history is very far from good and his breaches of the Rules can  fairly
    be described as "deliberate", he has not  committed  repeated  breaches
    over a lengthy period.  The breaches of immigration control  and  other
    public interest factors weighing against the Appellant are not,  in  my
    estimation, sufficiently egregious to outweigh the best interests of  A
    and L.   Put another way,  I  do  not  consider  that  the  Appellant's
    adverse immigration history is a sufficiently strong reason  to  refuse
    leave when viewed in the context of whether it is reasonable to  expect
    two British citizen children to relocate to Albania.

70. For the above reasons, I conclude that  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse leave to remain to the Appellant and to remove him  is  unlawful
    under section 6 Human Rights Act 1998 (as a breach of Article  8  ECHR)
    and I allow his appeal on that basis.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal  is  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent's
decision is unlawful under section 6 HRA 1998 (as  a  breach  of  Article  8
ECHR)


Signed[pic]                     Dated: 28 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04908/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Friday 15 December 2017                    |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                 Mr ilir [e]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Knight, Counsel instructed by Hunter Stone Law
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal.  No
application was made to me for anonymity of the Appellant.  There is no
reason to make such a direction.  I have however anonymised the names of
the children involved in these proceedings.


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Asjad promulgated on 23 March  2017  ("the  Decision")  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated 16th
    February 2016 refusing his human rights claim based on his relationship
    with his British citizen partner [CU] and his child A and stepchild L.

 2.  The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  Albania.   He  entered   the   UK
    clandestinely in May 2014 and claimed asylum which was  refused  on  17
    April 2015.  He applied for leave to remain based on his  human  rights
    on 6 August 2015 leading to the decision under appeal.

 3. The Judge did not accept  that  the  Appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his partner or that they  could  meet  the
    Immigration Rules on this basis as there was insufficient  evidence  of
    cohabitation for a period of two years.  She also did not  accept  that
    the Appellant is in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
    his child or stepchild due to the lack of evidence as to  the  part  he
    plays in their lives.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  Judge
    had failed to take account of material evidence as to cohabitation  and
    that the couple were unable to marry only because  the  Respondent  was
    holding the Appellant's passport.  The Appellant also says that he does
    have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  the  children
    even if his statement does not deal with this in  any  detail.   He  is
    named as the father of both children on their  birth  certificates  and
    has proved by DNA evidence that he is the father of the younger.

 5. It is contended that the Judge has failed to assess the human rights of
    the Appellant, his partner and his children.  Permission to appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor on 7 September  2017
    in the following terms (so far as relevant) :-

         "3.  It is arguable that  the  Judge  has  indeed  failed  to  take
             relevant evidence into account and has  failed  to  adequately
             address the totality of the Article 8 claim.   It  appears  as
             though there was evidence in the 288-page  appellant's  bundle
             potentially  indicating  cohabitation  in  early  2015.   More
             importantly even if cohabitation had not occurred  until  2015
             (and therefore  short  of  the  two-year  period  required  by
             GEN.1.2 of Appendix FM) the Judge  herself  notes  the  fairly
             extensive  evidence  relating  to  2015/2016  at  [9].    When
             concluding  that  there  is  no  change  in   the   subsisting
             relationship at  all  [10]  the  Judge  appears  not  to  have
             considered  whether  this  evidence  was  supportive  of   the
             couple's claim. In addition, it is arguable that there are  no
             reasons stated  as  to  why  the  couple's  own  evidence  was
             implicitly rejected.  It is arguable that the Judge failed  to
             take account of the fact that the appellant was not  permitted
             to work and therefore could not contribute  to  the  household
             finances.   In  respect  of  the  couple's   British   citizen
             daughter, whilst the witness statements  are  indeed  thin  on
             detail, if the Judge's assessment of the couple's relationship
             is flawed it is arguable that this  might  have  infected  the
             consideration of the parental relationship.

         4.   In light of Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  an  error  in
             relation to the child may well be material."

 6. This matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision  contains  a
    material of error and if so to remake the Decision or remit the  appeal
    for rehearing to the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion and Conclusions

 7. The Appellant's case readily sub-divides into two aspects of  a  family
    life claim.  The first relates to his partner  relationship  with  [CU]
    and the second to his parental relationship with his biological child A
    and his stepchild L.  There is one further point  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's private life which I will come to if necessary once I  have
    dealt with the family life aspect.

 8. Dealing first then with  the  submissions  made  by  the  Appellant  in
    relation to family life with his partner, Mr Knight submitted that  the
    couple began to live together in 2015.  He took me to various documents
    which show that a relationship was in being as claimed  from  2014  and
    that the couple were living together at least from June 2015  as  there
    is evidence of tax credits being sent to the same address.  He accepted
    that the evidence does not show that the couple had been cohabiting for
    two years as at the date of the Respondent's decision.

 9. As Mr Wilding pointed out, there could not be evidence of  cohabitation
    for two years as at the date of application because the Appellant's own
    case is that  the  relationship  did  not  start  until  2014  and  the
    application was made in  August  2015.   As  Mr  Wilding  pointed  out,
    therefore, there is no  question  that  this  relationship  could  fall
    within an eligible relationship for the  purposes  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. This aspect of the case therefore fell to be considered  outside
    the Rules.

10. In essence, the Appellant's case  is  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to
    consider material evidence when  looking  at  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship.  I turn therefore to what the Judge said about this :-

         "9.      I have considered the evidence before  [me]  carefully  in
             order to show me whether or not the Appellant  and  [CU]  have
             lived together in a relationship akin to a marriage  or  civil
             partnership for at least  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of
             application so that they meet  the  definition  of  'partners'
             under the Immigration Rules.  The evidence of  both  [CU]  and
             the Appellant was that they began living together  soon  after
             she discovered she was pregnant and that this  was  in  August
             2014.  There are documents within the Appellant's bundle  that
             show them both living at the same address. Many of  these  are
             addressed separately i.e. to the  Appellant  -  such  as  from
             Tesco, Argos and Sky.  [CU] is in receipt of  Housing  Benefit
             and there is a  letter  from  the  Housing  Association  dated
             February 2015 (145) to say that she can have a partner  living
             with her.  There are no documents  related  to  2014  at  all.
             There is only one shared bill for Virgin Media - the  earliest
             of which is dated July  2015.   There  are  joint  Tax  Credit
             awards relating to 2015 and 2016.  Whilst this can  show  that
             [CU] has declared to the HMRC that she has a Partner and there
             is a joint award, her bank statements show that she  has  been
             receiving Income Support since at least October  2016  and  no
             working tax credits.  It would  appear  that  since  the  HMRC
             decision on the tax award was made - [CU]'s circumstances have
             changed.  I also note that despite claiming to  live  together
             since 2014 there are no joint financial commitments - such  as
             joint bank accounts or shared bills prior to 2016 (apart  from
             Virgin Media).  There is nothing to  say  that  the  Appellant
             contributes to any of  the  household  bills  other  than  for
             Virgin Media.  Many of the letters that the  Appellant  relies
             upon are for 2016.  I take all of the above into  account  and
             find that the Appellant cannot demonstrate on the  balance  of
             probabilities that he is the Partner of  [CU]  and  he  cannot
             meet the immigration rules on this basis.

         10.  I accept that there are letters from friends to say  that  the
             Appellant and [CU] are  in  a  relationship  together  and  it
             appears genuine - but none of their evidence  was  tested  and
             they did not attend the Tribunal in support  of  this  appeal.
             There are some undated photographs and cards addressed to  the
             couple. But given the absence of any documentary  evidence  to
             support the Appellant and [CU] living together I do  not  find
             that  the  Appellant  could   have   demonstrated   that   the
             relationship is genuine and subsisting.  Any Article 8  family
             life on the basis of his relationship with [CU] fails on  that
             basis."

11. I am unpersuaded by the submission that the Judge has failed to look at
    the documents.  The point made by the Judge is that  the  documents  do
    not show shared responsibility.  There may well be reasons why that  is
    so such as that the Appellant  cannot  work  and  cannot  open  a  bank
    account due to his immigration status.  It is not the case however that
    the Judge has failed to note the documents which are addressed  to  the
    Appellant  at  the  same  address  as  [CU].  Those  are  referred  to.
    Similarly, there is reference to the joint tax credit awards in 2015 to
    which I was taken and there is also reference to the Virgin Media  bill
    to which I was also taken.

12. I am unpersuaded that there was any  error  in  failing  to  take  into
    account the car  insurance  documents.   The  fact  that  a  person  is
    permitted to drive another person's vehicle does not show a genuine and
    subsisting relationship as a partner.

13. There are however two matters which are not factored into  the  Judge's
    assessment.  The first is that both the Appellant and his partner  gave
    oral evidence.  As Mr Knight rightly pointed out, there is  no  adverse
    finding of credibility let alone any reasons given for finding both the
    Appellant and his partner not to be credible in their  evidence  as  to
    the relationship.  The second point  is  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner have a child together.  I will come to that later in  terms  of
    the effect on the Article 8 claim.   However, it  is  also  a  relevant
    factor when looking at the genuineness of the relationship between  the
    Appellant and his partner and it is not mentioned in that context.

14. Mr Knight's other submission in this regard is that the couple were not
    on notice that there was any issue taken  as  to  the  genuineness  and
    subsistence of the  relationship.   As  Mr  Wilding  pointed  out,  the
    Secretary of State did not reach a view  whether  the  relationship  is
    genuine as she concluded  that  the  application  could  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules.  When considering the application of paragraph EX.1,
    however, she did state that it was not accepted that  the  relationship
    was genuine and subsisting because the couple were not married and  had
    not been cohabiting for two years prior to  the  date  of  application.
    That said, there was no cross-examination on the part of the Respondent
    of the Appellant and his  partner.   Mr  Knight  also  represented  the
    Appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  has  provided  (in  his
    skeleton  argument  for  this  hearing)  a  note  of  the  Home  Office
    submissions.  Those are summarised as being that  the  couple  did  not
    meet the Immigration Rules but that it would be open to them to make  a
    new application when they can meet the Rules.  It is implicit  in  that
    submission that no point  was  taken  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship.

15. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that the Judge erred in law  when
    dealing with the family life claimed based on the partner relationship.
     Whilst it may have been open to her to find that the relationship  was
    not a genuine one, she needed to give reasons as to the  oral  evidence
    she heard particularly in  the  absence  of  cross-examination  of  the
    Appellant and his partner.  The Judge  needed  to  explain  why  having
    heard that evidence, she found it not to be credible.

16. I turn then to deal with the Appellant's family life as the parent of a
    British citizen child.  The Judge deals with this point at [11] of  the
    Decision as follows:-

         "11. Insofar as his relationship with his daughter is concerned she
             is a British Citizen.  Apart  from  some  generic  email  from
             Mothercare, there is very little before me to  show  that  the
             Appellant  has  a  genuine  parental  relationship  with   his
             daughter (or his stepson).  Even the statements  of  both  the
             Appellant and  [CU]  are  silent  on  what  if  any  role  the
             Appellant plays in the life of his daughter and  stepson.   He
             is named on their birth certificates  but  that  is  all.   On
             balance, I find that the Appellant does  not  have  a  genuine
             parental relationship with his daughter  such  that  paragraph
             EX.1 needs to be considered further.  Article 8 on  the  basis
             of his family life with his daughter (and for the same  reason
             his stepson) fails for the same reasons."

17. I deal first with a point which emerged during the  hearing  concerning
    the extent to which the Appellant's relationship  with  his  biological
    child is a "new matter" for the purposes  of  Section  85  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  By coincidence, on the day  prior  to
    the hearing before me, the Tribunal promulgated  its  decision  in  the
    case of Mahmud (S.85 NIAA 2002 - 'new matters') [2017] UKUT 00488 (IAC)
    ("Mahmud").  The headnote to that decision reads as follows:-

         "1.  Whether something is or is not a  'new  matter'  goes  to  the
             jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal and  the
             First-tier Tribunal must therefore determine  for  itself  the
             issue.

         2.   A 'new matter' is a  matter  which  constitutes  a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84 as required  by  section
             85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting  a  ground  of  appeal
             means that it must contain  a  matter  which  could  raise  or
             establish the listed  ground  of  appeal.   A  matter  is  the
             factual substance of a claim.  A ground of appeal is the legal
             basis on which the facts in any given matter  could  form  the
             basis of a challenge to the decision under appeal.

         3.   In practice, a new matter is a factual matrix  which  has  not
             previously been considered by the Secretary of  State  in  the
             context of the decision in section 82(1) or a  statement  made
             by the appellant under Section 120.  This requires the  matter
             to be factually distinct from that  previously  raised  by  an
             appellant as opposed to  further  or  better  evidence  of  an
             existing  matter.   The  assessment  will   always   be   fact
             sensitive."

    The final paragraph of the headnote is lifted from paragraph 31 of  the
    decision which continues  consideration  of  what  constitutes  a  "new
    matter" as follows :-

         "By way of example, evidence that a couple had  married  since  the
         decision is likely to be new evidence but not a  new  matter  where
         the relationship has previously been relied upon and considered  by
         the Secretary of State.  Conversely, evidence that a couple had had
         a child since the decision is likely to be a new matter as it  adds
         an additional distinct new family relationship (with  consequential
         requirements to consider the best  interests  of  the  child  under
         Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009)
         which itself could separately raise or establish a ground of appeal
         under Article 8 that removal would be contrary to Section 6 of  the
         Human Rights Act."

18. In this particular case, the Appellant's stepson L was  born  prior  to
    the  date  of  the  Respondent's  decision.   The  Secretary  of  State
    requested DNA evidence in relation to that child  which  the  Appellant
    failed to produce by the date of  that  decision.  As  it  subsequently
    transpired, the Appellant is not the father of that child in any  event
    but as DNA evidence had  not  been  produced  the  Secretary  of  State
    declared herself  unable  to  make  any  decision  on  the  Appellant's
    relationship with that child.

19. The Appellant's biological  child  A  was  not  born  until  after  the
    Respondent's decision in September 2016.  Accordingly,  her  birth  and
    the Appellant's relationship with her and entitlement to stay  on  that
    basis was not a matter which the Secretary  of  State  could  consider.
    There has been no Statement of Additional Grounds  made  prior  to  the
    hearing  before  me.   Based  on  what  is  said  in  the  Mahmud,  the
    Appellant's relationship with A and his basis for remaining in  the  UK
    as a parent is very clearly a "new matter".  That is though not the end
    of consideration of this issue.  The Secretary of State is able to give
    consent for a "new matter" to be considered.  As was pointed out by the
    Tribunal at [36] of the decision in Mahmud, Section 85(5) of  the  2002
    Act requires actual consent by the Respondent which cannot be deemed or
    implied.

20. Mr Knight did not seek to suggest that there has been consent  in  this
    case.  Instead, he submitted  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that GEN.1.9 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules  applies.
    That reads as follows so far as relevant:-

         "(a) the requirement to make a valid application will not apply
             when the Article 8 claim is raised:

             (iii)    in an appeal (subject to the consent of the Secretary
                  of State where applicable); and ..."

    Mr Knight refers in this regard to [27] of his skeleton argument  dated
    14 February 2017 which reads "Pursuant to GEN.1.9(a)(iii) the Article 8
    claim may be raised in the course of the  appeal  i.e.  as  of  today's
    date, and thereby be considered as within the Rules."  There is however
    no reference there to the matter of consent and that does not appear to
    have been expressly raised with the Judge.  Certainly, if it  was,  the
    Judge has made no reference to it and  there  is  no  record  that  the
    Secretary of State has given her consent  to  the  "new  matter"  being
    raised.  That constitutes an error of law.

21.  There is however a question whether that error  of  law  is  material.
    Had it not been for my conclusions in relation to the partner aspect of
    the appeal I may have been persuaded by Mr Wilding's submission that on
    the evidence before her and in light of the fact that the birth of  the
    Appellant's biological child raises a "new matter", the finding of  the
    Judge at [11] of the decision is not so unreasoned as to  be  perverse.
    However, since I have already determined that there is a material error
    of law in relation to the findings on the partner relationship, whether
    this error is material matters not.  The Decision still falls to be set
    aside in relation to the other error.

22. For those reasons, I am satisfied that there is a material error of law
    in the Decision of Judge Asjad promulgated on 23 March 2017 and  I  set
    that aside.

23. There then followed some discussion as to how the "new matter" relating
    to A should  be  determined.   Mr  Wilding  noted  that  there  was  no
    Statement of Additional Grounds in relation to this  child.   That  was
    overcome by the handing in to me of a further statement from [CU] which
    confirms the birth of A and that the Appellant cares for this child  as
    her parent.

24. In light of the indication by  the  Tribunal  in  Mahmud  that  express
    consent is required by the Secretary of State  and  Mr  Wilding  having
    confirmed that he was not in a position to give that instantly, I  gave
    an oral direction at the hearing that by 4pm on Friday 22 December 2017
    the Respondent should indicate in writing to the  Tribunal  (copied  to
    the Appellant) whether she consents to  the  Tribunal  determining  the
    "new matter" of the birth of A and the Appellant's relationship as  the
    biological father of that child at the resumed hearing.  That direction
    is also recorded below. I have received a letter dated 21 December 2017
    confirming that the Respondent consents to the new matter being  raised
    (although wrongly stated as referring  to  the  Appellant's  biological
    child as L rather than A), in the event that I find an error of law (as
    I have now done).

25. Mr Knight indicated that if I found an error of law he was content that
    the matter should remain within the Upper  Tribunal  but  that  further
    evidence would need to be called, particularly in light of the  passage
    of time since the last hearing.  I have therefore given  directions  to
    deal with that matter.  I also note that since the last hearing,  under
    cover of a letter dated 21 December 2017, I have now been provided with
    further witness statements from the Appellant and [CU] which  I  assume
    are those which Mr Knight indicated that they would wish to provide.  I
    have however allowed a  further  very  short  period  for  any  further
    evidence to be provided should the Appellant wish to do so.

Notice of Decision

I am satisfied that the Decision  contains  material  errors  of  law.   The
Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Asjad promulgated on 23 March 2017  is
set aside.

The appeal will be relisted for a resumed hearing subject to  the  following
directions :-

    1.   By 4pm on Friday 22 December 2017 the Respondent is to indicate in
         writing to the Tribunal  (copied  to  the  Appellant)  whether  she
         consents to the Tribunal determining the "new matter" of the  birth
         of A and the Appellant's relationship as the biological  father  of
         that child at the resumed hearing (now completed: see above).

    2.   By 4pm on Friday 26 January 2018, the Appellant is  to  file  with
         the Tribunal and serve on the Respondent further witness statements
         from him and his partner  together  with  any  further  documentary
         evidence on which the Appellant wishes to rely  (now  completed  in
         part: see above).

    3.   By 4pm on Friday 9 February 2018 both parties are to file with the
         Tribunal and serve on the opposing party skeleton arguments setting
         out their position in relation to any legal issues.

    4.   The resumed hearing of the appeal will  be  listed  on  the  first
         available date after Monday 19 February 2018 - time  estimate  half
         day.


Signed[pic]                     Dated: 16 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

