
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04967/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|without a hearing                |                                 |
|On 6 August 2020                 |On 12 August 2020                |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|    |                   Ms Jayshreeben Atulkumar Patel |Appellant  |
|    |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |           |
|                                                                   |
|And                                                                |
|                                                                   |
|    |                The Secretary of State for the    |Respondent |
|    |Home Department                                   |           |


This is a decision on the  papers  without  a  hearing.  On  behalf  of  the
appellant, it was confirmed that she  did  not  object.  On  behalf  of  the
respondent, it was confirmed that she was content to  leave  the  matter  in
the hands of the Upper Tribunal.  The documents described at paras 4, 5  and
7 below were submitted. A face-to-face hearing or a remote hearing  was  not
held for the reasons given at paras 9-17 below. The order made  is  set  out
at para  53  below.  (Administrative  Instruction  No.  2  from  the  Senior
President of Tribunals).


Representation (by written submissions):

For the appellant:     Ms S Sharma of Portway Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellant is a national of India,  born  on  6  October  1965.  She
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davey
    (hereafter the "Judge") who, in a decision promulgated on 13  September
    2019 following a hearing on 15 May 2019, dismissed  her  appeal  (which
    was brought  on  human  rights  grounds)  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent of 7 March 2019 which refused her application of 3 May  2018
    for leave to remain on the basis of her protected human rights.


 2. By a Notice of Hearing dated 4 March 2020, the appeal  was  listed  for
    hearing on 24 April 2020. However, the hearing was adjourned in view of
    the fact that a lockdown was imposed on 23 March 2020 due to the Covid-
    19 pandemic.

 3. On 4 May 2020, the Upper Tribunal sent  to  the  parties  a  "Note  and
    Directions" issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt  dated  1  April  2020.
    Para 2 of the "Note and Directions" stated that, in light of  the  need
    to take precautions against the spread  of  Covid-19,  Judge  Pitt  had
    reached the provisional view, having reviewed the file  in  this  case,
    that it would be appropriate to determine questions (a) and (b) set out
    at para 2 of her "Note & Directions", reproduced at my para 8(i)(a) and
    (b) below, without a hearing. Judge Pitt gave the following directions:

      (i)   Para 3 of the "Note  and  Directions"  issued  directions  which
        provided  for  the  party  who  had  sought  permission   to   make
        submissions in support of the assertion of an error of law  and  on
        the question  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        ("FtT") should be set aside if error of law  is  found,  within  14
        days of the "Note and Directions" being sent to  the  parties;  for
        any other party to file and serve submissions in  response,  within
        21 days of the "Note and  Directions"  being  sent;  and,  if  such
        submissions in  response  were  made,  for  the  party  who  sought
        permission to file a reply no later than 28 days of the  "Note  and
        Directions" being sent.

      (ii)  Para 4 of the "Note and Directions" stated that  any  party  who
        considered that despite the  foregoing  directions  a  hearing  was
        necessary to consider questions (a) and (b) may submit reasons  for
        that view no later than 21 days of the "Note and Directions"  being
        sent to the parties.


 4. The respondent filed a response dated 17 June 2020 under  cover  of  an
    email to the Upper Tribunal dated 17 June 2020 timed at 13:10 hours.

 5. On 15 May 2020, the Upper Tribunal received the appellant's submissions
    dated 15 May 2020 under cover of an email dated 15 May  2020  timed  at
    11:28  hours  from  Portway  Solicitors.   This  did  not  advance  any
    submissions on the  "error  of  law"  decision  being  made  without  a
    hearing.

 6. By a second "Note and Directions" dated  13  July  2020  (sent  to  the
    parties on 20 July 2020), Judge Pitt stated  that  there  had  been  no
    response from the appellant to the "Note and Directions" of 4 May  2020
    and she therefore permitted the appellant a further period of  14  days
    within which to provide her response indicating  her  position  on  the
    "error of law" decision being  made  on  the  papers  and  any  further
    submissions in support of her grounds of appeal.

 7. On 22 July 2020, the appellant's representatives,  Portway  Solicitors,
    informed the Upper Tribunal by email timed at 14:24 hours that they had
    already submitted their written submissions on 15 May 2020 in  response
    to the "Note and Directions" dated 4 May  2020.  In  this  email,  they
    confirmed that there was no objection to the decision being made on the
    papers.

The issues

 8. I have to decide the following issues (hereafter the "Issues"),

      (i)   whether it is appropriate  to  decide  the  following  questions
without a hearing:

            (a)  whether the decision of the Judge involved  the  making  of
           an error on a point of law; and

            (b)  if yes, whether the Judge's decision should be  set  aside.



      (ii)  If yes, whether the decision on the appellant's  appeal  against
        the respondent's decision should be re-made in the  Upper  Tribunal
        or whether the appeal should be remitted to the FtT.

Issue (i) - whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing

 9. In her written submissions of 15 May 2020 on behalf of  the  appellant,
    Ms Sharma did not make  any  submissions  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant objects to the Upper Tribunal proceeding to decide the Issues
    without a hearing. However, in their email dated 22 July 2020,  Portway
    Solicitors confirmed that there was no objection to the decision  being
    made on the papers.

10. In his response of 17 June 2020 on behalf of the respondent, Mr Diwnycz
    stated that, given the appellant's response of 15 May,  the  respondent
    was content for the Upper Tribunal to decide  the  appropriate  further
    action. I infer that the respondent was content to leave the matter  in
    the hands of the Upper Tribunal, i.e.  whether  it  is  appropriate  to
    proceed to decide the Issues without a hearing.

11. I am aware of the guidance  in  the  case-law,  including  the  Supreme
    Court's judgment in Osborn and others v Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61.  I
    have taken into account the guidance at para 2 of the  Supreme  Court's
    judgment.

12. Given that my decision is limited to the Issues, there is  no  question
    of my making findings of fact or hearing oral evidence  or  considering
    any evidence at this stage.

13. I take into account the force of the points made in Sengupta  v  Holmes
    [2002] EWCA Civ 1104 at para 38 and Wasif v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 82  at
    para 17(3) concerning the  power  of  oral  argument  as  well  as  the
    decision in R v Sussex Justices, ex parte McCarthy [1924] 1 KB  256  to
    the effect that justice must be done and be seen to be done.

14. In  addition,  it  is  necessary  for  me  to  take  into  account  the
    seriousness of the issues at stake for the  individual  concerned.  For
    example, the principles explained in all of the cases I have  mentioned
    are  all  the  more  critical  when  the  case  concerns  a  claim  for
    international protection. Although the appeal in the instant  case  was
    not brought on asylum grounds, the appeal does concern the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim which is an issue of some seriousness.

15. I have considered  all  the  circumstances  very  carefully  and  taken
    everything into account, including the overriding objective.

16. Taking a preliminary view at this  stage  of  deciding  whether  it  is
    appropriate and  just  to  decide  the  Issues  without  a  hearing,  I
    considered the Judge's decision, the grounds and the submissions before
    me. I was of the view, taken provisionally at this  stage,  that  there
    was nothing complicated at all in the assessment of the Issues  in  the
    instant case, given that the grounds are simple and straightforward and
    the Judge's decision straightforward. I kept the  matter  under  review
    throughout  my  deliberations.  However,  at  the  conclusion   of   my
    deliberations, I was affirmed in the view I had taken on a  preliminary
    basis.

17. In all of the circumstances, and taking  into  account  the  overriding
    objective and having considered Osborn and others  v  Parole  Board,  I
    concluded that it is appropriate, fair and just for me to  exercise  my
    discretion and proceed to decide the Issues without a hearing.



Questions (a) and (b) - whether the judge  erred  in  law  and  whether  his
decision should be set aside

Summary of the appellant's Article 8 claim

18. The appellant married in India in 1989. She suffered domestic  violence
    at the hands of her husband in his family home. She  left  her  husband
    and obtained a divorce in 2006. She had two children  by  her  husband.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom on 30 June 2006 with entry  clearance
    as a visitor. She overstayed.

19. The appellant's Article 8 claim was  based  on  private  life  she  has
    developed in the  United  Kingdom  including  with  close  friends  and
    charitable works she  has  performed  by  helping  people  through  her
    temple.

20. In addition, if returned to India, it is said that she would experience
    very significant obstacles to her reintegration. She is a single  woman
    who has never worked in India. She is no longer  in  contact  with  her
    children. She has lost contact  with  relatives  in  India.  She  would
    therefore have no support in India.

21. The appellant gave evidence that threats against  her  continue  to  be
    made by her ex-husband. The threats were not made directly to  her  but
    were relayed to her through those who know him  and  who  come  to  the
    United Kingdom and pass on messages of his intended abuse were  she  to
    return (para 5 of the judge's decision).

The Judge's decision

22. The Judge rejected the appellant's evidence  that  her  ex-husband  has
    continued to make threats against her. He gave his reasons at paras  6-
    10, para 14 and the first sentence of para 15  of  his  decision  which
    read:

        "6.      The consideration of that evidence [of continuing threats]
            needs to be set in the context of a statement  made  on  1  May
            2019 by the Appellant, which she  adopted  without  alteration,
            save a correction at paragraph  13  as  to  the  life  she  had
            developed over some thirteen years in the UK.


        7. I note that her statement makes reference to past threats,  that
            is during the marriage, but there is no reference whatsoever to
            any ongoing threats or continuing  threats  in  her  statement.
            There is similarly no mention of her telling of any  continuing
            threats to her family and friends in the UK.


        8. The statement  (AB7)  of  Jagdish  Patel,  a  distant  relative,
            contained within the letter of 25 April 2019 and  in  his  oral
            evidence, did not refer to ongoing or continuing threats or his
            having any knowledge of ongoing or existing threats from her ex-
            husband.


        9. The evidence (AB9) from Mr Mukund Patel again makes no reference
            to the matters being raised of domestic  violence  and  threats
            continuing. Similarly the statement (AB10) of Kirtan Patel  who
            also  gave  evidence  makes  no  reference  to  such   matters.
            Supporting letters (AB11 & AB12) of R N Patel and V  J  Choksi,
            as indeed the other witnesses' statements  that  I  have  taken
            into account, speak well of the Appellant, the role  she  plays
            in their society, the life she plays in their  temple  and  the
            help she gives to amongst others the parents of Jagdish  Patel.
            The Appellant provides company and assistance to his mother and
            father.


        10.      The letters, for example (AB8) from Sajeela  Khamad  dated
            12 April 2019, and the others I referred to already  all  speak
            well of her in affectionate terms and of her honesty,  kindness
            and help that she offers. There is no reference to any  threats
            from the ex-husband.


        14.      I thought having heard the evidence that the Appellant  is
            now exaggerating how her husband is continuing to make  threats
            against her as a way to avoid removal. I found  it  significant
            that there was an absence of reference to threats made  in  the
            extensive representations by Portway Solicitors  on  behalf  of
            the Appellant in their letter  dated  3  May  2018.  They  make
            reference to the Appellant having been abused in India  by  her
            ex-husband but asserting that  she  has  had  no  contact  with
            family members in  India,  no  ties  or  connections  with  any
            friends and since she left India she has had no connections  or
            ties with India. There was no reference to continuing  threats.
            If the Appellant had by 2018 been continuing to  receive  abuse
            and/or threats via her ex-husband's friends coming  to  the  UK
            then  there  would  at  least  be  some  reference   in   those
            representations.


        15.      Following the Reasons for Refusal Letter, the  grounds  of
            appeal do not set out or assert some omission by the Respondent
            in addressing the claim or iterating the  issue  of  continuing
            abuse from her ex-husband.... "


23. The Judge accepted that the appellant has  helped  people  through  the
    temple and is well-regarded by those who  know  her.  At  para  11,  he
    quoted the witness statement of Mr Bhatt dated 29 April 2019  which  he
    said set the tone of all of the evidence that was written in support of
    the appellant's appeal. Para 11 of the judge's decision reads:

            "11. I have no doubt that the  Appellant  in  the  UK  has  been
             helping others through the temple, has been generally providing
             support and is well regarded by those who know her who think of
             her as an aunty. The statement (AB5) of Mr Bhatt dated 29 April
             2019 perhaps sets the tone of all the evidence that is  written
             in support when he states:

                       "I have still remembered when I  first  met  Jayshree
                 Patel (aunty) two years back. Very simple and kind woman. I
                 found in her my mother.

                       When I was working with  charity  she  used  to  come
                 regularly to help  us.  There  I  met  her.  Her  friendly,
                 generous and caring nature made our relations strong.

                       She has been attending all our  social  function  and
                 gathering. Also she is cooking delicious food for me.

                       I  have  unforgettable  memories  with  aunty.  Since
                 aunty I met she has filled gap of mother in my life. I have
                 great respect for her.

                       It is with great pleasure that  I  write  to  you  in
                 recommendation of Mrs Jayshree Patel. We are very close  to
                 each other by hearts. We want to continue  living  as  one,
                 sharing happiness and sorrows together ..."

24. The Judge then considered whether the appellant would  experience  very
    significant obstacles to her reintegration in India at paras  12-15  of
    his  decision.  This  included  consideration  (at  para  14)  of   the
    appellant's evidence that she has continued to receive threats from her
    ex-husband and (at paras 13 and 15) her health.  The  Judge  found  (at
    para  16)  that  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's reintegration in India. Paras 12-16 of the judge's decision
    read:

      "12.  The Appellant basically says the very significant obstacles  to
             return are:- the time she has spent in the UK, the  continuing
             position of her ex-husband who would act  against  her  if  he
             found out where she was, her age,  the  fact  that  she  is  a
             single woman, she has never worked in India and has no evident
             working skills other than the  charitable  work  she  does  to
             provide company and cooking. She has  lost  contact  with  any
             relatives in India although it appears she had a  brother  and
             sister-in-law who lived in her parents' home,  along  possibly
             with her parents, if they are still alive  which  was  unclear
             from the evidence. The Appellant otherwise says that she likes
             her life here, the freedoms that she has and the work that she
             does helping others.


      13.   Looking at the evidence I accept entirely that  the  Appellant,
             apart from the fact that she has  been  unlawfully  here,  has
             been contributing through her temple to the  lives  of  others
             and that she has been, as might be expected, of good  conduct.
             It seems to me that she has spent most of her  life  in  India
             and therefore readily understands life and conditions that she
             might encounter. Her health is not an issue.  Whilst  she  has
             certain medical problems,  those  do  not  require  treatment,
             hospitalisation or medication  that  would  otherwise  not  be
             available in India. Therefore looking at the evidence  in  the
             round it seemed to me within  the  understood  sense  of  very
             significant obstacles to return the principal one is that  she
             is a single woman who to some extent cannot return wholly free
             of the consequences of the breakdown of the marriage  and  her
             husband's conduct.


      14.   [quoted above]


      15.   [first sentence quoted  above]  Portway  Solicitors,  in  their
             grounds of appeal dated 15 March 2019,  solely  refer  to  the
             unfortunate  medical  circumstances  of  the  Appellant  being
             injured in a road traffic  accident  and  suffering  pain  and
             sequelae  of  that  accident.  Whilst  it  is  asserted   that
             physiotherapy sessions and regular medication is being  taken,
             her own evidence does not particularly develop that point  and
             nor do the medical enclosures in the Appellant's bundle  (B13-
             30). The  medical  correspondence  of  particular  application
             confirms  that  the  Appellant  suffered  pain  in  her  right
             shoulder and her condition improving in some measure  and  the
             matter being attended to and  it  seems  possible  [sic]  some
             physiotherapy. There is nothing to suggest that the  condition
             is any more serious than the  fact  that  the  effect  of  the
             accident may be to impede some of her mobility.  There  is  no
             medical evidence to suggest  that  removal  would  lead  to  a
             deterioration in her condition or the absence of the necessary
             support in India.


      16.   In  the  circumstances  taking  into  account  the  Appellant's
             circumstances it  seemed  to   me  that  there  were  no  very
             significant obstacles to her return to India... "


25. In the second sentence of para 16, the Judge said that he  went  on  to
    consider the wider issues of Article 8 of the Immigration Rules through
    the prism of the Rules. He concluded that the respondent's decision was
    proportionate, giving his reasons in the third sentence of para 16  and
    in paras 17-24, which read:

            "16. ...  I  have  set  out  above  the  favourable  aspects  of
             people's views of the  Appellant  which  seem  to  me  entirely
             consistent and reliable.

            17.  I take into account also that the Appellant by choice  came
             as a visitor and overstayed and did not seek to regularise  her
             position even if she is, as she would say, not  well  educated,
             through the support of the temple and others  if  there  was  a
             basis of fear of return from her ex-husband  and  the  fear  of
             further domestic violence even though the marriage was over.

            18.  I concluded that there was nothing in  the  evidence  which
             showed that the circumstances meant that it  was  unduly  harsh
             for the Appellant  to  return  or  would  give  rise  to  undue
             difficulties that could not be addressed.

            19.  In the circumstances therefore I  did  not  find  that  the
             circumstances  got  close  to  showing  that  the   effect   of
             interference in her private life in the United Kingdom and such
             element of it that might be called 'family life' got  close  to
             showing  that  the  effect  of  interference  in  removal   was
             significant. If I was wrong in that, applying the case  law  of
             Hesham Ali [2016] UKUT 60 and Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11,  and  the
             evidence showed that this was a case where Article 8  (1)  ECHR
             rights are engaged. If I was wrong in  that  view  and  it  was
             engaged, then I would take the view the  Respondent's  decision
             is lawful and properly serves Article 8(2) purposes.

            20.  I further therefore consider  the  proportionality  of  the
             Respondent's decision and do so taking  into  account  Sections
             117A and 117B of  the  NIAA  2002.  I  take  into  account  the
             Applicant's precarious status in the UK and the  fact  that  it
             has never been held out to  her  that  she  would  be  able  to
             remain. I bear in mind her limited assimilation into the UK  in
             the sense of language skills.

            21.  I take into account the positive contribution she has  been
             making through the temple and connections in the  UK  and  that
             she has not, although I give it limited weight, broken the  law
             other than in the immigration sense of overstaying.

            22.  In the circumstances I am mindful  of  the  fact  that  the
             Appellant is [sic] on the case returning as a single woman  and
             conscious  that  single  women  in  India  may   constitute   a
             particular social group but no claim  has  been  made  on  that
             basis and nor has it been argued that  she  cannot  return  for
             that reason.

            23.  I accept that there are difficulties and I find  I  do  not
             have complete confidence in her assertions that she has had  no
             contact whatsoever with her children in India but if that is by
             choice on her part or  unwillingness  on  theirs  to  make  any
             contact with her then it seems to me that that  is  a  sad  but
             unfortunate fact of life that she faces come what  may.  I  can
             see no reason why she could not make  fiends  [sic]  through  a
             temple in India, I was given no evidence about the availability
             of state support/ benefits or finding  paid  employment  for  a
             lady of over 40 years of age.

            24.  Accordingly looking  at  the  evidence  in  the  round  and
             taking account of the positive as well as any negative  aspects
             of  the  outcome  I  found   the   Respondent's   decision   is
             proportionate."

The grounds

26. In summary, the grounds contend that the Judge materially erred in  law
    as follows:

      (i)    (ground  1)  by  failing  to  give  sufficient  weight  to  the
        appellant's absence from India since 2006;

      (ii)  (ground 2) by failing to take into account  that  the  appellant
        has never worked and has no support network on return to India as a
        single woman;

      (iii)  (ground  3)  by  failing  to  give  sufficient  weight  to  the
        appellant's ties in the United Kingdom; and

      (iv)  (ground 4) by failing to have regard to the appellant's  English
        language certificates.

27. An Upper Tribunal Judge (the "UTJ")  granted  permission  stating  that
    ground 2 was arguable, in that, although it was recorded at para 12  of
    the  Judge's  decision  that  the  appellant  claimed  to   face   very
    significant obstacles on return to India due, inter alia, to  the  fact
    that she is a single woman without any  family  or  other  contacts  in
    India, the Judge appeared (at para 22) to discount  this  as  a  factor
    because the appellant had not claimed asylum  on  the  basis  that  she
    fears persecution on return as a  single  woman,  something  which  the
    Judge had noted (at para 22) may constitute a particular social  group.
    The UTJ said that there was no consideration at all by the Judge as  to
    whether this would  still  constitute  an  obstacle  to  reintegration,
    particularly  in  light  of  the  Respondent's   'County   Policy   and
    Information Note, India: Women fearing  gender-based  violence',  dated
    July 2018  (hereafter  the  "2018  CPIN"),  which  refers  to  possible
    difficulties for single women  in  accessing  government  services  and
    housing. However, the UTJ observed that there was  nothing  to  suggest
    either party referred to or relied upon this document before the Judge.
    The UTJ further said that there was a lack of any express consideration
    of the appellant not having lived independently  in  India  previously,
    having no employment history there and  no  formal  employment  in  the
    United Kingdom either.

28. Although the UTJ did not limit the grant of permission, she  said  that
    the remaining grounds had "far less merit" as they concern  the  weight
    to be attached the various certain matters which was primarily a matter
    for the Judge.

Assessment

29. I deal first with ground 2; in particular, whether (as suggested in the
    grant of permission) the Judge had discounted as a factor that fell for
    his consideration the fact that the appellant  would  be  returning  to
    India as a single woman with no family or contacts in India because she
    had not claimed asylum on the ground  that  she  fears  persecution  on
    return as a single woman.

30. At para 17 of her written submissions dated  15  May  2020,  Ms  Sharma
    states that the Judge's attention was drawn to  "the  country  guidance
    2018". She specifically mentions para 4.8.2 on the  ability  of  single
    women to access  accommodation  and  para  5.2  on  the  prevalence  of
    domestic abuse. Ms Sharma, who I note appeared for the appellant before
    the Judge, does not say in her written submissions whether she  or  the
    respondent's  representative  drew  the  Judge's  attention   to   this
    material.

31. However, any suggestion in the appellant's written submissions that the
    Judge's attention was drawn by one  or  other  party  to  the  material
    mentioned above would be contrary to para 3 of Ms Sharma's  grounds  of
    appeal to the FtT and the Upper Tribunal which were also prepared by Ms
    Sharma. At para 3 of both sets of grounds, she states:

            "3.  The [FtT] Judge acknowledges that the appellant may  suffer
             on return as a single woman. He disregards the country guidance
             2018 which states that single women would  have  difficulty  in
             accessing housing are 4.82 and also refers to the prevalence of
             domestic abuse at 5.2 The [FtT] Judge states  that  the  single
             woman issue  was  not  raised  in  representations  or  at  the
             hearing. He is clearly not  prohibited  from  raising  relevant
             concerns himself  and  appears  to  have  considered  the  same
             although briefly."

            (my emphasis)

32. Para 3 of Ms Sharma's grounds (to the FtT and to  the  Upper  Tribunal)
    plainly indicate that neither party drew the Judge's attention  to  the
    material in question. Instead, the grounds contended  that  the  Judge,
    having indicated at para 22 that he was  aware  that  single  women  in
    India may constitute a particular social group,  erred  by  failing  to
    consider the material mentioned in the grounds.

33. I have noted that the material mentioned at para 3 of  the  appellant's
    grounds to the FtT and to the UT was not included  in  the  appellant's
    bundle of 163 pages. The appellant's 163-page bundle  was  supplemented
    only by:

      (a)   a letter dated  8  May  2019  from  Woodrange  Medical  Practice
        confirming  that  the  appellant  suffers  with  diabetes,  C-spine
        stenosis, spondylosis, dyspepsia, vitamin D  deficiency  and  chest
        pain and that she is reviewed at the practice as needed; and

      (b)   a letter dated 19  April  2018  from  an  NHS  Patient  Referral
        Centre concerning an appointment on 29 April 2018 for an MRI of the
        appellant's right shoulder.

34. I have also consulted the Judge's manuscript record of the  proceedings
    ("RoP"). There is no mention at all of any reliance upon  any  "country
    guidance 2018" or the 2018 CPIN.

35. Finally, there is no witness statement from Ms Sharma to  confirm  that
    the Judge's attention was drawn to the material mentioned at para 3  of
    the appellant's grounds.

36. In all  of  these  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge's
    attention was not drawn to the material mentioned  at  para  3  of  the
    appellant's grounds.

37. Indeed, I am satisfied that, in stating at para 22  that  he  was  "...
    mindful of the fact that the appellant is [sic] on the  case  returning
    as a single  woman  and  conscious  that  single  women  in  India  may
    constitute a particular social group but no claim has been made on that
    basis", the Judge was merely  indicating  that  he  was  aware  of  the
    possibility of such a claim and making it clear  that  the  appellant's
    case as advanced before him did not include such a claim.  I  therefore
    do not  agree  with  my  fellow  UTJ's  observation  in  the  grant  of
    permission that, in making this observation, the Judge  discounted  the
    fact that the appellant would be returning to India as a  single  woman
    without any family or other contacts in India because the appellant had
    not claimed asylum on the basis that she feared persecution  on  return
    as a single woman.

38. Nevertheless, the  question  remains  whether  the  Judge  should  have
    considered the issue of his own volition.

39. The question whether or not an  individual  returning  to  India  as  a
    single female is a member of a particular social group is a complicated
    issue, the answer to which is case-specific and in respect of  which  a
    Judge is entitled to  have  the  benefit  of  the  submissions  of  the
    parties. There were no such submissions before the Judge and, as I have
    said, his attention was not drawn to any  background  material  or  any
    relevant country guidance cases on the issue.  The  2018  CPIN  is  not
    "country guidance" as this term is  normally  understood  to  refer  to
    country guidance cases promulgated by the Upper Tribunal.

40. The Judge would therefore have been embarking upon a frolic of his  own
    if he had considered whether the appellant was a member of a particular
    social group. He  would  have  been  conducting  research  of  his  own
    volition if he had considered material to which his attention  had  not
    been drawn in order to consider a case that was not advanced, i.e. that
    she was a member of a particular social group and would experience very
    significant obstacles in her reintegration for that reason.

41. The case that was advanced to the Judge was  a  simple  one,  that  the
    appellant would experience very significant obstacles as she  would  be
    returning as a single female with no support  and  who  had  not  lived
    independently in India. I describe it as a simple case because  of  its
    lack of reliance upon membership of a particular social group  and  the
    complexities that consideration of that concept often entails.

42. The Judge did consider the appellant's case as advanced to  him.   When
    his decision is read as a whole, it is plain  that  he  considered  her
    case that she would be returning as a single woman. At para 12, he also
    specifically referred to the fact that the appellant had  lost  contact
    with any relatives in India. At para 23, he specifically stated that he
    accepted that there would be difficulties, saying at the same time that
    he did not have complete confidence in her assertion that she  has  had
    no contact whatsoever with her children in India.

43.  I  do  not  agree  with  my  fellow  UTJ's  observation,  in  granting
    permission, that there was a lack of any express consideration  of  the
    appellant not having any employment history  in  India  and  no  formal
    employment in the United Kingdom. This is because the  Judge  expressly
    said, at para 12 of his decision, that the appellant "has never  worked
    in India and has no evident working skills other  than  the  charitable
    work she does to provide company and cooking". He was therefore plainly
    aware that the appellant had not had any employment  history  in  India
    and that she had had no formal employment in the United Kingdom. He was
    aware that she had not lived independently in India.  At  para  23,  he
    said that he was provided with "no evidence about the  availability  of
    state support/benefits or finding paid employment for a lady of over 40
    years of age".

44. For all of the reasons given above, I reject ground 2.

45. I turn to ground 4.

46. Para 5 of the grounds contends that  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the language certificates at pages 137-139 of  the  appellant's
    bundle. However, whilst this evidence  shows  that  the  appellant  has
    attended a course entitled: "ESOL  -  Skills  for  Life  (Speaking  and
    Listening)" and obtained a grade E1 pass entry level  1,  the  fact  is
    that judges are not obliged to refer in terms to every document  relied
    upon before them. The mere fact that the Judge did  not  refer  to  the
    documents at pages 137-139 of the appellant's bundle does not mean that
    he did not take the evidence into account. There is no reason to  think
    that he did not consider all the evidence  before  him  in  considering
    s.117B(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  which
    refers to an individual's ability to speak English and the relevance of
    this to  the  individual's  integration  into  society  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

47. On the evidence before the Judge, the appellant  was  someone  who  was
    deeply involved, socially and through the  temple  she  attended,  with
    members of her own ethnic community. There was little  or  no  evidence
    before him of the appellant's integration into the wider  community  in
    the United Kingdom. He had before him someone who had obtained a  grade
    E1 pass at entry level 1 in the speaking  and  listening  component  of
    "ESOL - Skills  for  Life  (Speaking  and  Listening)"  but  who  still
    required an interpreter in order to give oral evidence before  him.  On
    the whole of the evidence, the Judge was entitled to conclude that  the
    appellant's assimilation into the United Kingdom was  "limited  ...  in
    the sense of language skills".

48. I therefore also reject ground 4.

49. Grounds 1 and 3 plainly concern the  weight  to  be  given  to  various
    factors. That was essentially a matter for the Judge. Grounds 1  and  3
    together with the appellant's written submissions on grounds  1  and  3
    amount to no more than a disagreement with the Judge's reasoning and an
    attempt to re-argue the appellant's case.

50. I turn now to deal  with  the  remainder  of  the  appellant's  written
    submissions as follows:

      (i)   Para 5 of the written submissions refers,  inter  alia,  to  the
        appellant having to return to the same area in India where she  had
        lived and where it is said she would be unable to live a free  life
        due to concerns about her  ex-husband  and  other  family  members.
        Indeed, para 8 contends that she fears maltreatment in returning to
        the same area. Para 7 states that the appellant fears returning  to
        India as a single woman due to  prevailing  widespread  and  common
        discrimination, abuse and violence against women, that she has been
        made aware of threats from her ex-husband and that she  feels  that
        the police would not be willing to assist her  as  they  previously
        failed to do so. Para 8 also contends that the appellant would  not
        be able to access accommodation  without  using  the  name  of  her
        father or ex-husband.

                 However, these submissions were  not  in  the  grounds  and
        therefore the appellant does not have permission to  advance  them.
        In any event, they ignore the fact that the Judge roundly  rejected
        the appellant's evidence of receiving continuing threats  from  her
        ex-husband and there was  no  evidence  of  any  threats  or  other
        problems from the appellant's father.

      (ii)  Referring to the fact that the Judge had said that  neither  the
        appellant nor her supporting witnesses had referred to there  being
        any ongoing threats from the appellant's ex-husband, para 14 of the
        written submissions contends: (a) that there was no  evidence  that
        any of these witnesses were friends of the  appellant's  ex-husband
        and therefore that they had direct knowledge of  threats;  (b)  all
        the witnesses were aware of  appellant's reason for  leaving  India
        but had indicated that they did not pry and she  did  not  like  to
        talk about her former husband; and (c) the fact  that  divorce  was
        not acceptable in 2006 and that the appellant has been safe in  the
        United Kingdom since then  meant  that  she  did  not  mention  the
        threats until she was asked directly about the  reasons  she  could
        not return to India in court.

                 However, these submissions were  not  in  the  grounds  and
        therefore the appellant does not have permission to  advance  them.
        In any event, they amount to no more than a disagreement  with  the
        Judge's reasoning and an attempt to re-argue the appellant's case.

      (iii) Para 6 contends that the Judge failed to  acknowledge  that  the
        appellant's lack of contact with her children was a  direct  result
        of her husband's intervention; para 7 that  the  appellant  has  no
        property, family, or social ties with her home country; and para  9
        that the appellant was unable to give details about her parents  or
        brother as she has had no contact with them and does not even  know
        if they remain in the same locality.  Para  11  contends  that  the
        witnesses before the Judge  had  stated  that  they  would  not  be
        willing to support the appellant financially  if  she  returned  to
        appellant. In other words, that  she  would  be  without  financial
        support in India.

                  However,  contrary  to  these   submissions,   the   Judge
        specifically considered at para 23 the  appellant's  evidence  that
        she has had no contact with her children in India and  at  para  12
        the evidence before him concerning  her  brother  and  parents.  He
        considered her case that she would be returning to India as a  lone
        female with no support. He said, at para  23,  that  there  was  no
        evidence before him about the  availability  of  state  support  or
        benefits or of "finding paid employment for a lady of over 40 years
        of age". It is therefore plain, once again, that these  submissions
        amount to no more than an attempt to re-argue the appellant's case.



      (iv)  Para 10 contends that there was no consideration of  the  effect
        on the appellant's mental health in returning to  the  place  where
        she had suffered mental and physical abuse  at  the  hands  of  her
        husband and in-laws.

                 However, this was not part of the appellant's  grounds  and
        therefore the appellant does not  have  permission  to  argue  this
        issue. Further, and in any  event,  there  was  simply  no  medical
        evidence before the Judge concerning the impact on the  appellant's
        mental health of returning to her home area in India.  The  medical
        evidence that was before the Judge is at AB/13-30, supplemented  by
        the two letters mentioned at para 33 above.  The  Judge  considered
        the medical evidence at paras 13  and  15  of  his  decision  which
        sufficiently describe the evidence that was before him.

                 Accordingly, given  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence
        before the Judge concerning the impact on  the  appellant's  mental
        health of returning to India, there was no basis  at  all  for  the
        suggestion in the appellant's written submissions  that  the  Judge
        erred  by  failing  to  consider  this  issue.  In  advancing  this
        submission, para 10 of the appellant's written submissions attempts
        to advance a case that was not evidenced before the Judge.

      (v)   Para 13 states that the appellant had  given  detailed  evidence
        about her relationship with the parents of Jagdish Patel  and  that
        she has provided care  and  companionship  over  several  years  in
        return for board and lodging. It is contended that the Judge failed
        to consider that separation would have an adverse  effect  on  both
        the couple and the appellant.

                 However, the fact is that  there  was  simply  no  evidence
        before the Judge of the impact on the appellant and/or the  parents
        of Mr Jagdish Patel of the  appellant's  removal  from  the  United
        Kingdom. The appellant's witness statement (AB/1-4) was  silent  on
        the issue,  as  was  the  letter  from  Mr  Jagdish  Patel  (AB/7).
        According to the Judge's RoP, the appellant's oral evidence did not
        include any evidence concerning the  impact  upon  her  and/or  the
        parents of Mr Jagdish Patel of her removal from the United Kingdom.
        In his examination-in-chief, Mr Jagdish Patel  said  that,  if  the
        appellant left the United Kingdom,  "Things  wd  be  difficult  for
        parents. Support w'dn't be as good as she provides" and  in  cross-
        examination he said that he had not  gone  to  the  NHS  or  social
        services to enquire about help for his parents but "if she  went  I
        w'd try". He did not give any  oral  evidence  concerning  how  the
        appellant's departure would affect his parents other than that  any
        support they might receive from other sources would not be "as good
        as she provides".

                 Once again, in contending that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
        consider the adverse effect on the appellant of her  removal,  para
        13 of the appellant's written submissions  attempts  to  advance  a
        case that was not evidenced before the Judge. True it  is  that  Mr
        Jagdish Patel gave evidence of the possibility of his  parents  not
        receiving support that was as good as  the  support  the  appellant
        provides. However,  the  evidence  lacked  detail  and  was  wholly
        incapable of affecting the outcome on any legitimate view.

                 In any event, the Judge was aware of the  appellant's  case
        of her relationship with the parents of Mr Jagdish Patel  and  that
        she provided  care  and  companionship  in  return  for  board  and
        lodging. He specifically referred to the help she gives to them  in
        the  final  sentence  of  para  9  of  his  decision.  Plainly,  he
        considered her case on this point on such evidence  as  was  before
        him.

51. Overall, it is clear that  the  Judge  considered  the  case  that  was
    presented to him adequately.  His  (understandable)  effort  in  making
    clear at para 22 of his decision what the appellant's case was not  has
    unfortunately resulted in the appellant attempting to  advance  through
    this appeal a case that was not presented below.

52. For all of the reasons give above, I am satisfied that  the  Judge  did
    not err in law. The appellant's appeal is therefore dismissed.


Notice of Decision

53.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
    any error on a point of  law.  The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is therefore dismissed.


Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                    Date: 6 August 2020


____________________________________________________________________________
________

NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
  a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such  application  must
  be received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after
  this decision  was  sent  to  the  person  making  the  application.  The
  appropriate period varies, as follows, according to the location  of  the
  individual and the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision  was  sent:




2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
  United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to  appeal
  is made, and  is  not  in  detention  under  the  Immigration  Acts,  the
  appropriate period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice  of
  decision is sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
  Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7  working  days  (5  working
  days, if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
  the United Kingdom at the time that the  application  for  permission  to
  appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working  days,  if
  the notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
  Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
  covering letter or covering email

