
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04082/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Court of Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2019                    |On 14 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     JE
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bexson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') sent on 9 July  2019,  dismissing  his  appeal  on
         Article 8 grounds.

      2. The appellant had appealed to  the  FTT  against  the  respondent's
         decision to  make  a  deportation  order  dated  30  January  2018,
         following his conviction and sentence of  90  months  imprisonment,
         for possessing a firearm with intent to cause violence on 14  April
         2016.

Summary of FTT's decision

      3. The FTT summarised the evidence relevant to the appellant's claimed
         relationship with A (his child born in 2014) and  B  (A's  mother),
         and concluded that these were not genuine or subsisting - see  [26-
         32] of the FTT's decision.  The FTT also found at [33], that having
         been born in 1994, and having entered the United Kingdom ('UK')  in
         2012, the appellant had not been in the UK "for most of his  life".
         Although the FTT did not explicitly say so, it clearly  found  that
         the appellant could not benefit from Exceptions  1  and  2  of  the
         Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act').

      4. As the appellant was sentenced to four years or more  imprisonment,
         the critical issue before the  FTT  was  whether  there  were  very
         compelling circumstances over and above Exceptions 1 and 2 in order
         to meet the requirements in s. 117C(6) of the 2002  Act.   The  FTT
         did not explicitly address this critical issue, but  dismissed  the
         appeal on, inter alia, human rights grounds.

Legal framework

      5. In order to correctly determine that critical issue,  the  FTT  was
         obliged to apply paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration  Rules.
         These are reflected within s. 117C of the 2002 Act, which states as
         follows:

             "(1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
             interest.

             (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where - (a) C has been lawfully
             resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's life, (b) C is
             socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and
             (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's
             integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
             deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
             and 2."

      6. In MS (s. 117C(6);  "very  compelling  circumstances")  Philippines
         [2019] UKUT 122 (IAC) the President (sitting in a panel  with  UTJs
         Gill and Coker) considered the correct approach to s. 117C(6)  with
         the benefit of the guidance provided in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2018]
         UKSC 53 and NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2017] 1 WLR 207; [2016] EWCA  Civ
         662, and said this:

             "16. By  contrast,  the  issue  of  whether  "there  are  very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2" is not in any sense a hard-edged question.
             On the  contrary,  it  calls  for  a  wide-ranging  evaluative
             exercise. As NA (Pakistan) holds, that exercise  is  required,
             in the case of all foreign criminals, in order to ensure  that
             Part 5A of the 2002 Act produces, in each such case, a  result
             that is compatible with the United Kingdom's obligations under
             Article 8 of the ECHR.

             17.  Viewed in this light, it can readily  be  seen  that  the
             ascertainment   of   what    constitute    "very    compelling
             circumstances",  such  as  to  defeat  the  public   interest,
             requires a case-specific analysis of the nature of the  public
             interest.  The  strength  of  the  public  interest,  in   any
             particular case, determines the weight that must then be found
             to lie on the foreign criminal's side of the balance in  order
             for the circumstances  to  be  properly  categorised  as  very
             compelling. It would,  frankly,  be  remarkable  if  a  person
             sentenced  to  four  years'  imprisonment  for  fraud  had  to
             demonstrate the same circumstances as a  person  sentenced  to
             life imprisonment for multiple murders.

             18.  To say this is not to  seek  to  introduce  a  "balancing
             exercise" into Exceptions 1 and 2  and  the  test  of  "unduly
             harsh". The words "over and above", as interpreted by  Jackson
             LJ in NA (Pakistan), underscore the difference  in  the  tasks
             demanded by, on the one hand, section 117C(4) and (5) and,  on
             the other, section 117C(6).

             ...

             20.   For  these  reasons,   despite   Ms   Patyna's   elegant
             submissions, we find the effect of  section  117C  is  that  a
             court or tribunal,  in  determining  whether  there  are  very
             compelling circumstances, as required by subsection (6),  must
             take into account the seriousness of  the  particular  offence
             for which the foreign criminal was  convicted,  together  with
             any other relevant public interest considerations. Nothing  in
             KO (Nigeria) demands a contrary conclusion."

      7. The wide-ranging evaluative  exercise  required  under  s.  117C(6)
         clearly includes an application of the principles in the Strasbourg
         authorities.   As NA  (Pakistan)  (supra)  holds,  the  s.  117C(6)
         exercise  is  required  to  ensure  compatibility  with  the   UK's
         obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR.  In addition, the judgment
         in NA (Pakistan), given by Jackson LJ, reads:

             "29. ...The phrase used in section 117C (6), in para.  398  of
             the 2014 ... does not mean  that  a  foreign  criminal  facing
             deportation is altogether disentitled from seeking to rely  on
             matters  falling  within  the  scope  of   the   circumstances
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to  contend  that
             'there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2'. ... [A] foreign criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

             30.  In the case of a serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. One might describe that as  a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On  the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute 'very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2',  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8."

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      8. Ms Bexson relied upon her three written  grounds  of  appeal.   FTT
         Judge O'Brien had granted permission to appeal on all grounds in  a
         decision dated 7 August 2019.  I turn to each of the three  grounds
         of appeal in turn, including the submissions made by  both  parties
         at the hearing before me.

Ground 1

      9. Ms Bexson submitted that the FTT was not entitled to find  at  [26]
         that the appellant had been convicted of an  offence  "relating  to
         domestic  violence  against"  B  or  that  their  relationship  was
         "characterised  by  violence  at  times".  In   support   of   that
         submission, Ms Bexson  submitted  that  that  the  FTT  misdirected
         itself regarding the appellant's antecedents  in  2014,  which  she
         claimed involved no violence whatsoever, and  was  limited  to  the
         appellant sending an abusive text message  to  B.   As  Mr  Lindsay
         pointed out at the  hearing,  this  submission  entirely  fails  to
         address material evidence before the FTT including the following:

          i) B's evidence before the FTT, recorded at [14], that she called
             the police because there had been  an  argument  and  she  was
             afraid that the appellant would hurt A, who was a baby at  the
             time;

         ii)  the  antecedent  criminal  history  demonstrates   that   the
             appellant was convicted of three offences on 20 November 2014,
             which all came under the  umbrella  description  of  'domestic
             abuse' - sending threatening  messages,  causing  nuisance  on
             school premises and resisting or obstructing an officer.

     10. Ms Bexson also sought to submit that the  FTT  mistakenly  recorded
         the evidence provided by the appellant and B in this regard.  There
         was no witness statement to support this claim attaching a note  of
         proceedings.  The grounds of appeal make the broad submission  that
         there was no evidence of the appellant being violent toward A or B.
          As Mr Lindsay pointed out, domestic violence  is  not  limited  to
         physical  violence.   The  FTT  was  entitled  to  find  that   the
         relationship was characterised by violence at  times  including  to
         the extent that B was afraid for the safety of A, when he was  just
         a baby.  In  addition,  the  text  messages  were  threatening  and
         abusive, and could be said to be characterised  by  an  element  of
         violence.  Ms Bexson did not seek to reply to this  submission  and
         was unable to  reconcile  her  first  ground  of  appeal  with  the
         evidence I have particularised.

     11. I am also satisfied that the FTT was entitled to find the report of
         the independent social worker ('ISW')  of  limited  value  for  the
         reasons provided at [27] of the decision.  The ISW was only able to
         say that deportation would  deprive  A  of  his  father,  when  the
         appellant's lengthy imprisonment had  already  done  that  and  A's
         parents had taken the decision not to bring  A  to  the  prison  to
         visit his father.

     12. Ground 1 also submits that the FTT  failed  to  consider  A's  best
         interests.  This is not a material error of law because the FTT was
         entitled to find a complete absence of any genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship between the appellant and A.

Ground 2

     13. Ms Bexson submitted that the FTT's conclusion  that  the  appellant
         and B were not in a subsisting relationship  was  contrary  to  the
         "consistent and unequivocal" evidence  that  they  had  been  in  a
         relationship since 2012 and had never separated.   This  submission
         entirely fails to grapple with the appellant's own ISW report dated
         10 December 2018.  This states that B "describes herself as single"
         and refers to B  as  the  appellant's  "ex-partner".   The  witness
         statements are unclear regarding  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
         claimed relationship.  Indeed, the appellant's statement says:  "we
         have been friends since."  B does not provide any detail on how she
         (or B) continue to have a relationship with the appellant  when  he
         has been in prison since being caught fleeing from police  officers
         in possession of a gun in October 2015.   The  ISW  refers  to  the
         appellant as having declined visitors whilst in prison.   In  these
         circumstances, the FTT  was  entitled  to  find  that  B's  witness
         statement "strongly suggests that their  relationship  is  no  more
         than as parents..." and that their live evidence  was  not  trusted
         beyond this.  Although  the  appellant's  father,  step-mother  and
         brother state that the appellant and B have a  close  relationship,
         there has been no attempt to particularise this or  reconcile  this
         with the ISW's report including the evidence that the appellant has
         not been visited in prison.



Ground 3

     14. Mr Lindsay accepted that the FTT failed  to  address  the  critical
         issue in the appeal: whether the appellant could benefit  from  the
         "very compelling circumstances" provision in s. 117C(6) of the 2002
         Act.  This  is  a  surprising  omission  given  the  focus  of  the
         submissions before the FTT and the uncontentious  fact  that  as  a
         foreign criminal who had been  sentenced  to  four  years  or  more
         imprisonment, the appellant could only succeed in his appeal if  he
         met the requirements in s. 117C(6).  In addition, at [38]  the  FTT
         carelessly and erroneously referred to a concession on the part  of
         the appellant regarding Article  8,  when  it  is  clear  from  the
         skeleton argument and the remainder of the decision that Article  8
         was very much relied upon.   Mr  Lindsay  acknowledged  that  these
         failures constitute clear errors of law but submitted that they are
         immaterial because on any legitimate view of the  relevant  factual
         matrix, the appeal was bound to fail under s. 117C(6).

     15. It is regrettable that the  FTT's  decision  was  promulgated  five
         months after the hearing and fails to address the critical issue in
         the appeal.  However, for the  reasons  I  have  already  provided,
         there is no error in law in the factual findings as to the  absence
         of a genuine relationship between the appellant and A and /  or  B.
         In those circumstances, I invited Ms  Bexson  to  explain  how  the
         appeal could possibly succeed under s. 117C(6).  She was only  able
         to emphasise that the appellant has a close relationship  with  his
         extended family in the UK.  This comes nowhere close  to  the  high
         threshold that must be reached, as explained in MS (supra)  and  NA
         (supra).  After all, the appellant has not been visited in  prison,
         and he has been there since late 2015.  He is an adult and did  not
         provide any evidence  of  particular  dependency  on  his  extended
         family members.  Absent some other  very  compelling  reason  based
         upon strong evidence, the FTT's findings regarding Exceptions 1 and
         2 meant that any claim to meet the requirements in s.  117C(6)  was
         hopeless,  and on  any  legitimate  view  would  fail.  After  all,
         Exceptions 1 and 2 were not met by a very large margin indeed.   As
         to Exception 2, there was no genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
         with a qualifying child or partner and it was therefore unnecessary
         to consider whether the  effect  of  deportation  would  be  unduly
         harsh.  As to Exception 1, the appellant fell at the first  hurdle.
         There is nothing compelling about the appellant's relationship with
         extended family members.

     16. I note that there appears to have been an argument before  the  FTT
         (recorded at  [18])  that  the  appellant's  neurological  symptoms
         following a car accident in 2014 explain his offending in 2016, and
         this amounts to very compelling circumstances.  I entirely fail  to
         see how this in itself can amount to very compelling  circumstances
         for the purposes of  s.  117C(6).   At  best  it  might  have  been
         mitigation in relation to the offence itself, but I was  not  taken
         to any evidence that the sentencing judge took this  into  account.
         In any event, that is not a submission  that  was  pursued  in  the
         grounds of appeal or at the hearing before me.  I was not taken  to
         any evidence available to the FTT  that  the  appellant's  symptoms
         could not be treated in Jamaica.

     17. In any event, Mr Lindsay relied upon  MS  (supra)  to  support  his
         submission that s. 117C(6) requires the  Tribunal  to  balance  any
         compelling circumstances with the seriousness of the index offence.
          The offence in this case attracted  a  sentence  significantly  in
         excess of the four year marker, which indicates the seriousness  of
         the offence.

     18. I entirely accept Mr Lindsay's powerful submission that this is one
         of those rare cases in which the FTT's failure  to  deal  with  the
         critical legal issue in the appeal does not give rise to a material
         error of law.  The FTT was entitled to make the factual findings it
         did regarding Exceptions 1 and 2.  When this is considered together
         with  the  remaining  evidence  taken  at  its  highest   and   the
         appellant's very serious criminal  offending,  the  high  threshold
         required by s. 117C(6) could not be met on any legitimate  view  of
         the  evidence.   It  is  noteworthy  that  having   completed   his
         submissions  including  this  particular  submission,   Ms   Bexson
         declined to make any reply whatsoever.



Decision

     19. The FTT's decision does not contain a material error of law and  is
         not set aside.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer   Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer    8 October 2019

