
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/04961/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons          |
|                                          |Promulgated                 |
|On 3 May 2019                             |On 10 May 2019              |
|                                          |                            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               Md ABDUL KAHER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr L Kennedy, advocate, instructed by KC, solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge R E  Barrowclough  promulgated  on  26  October  2018,  which
dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 18 May 1989 and is a  national  of  Bangladesh.
The appellant entered  the  UK  as  a  student  on  27  December  2009.  The
appellant submitted an application for further leave to remain in the UK  on
31 January 2017. The respondent refused that application on 7 February 2018


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  Barrowclough  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  his   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 31 January  2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted permission  to  appeal  stating
inter alia

      "The  Judge  appears  to  have  found  that  the  respondent  had  not
      discharged the burden of proof upon him to show that  the  appellant's
      TOEIC results were obtained fraudulently and therefore at the  end  of
      paragraph 25 he concluded that the appellant's suitability as a reason
      for refusal and exclusion was unjustified  and  illegitimate.   It  is
      possibly arguable that taking that  into  account  together  with  the
      earnings of the appellant's wife and her savings  and  the  fact  that
      their child is British the Judge may have erred in  his  consideration
      of the proportionality of removal."

The Hearing

5. For the respondent, Mr Govan  told  me  that  the  appeal  is  no  longer
resisted. He told me that he could not understand why  the  Judge  dismissed
the appellant's appeal after finding in the appellant's favour  in  relation
to the English  language  test  and  finding  that  article  8  family  life
existed. Mr Govan reminded me that the appellant is the father is a  citizen
child, and agreed that the Judge has not applied the "reasonableness"  test.
Mr Govan agreed that the Judge does not even use the word "reasonable"  when
considering whether or not the  appellant's  British  citizen  child  should
leave the UK.

6. Mr Govan and Mr Kennedy (for the appellant) joined in asking  me  to  set
the  decision  aside  and  to  substitute  my  own  decision  allowing   the
appellant's appeal.

Analysis

7. The  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant's  wife  and  child  are  British
citizens. The Judge finds that article 8 family life  exists.  At  [30]  the
Judge  considers  whether  there   are   very   significant   obstacles   to
reintegration of the appellant's wife  and  child  in  Bangladesh.  That  is
plainly wrong. Paragraph  276  ADE(1)(vi)  requires  consideration  of  very
significant obstacles to the applicant's integration  into  the  country  to
which he would have to go if required to leave the UK. That same  test  does
not apply to the appellant's wife and child.

8. The appellant's child is  a  qualifying  child.  The  Judge  should  have
considered S.117B(6) of the 2002  Act.   In  JG  (S117B(6):  "reasonable  to
leave the UK") Turkey (Rev 1) [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC) it was held that  Section
117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  requires  a
court or tribunal to hypothesise that the child in question would leave  the
United Kingdom, even if this is not likely to be the case, and  ask  whether
it would be reasonable to expect the child to do so.

9. In SSHD v AB (Jamaica) and Anor [2019] EWCA Civ 661, the Court of  Appeal
further  considered  the  interpretation   of   section   117B(6)   of   the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The  Court  of  Appeal  agreed
with the interpretation of s.117B(6)(b)  given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
both, JG v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] UKUT 00072  and
SR (Subsisting  Parental  Relationship  -  s117B(6))  Pakistan  [2018]  UKUT
00334. The Court of Appeal made it clear that the

      "... position has now been reached in which this  Court  is  not  only
      free to depart from the approach taken by Laws LJ in MM  (Uganda)  but
      indeed is required to do so in order to follow the binding decision of
      the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)."

10. The Judge applied the wrong test in considering  the  interests  of  the
qualifying child. The single question that has to be  answered  in  relation
to the appellant's child is

      "... is it reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK?"

11. The Judge neither asked nor answered that question. The  Judge  did  not
make findings driving at consideration of section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act.
That is a material error of law. I set the decision  aside.  I  am  able  to
substitute my own decision.

The Facts

12. The appellant entered the UK as a  student  at  27  December  2009.  The
respondent extended the appellant's leave to remain as a student  until  his
leave to remain was curtailed on 27 July 2014  (when  the  licence  for  the
College at which he was enrolled was revoked).

13. On 9  October  2014  the  appellant  married  a  British  citizen  in  a
religious ceremony. The marriage was registered in  the  UK  on  27  October
2014. The appellant and his wife have one child, born on 8 April  2017.  The
appellant,  his  wife  and  their  child  continue  to  live  together.  The
appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife  and  with
his child.

14.  In the final sentence of [25] the  Judge  (correctly)  finds  that  the
appellant meets the suitability requirements of the  immigration  rules  and
that the respondent fails to establish that the appellant has cheated in  an
English language test. The Judge's findings of fact indicate that the  Judge
accepts that article 8 family life exists.

15. The appellant submitted an application for leave to remain in the UK  as
the spouse of his British citizen wife  on  the  on  31  January  2017.  The
respondent refused that application on 7 February 2018. It is  against  that
decision that the appellant appeals.  The  respondent's  decision  does  not
consider the appellant's article 8 rights and takes no account of  the  fact
that the appellant's wife and child are British citizens.

The Immigration Rules

16. Because of the length of time the appellant has lived in the UK and  his
age, he cannot meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)  to  (v)  of
the rules. There is no evidence to suggest that there are  very  significant
obstacles to the appellant's re-integration in Bangladesh.

17. The appellant's leave as a  tier  4  student  ended  on  27  July  2014.
Paragraph 39E of the immigration rules do not apply to  the  appellant.  990
days passed between curtailment of the appellant's tier 4 student leave  and
submission of his application for leave  to  remain.  The  appellant  cannot
meet paragraph e-LTRP 2.2 of the immigration rules. The appellant  does  not
produce evidence to show that he meets the  financial  requirements  of  the
immigration rules.  The  result  is  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
eligibility requirements of appendix FM.

18. The failure to meet the eligibility requirements is not the end  of  the
matter. Paragraph EX.1 must be considered. Paragraph EX.1 says
   'EX.1. This paragraph applies if
        (a) (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship with a child who-
                    (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the  age
                    of 18 years when the applicant was first  granted  leave
                    on the basis that this paragraph applied;
                    (bb) is in the UK;
                    (cc) is a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                    continuously  for  at  least  the  7  years  immediately
                    preceding the date of application; and
              (ii) taking into account their best interests  as  a  primary
              consideration, it would not be reasonable to expect the child
              to leave the UK; or
        (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
        partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
        UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
        there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
        continuing outside the UK.
   EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable  obstacles"
   means the very significant difficulties  which  would  be  faced  by  the
   applicant or their partner  in  continuing  their  family  life  together
   outside the UK and which could not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very
   serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.'
19. The appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a  British
citizen child and with his British citizen wife. The focus in this  case  is
clearly  on  the  appellant's  British  citizen  child.  The   determinative
question is whether or not it is reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave
the UK. The same test can be found in section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act,  so
that it doesn't really matter whether article 8  is  considered  within  the
rules or outside the rules. The test remains the same.

Article 8 ECHR

20. What is beyond dispute is  that  the  appellant's  wife  and  child  are
British citizens.   On the facts as I find them to be, the appellant  has  a
genuine and subsisting relationship with two  British  citizens.  Article  8
family life exists for the appellant.

21. The respondent's IDIs on Family Migration (Paragraph 11.2.3) deals  with
British children. The  August  2015  version  states  that,  save  in  cases
involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not  take  a  decision  in
relation to the parent or primary carer of a  British  Citizen  child  where
the effect of that decision would be to force that British  child  to  leave
the EU, regardless of the age of that child. However, it  also  states  that
"where a decision to refuse  the  application  would  require  a  parent  or
primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the  case  must  always
be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect  a  British
Citizen child to leave the EU  with  that  parent  or  primary  carer".  The
section goes on to address the grant of leave to the parent indicating  that
it may not be appropriate if there is no satisfactory evidence of a  genuine
and subsisting parental relationship or where the conduct of the  parent  or
primary carer gives rise to considerations of  such  weight  as  to  justify
separation but none of that gets round the  unequivocal  statement  that  it
would always be unreasonable to expect a British child to leave the EU.

22. The Upper Tribunal in SF and others (Guidance,  post-2014  Act)  Albania
[2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC) held, considering this guidance  that  even  in  the
absence of a "not  in  accordance  with  the  law"  ground  of  appeal,  the
Tribunal ought to take the Secretary of State's guidance into account if  it
points clearly to a particular outcome in the instant case.   Only  in  that
way can consistency be obtained between  those  cases  that  do,  and  those
cases that do not, come before the Tribunal

23.   The respondent's guidance February 2018  suggests  that  the  test  is
whether the child would be likely to leave rather than actually be  required
to leave. In JG (S117B(6): "reasonable to leave  the  UK")  Turkey  (Rev  1)
[2019] UKUT 72 (IAC) it was held that Section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 requires a court or tribunal to  hypothesise
that the child in question would leave the United Kingdom, even if  this  is
not likely to be the case, and ask whether it would be reasonable to  expect
the child to do so.

 24. It is now accepted by the Home Office that  it  is  not  reasonable  to
expect the appellant's child to leave the UK. The appellant therefore  meets
the requirements of EX.1, and so meets the requirements of  the  immigration
rules. In addition the statutory test set out in section 117B  of  the  2002
Act is met.

25.  On the  facts  as  I  find  them  to  be,  family  life  exists.   The
respondent's decision is an interference with that family life. The  burden
therefore shifts to the  respondent  to  show  that  the  interference  was
justified. The respondent relied solely on the public interest in effective
immigration control, but now concedes that this appeal should be allowed on
article 8 ECHR  grounds  because  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of  the
appellant's child and the appellant's spouse that they (and the  appellant)
should remain in the UK, and because it is not  reasonable  to  expect  the
child to leave the UK.

26.    Section 117B(6)(a) weighs in favour of the appellant because  he  has
a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  his  qualifying  child.
It is Section 117B(6)(b) which is determinative of this case.

27.  I  have  already  found  that  it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
appellant's child to leave the UK.  Adhering to the interpretation given  to
s.117B(6) in MA (Pakistan) and in JG (S117B(6):  "reasonable  to  leave  the
UK") Turkey (Rev 1) [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC) I find that the appellant  succeeds
under section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

28.  I  remind  myself  of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009. In ZH  (Tanzania)  (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011]  UKSC  4  Lady  Hale  said
that "Although nationality is  not  a  "trump  card"  it  is  of  particular
importance in assessing the best interests of any child".

29.  In R (on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  it  was
confirmed that if section 117B(6) applies then "there can be no  doubt  that
section 117B(6) must be read as a  self-contained  provision  in  the  sense
that Parliament has stipulated that where the conditions  specified  in  the
sub-section are satisfied, the public interest will not justify removal."

30. Because the simple wording of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act,  endorsed
in MA (Pakistan), weighs in the appellant's favour, I find that  the  public
interest does not justify removal. That finding leads me to  the  conclusion
that the respondent's decision is a disproportionate interference  with  the
right to respect for article 8 family life.

31. The respondent's guidance says that it is  unreasonable  to  expect  the
appellant's  child  to  leave  the  UK.  Family  life  exists  between   the
appellant, his wife and their child.  The respondent's  decision  interferes
with article 8 family life. The respondent's  own  guidance  indicates  that
the interference is disproportionate.

32. In Kaur (children's best interests / public interest  interface)  [2017]
UKUT 14 (IAC) it was held that the "little weight" provisions in Part 5A  of
the 2002 Act do not  entail  an  absolute,  rigid  measurement  or  concept;
"little  weight"  involves  a  spectrum  which,  within  its  self-contained
boundaries, will  result  in  the  measurement  of  the  quantum  of  weight
considered appropriate in the fact sensitive context of every case.

33. Even when  I  give  little  weight  to  the  relationship  between  the
appellant, his  wife  and  their  child,  the  relationship  still  carries
sufficient weight because the article 8 family life that is established  is
not limited to the relationship between the appellant  and  his  wife.  The
article 8 family life established encompasses  the  interests  of  a  young
British child.

34.  I find that this appeal succeeds  on  article  8  ECHR  (family  life)
grounds.

Decision

 The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 26 October  2018  is
tainted by material errors of law and is set aside.

 I substitute my own decision

 The appeal is allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed
               Date 8 May 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle









