
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04100/2015
                                                               HU/04101/2015
                                                               HU/04102/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th June 2017                             |On 10th July 2017             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                          SHOTNA B - 1st Appellant
                             NF - 2nd Appellant
                             MAH - 3rd Appellant
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Karim of counsel
For the Respondent: Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

   1. The Appellants are all citizens of Bangladesh.  The  first  Appellant
      (who I shall refer to as the Appellant) was born on [ ] 1979  and  is
      the mother of the 2nd and 3rd Appellants who were born on  [  ]  2001
      and [ ] 2005 respectively. They appealed against a  decision  of  the
      Respondent dated 30th of July 2015 to refuse  them  leave  to  remain
      pursuant to Appendix FM and paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  Immigration
      Rules. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Cameron  sitting  at  Taylor
      House on 21st of July 2016 allowed their  appeals.  For  the  reasons
      which I gave in my determination dated 25th of April  2017,  I  found
      material errors of law in that determination  and  overturned  it.  I
      have  reheard  the  appeals  and  now  give  my  decision   in   this
      determination. A copy of my previous determination finding  an  error
      of law is attached to this determination.

The Appellant's Case

   2. The Appellant came  to  the  United  Kingdom  with  her  husband  and
      children on a visitor's visa on 13th of September 2008 and overstayed
      thereafter. She separated from her husband in 2010 but did not return
      to Bangladesh as her husband had made the decision for the family  to
      stay, she had nowhere to go in Bangladesh and the children wished  to
      stay in this country. Her parents-in-law live in Bangladesh  and  she
      has a sister who lives there but neither her sister nor her  parents-
      in-law would be able to look after her if  she  returned  there.  The
      Appellant's parents were currently in London living with her brother.
      The Appellant had a number of other family members in  this  country.
      She was supported by her family and friends who would give  her  food
      and clothes. She also worked unlawfully. Her son  the  3rd  Appellant
      received free school meals from the London Borough of Tower  Hamlets.
      The children understood a little Bengali but otherwise spoke English.
      They are both doing well at school. Her daughter is now 16 years  old
      and her son is now 12 years  old.  They  have  lived  in  the  United
      Kingdom for 9 years. They do not wish to return  to  Bangladesh.  The
      Appellant's husband passed away last year. Her first cousin  Mr  Miah
      had been providing free accommodation to her and the  children  since
      September 2016.


      The Written Evidence Relied Upon


   3. In addition to the bundle which was before  the  First-tier  tribunal
      which included  a  witness  statement  of  the  Appellant  and  birth
      certificates and education documents for the  other  Appellants,  the
      Appellant relied for the hearing before me on  an  additional  bundle
      which  comprised  a  further  witness  statement  of  the  Appellant,
      documentation regarding her cousin Mr  Miah  including  a  letter  of
      support from him, a letter of  support  from  other  individuals  and
      further documents in relation to the children's education.


      The Hearing Before Me


   4. At the outset of the hearing before me counsel indicated that he  was
      not proposing to call the Appellant to give evidence. I queried  this
      in the light  of  the  fact  that  I  had  indicated  in  my  earlier
      determination finding material errors of law that  whilst  there  was
      not a substantial degree of fact finding to be carried  out  at  this
      hearing, an explanation was  needed  as  to  the  Appellant's  living
      conditions. What I had referred to at paragraph 14 was  the  apparent
      coincidence that the Appellant had brought herself to  the  attention
      of the authorities once the two children had been here for  7  years.
      Counsel in response indicated that he did  not  intend  to  call  the
      Appellant to give evidence.


   5. Counsel relied on his skeleton argument which quoted at  some  length
      from the Immigration Rules, section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
      and Immigration Act 2009 and the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum
      Act 2002. The skeleton argument indicated that there were two  issues
      to be resolved. The first was whether it was reasonable to expect the
      minor Appellants to relocate and the second was  whether  as  a  lone
      woman with 2 children returning to  Bangladesh  the  Appellant  would
      face societal difficulties.


   6. In relation to the first issue it was submitted very weighty  reasons
      were needed to justify separating a child from a community  in  which
      they had grown up and lived for most  of  their  life.  Although  the
      family  would  be  removed  together  the  Appellants  had  a  strong
      attachment to the UK. Residence of over 7 years  with  children  well
      integrated into the educational system indicated that the welfare  of
      the children favoured regularisation of their status.  7  years  from
      age four was likely to be more significant than a child in the  first
      7 years of life. The only negative factor against the  Appellant  was
      the overstaying. The 2nd Appellant was at a crucial stage of her life
      namely midway through her GCSEs. The case of  EV  Philippines  [2014]
      EWCA Civ 874 could be distinguished because the children in that case
      had been in United Kingdom for less  than  4  years.  The  length  of
      residence, academic  progress,  ties,  friends,  extracurricular  and
      other social activities meant that the removal of the of the children
      in this case was unreasonable.


   7. On the second point the Appellant did not have close  male  relatives
      in Bangladesh. As a single woman returning without any family support
      it would be against her welfare and that of the children  to  return.
      The skeleton argument quoted from a country guidance  case  on  women
      who are the victims of domestic violence which appears not to be  the
      situation in this case. The education the children had  received  was
      not deemed  to  be  a  public  fund  according  to  the  Respondent's
      guidance. It could  not  be  in  the  children's  best  interests  to
      relocate to Bangladesh. The appeals should be allowed.


   8. In oral submissions counsel  reiterated  much  of  what  was  in  the
      skeleton argument and said that the children should not be  penalised
      for the decision of their father to stay in this country. It would be
      wholly unreasonable for these children to relocate to a country  from
      where they had been absent for 9 years. The  Respondent  argued  that
      the fact that the children had been here for more than  7  years  and
      were thus qualifying children was a consideration but it  was  to  be
      balanced against the public interest. The children had been in United
      Kingdom receiving education but it was reasonable to expect  them  to
      relocate to their country of origin. The children both spoke  Bengali
      and there was no good reason why family life could  not  continue  in
      Bangladesh with support from family members settled here.

Findings

   9. The first issue I have to decide is whether any of the Appellants can
      come within the Immigration Rules. Paragraph 276  ADE  sets  out  the
      requirements to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain  on  the
      grounds of their private life. Where an applicant is under the age of
      18 years as are the 2nd and 3rd Appellants, the test  is  whether  it
      would or would not be reasonable to  expect  that  the  Appellant  to
      leave the United Kingdom. For those aged 18 years or  above  (as  the
      Appellant is in this case) but who has lived continuously in  the  in
      the United Kingdom for less than 20 years (she has lived here  for  9
      years) until 28 July 2014 she would have had to show she had no  ties
      including social cultural family with Bangladesh. After that date the
      paragraph was amended and the test now in force is that  there  would
      be very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into the
      country to which they would have to  go  if  required  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom.


  10. Given that the Appellant speaks Bengali and has at least  one  family
      member on her own admission in Bangladesh, it is difficult to see how
      the Appellant could have satisfied the earlier test  in  relation  to
      her private life. I deal in more detail later on with her claim  that
      there would be very significant obstacles to her  reintegration  into
      Bangladesh society because  of  her  status  as  a  lone  female.  In
      relation to the children the test is  whether  or  not  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect them to leave the United Kingdom. This same test
      reappears in section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act if one is assessing the
      claim under Article 8 but outside the Immigration Rules.


  11. In effect this is a decision on proportionality. To that end  I  must
      first assess what is the best interests  of  the  children  and  then
      weigh that in the scales with all the other relevant factors such  as
      the countervailing argument  on  the  Respondent's  side  that  great
      weight should be given to  the  Appellant's  immigration  history.  I
      accept the evidence as the Judge at first instance accepted that  the
      children  are  well  established  at  school  and  are   doing   well
      academically. Although  their  command  of  Bengali  is  said  to  be
      limited, I see no reason why their knowledge of that  language  would
      not improve upon return. The educational system in Bangladesh may  or
      may not be superior to that of the educational system in this country
      but I do not consider that to be a  particularly  significant  factor
      since the children would be  able  to  continue  their  education  in
      Bangladesh no doubt building on  benefits  they  have  received  from
      education in this country.


  12. The children's wishes as expressed by the Appellant are to remain  in
      this country. That is hardly surprising as they have  no  doubt  made
      friends at their school and they have relatives living  here.  It  is
      not however clear to me what the Appellant has said to  her  children
      about life in Bangladesh. She did not give evidence before me  to  be
      questioned on that point but I see no reason  why  the  children  who
      have evidently adapted to a way of life in this country different  to
      what they knew in Bangladesh could not equally readapt back  to  life
      in their country of origin. This is not a case of children  who  were
      born in the United Kingdom and have never seen the country  of  which
      they are citizens.


  13. The proportionality exercise in this case in relation to the children
      comes  down  to  the  weighing  of  two  different  factors.  On  the
      children's side is the fact that they have been here for more than  7
      years and therefore very significant reasons must be given  why  they
      should be expected to leave this country. In other words, there  must
      be very significant weight on the Respondent's side of the scales  to
      outweigh what is very significant weight on the Appellant's side.  On
      the Respondent's side is the argument that  the  private  and  family
      life built up by the Appellant and the children in this  country  has
      been built up whilst there has been no leave.


  14. The Respondent relies on the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  the
      case of Rajendran [2016] UKUT 138.  This  decision  established  that
      precariousness was a criterion of relevance to family life as well as
      private life cases. Although the little weight provisions of  section
      117B (4) and (5) were confined to private life claims established  by
      person at a time  when  their  immigration  status  was  unlawful  or
      precarious, this did not mean that when answering the public interest
      question a court or tribunal should disregard precarious family  life
      criteria. This  analysis  was  reinforced  by  the  Court  of  Appeal
      decision in MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705. That  case  reminds  the
      tribunal that where a child has been here for 7 years that fact  must
      be given significant weight when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
      exercise. Further it was submitted to me that the longer the children
      stayed in this country beyond the 7-year mark, the greater the weight
      that should be given to their private and family lives here.


  15. However, MA Pakistan is important for  one  further  matter  which  I
      alluded to in my decision finding an error of law. What  is  required
      in assessing reasonableness is a balancing exercise of  all  relevant
      factors taking a holistic approach. It is not the case that  a  child
      is a trump card and it is not the case that merely  because  a  child
      has been here for more than 7 years and is thus  a  qualifying  child
      that that should carry significant weight but no other  factor  will.
      What is of significance and must be given appropriate weight  is  the
      fact that the children have built up their private and  family  lives
      as has the Appellant at a time when they did not have status here. It
      is difficult to get to the bottom of how that  situation  has  arisen
      again in part because the Appellant would not give evidence in  front
      of me. The Appellant claims that she overstayed because  of  she  was
      acting under the instructions of her husband. Yet on her own case she
      separated from him in 2010 at a time when the family  had  only  been
      here for 2 years. Although there were  letters  of  support  for  the
      Appellant none  of  the  makers  of  those  letters  made  themselves
      available to be questioned by the  Tribunal.  It  was  not  therefore
      possible to establish that the Appellant had continued to  evade  the
      authorities and live under the radar because she  was  continuing  to
      act under the instructions of her husband or because  she  was  aware
      that it was not until the passage of 7 years' residence here that her
      immigration position and that of the children would be  significantly
      strengthened.
  16. The Appellant seeks to address this point in her most recent  witness
      statement where she said she had  no  knowledge  of  the  immigration
      system until she met her solicitors in 2015. The difficulty with this
      argument is that a number of members of the Appellant's  family  with
      whom she has been in regular contact throughout had direct experience
      of the immigration law system in this  country  and  would  therefore
      been in a position to advise the Appellant on her immigration status.
      As  I  have  indicated  this  matter  could   not   be   investigated
      notwithstanding that I raised with  counsel  at  the  outset  of  the
      hearing that it was  a  matter  I  was  concerned  about.  I  am  not
      satisfied with the answer given  by  the  Appellant  in  her  witness
      statement. On reflection, I find it difficult to find that  it  is  a
      coincidence that the Appellant brought herself to  the  attention  of
      the authorities once the children  had  been  here  for  7  years.  I
      consider that both the Appellant  and  her  husband  have  sought  to
      manipulate the immigration system for their own benefit and  that  of
      the children.


  17. The Appellant's skeleton argument seeks to brush aside what is on the
      Respondent's side of the scales by saying it is  overstaying  by  the
      Appellant. Had the Appellant been here lawfully for 9 years I  accept
      that there would have been very little weight to  be  placed  on  the
      Respondent's side of the scales but that is not  the  position  here.
      The Appellant evaded the attention  of  the  immigration  authorities
      whilst incurring public expenditure on the children's education.  The
      Appellant's argument in response to  that  last  point  is  that  the
      Respondent's guidelines do not consider  public  education  to  be  a
      reliance on public funds.


  18. I do not accept that argument. Firstly, those guidelines do not  have
      the force of law and secondly, I am bound  by  the  Court  of  Appeal
      decision in EV Philippines. Whilst it is  correct  to  say  that  the
      children in that case had not been in the United Kingdom as  long  as
      the children in this case had been, the general principle  that  this
      country is not under an obligation to educate the world is valid  for
      all cases. At a time when educational budgets are severely  stretched
      it is not reasonable to impose an added burden on  local  authorities
      caused by an individual (that is the parent) who has no right  to  be
      in this country. If the presence of children in  this  country  is  a
      trump card, then the public interest considerations  are  outweighed.
      However, that is not what the existing  jurisprudence  on  Article  8
      suggests. This is not a case of visiting the sins of the parents upon
      the children. This is a case of balancing the public interest against
      the best interests of the children (and taking into account all other
      relevant factors) when making a proportionality  decision  within  or
      outside the Immigration Rules.


  19. As I have indicated if the children had been  born  in  this  country
      (and thus would be approaching a  stage  where  they  can  apply  for
      British  citizenship)  or  if  their  status  here  had  been  lawful
      throughout the public interest in their removal would be considerably
      reduced but that is not  the  situation  here.  In  my  view,  it  is
      reasonable to expect these children  to  return  to  Bangladesh  with
      their mother.


  20. I do not accept the argument that the Appellant would be returning to
      Bangladesh without any support. She claims to have  generous  support
      from her family and others and I see no reason why  they  should  not
      continue to support her upon return. They do not say in their letters
      of support that they will stop their support  upon  her  return.  The
      Appellant is a widow  and  while  there  is  background  material  to
      indicate  that  single  women  including  widows   would   experience
      difficulty  accessing  services,  this  relates  primarily  to  those
      without support. This Appellant  is  not  without  support  from  her
      family. Her position can  be  contrasted  with  victims  of  domestic
      violence who would face such societal discrimination as to  interfere
      with their rights under Articles 3 or 8. The Appellant separated from
      her husband but his death recently means that she can  explain  quite
      truthfully why she is a single woman, because she  is  a  widow.  The
      Appellant's evidence on what family she still has in  Bangladesh  was
      vague but it appears to be accepted that she has at least  one  close
      relative there. I do not consider therefore that  the  Appellant  can
      show there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  her  returning  to
      Bangladesh with the children nor can she show that it is unreasonable
      to expect the children to leave the  United  Kingdom  with  her.  The
      Appellants do not come within the provisions of Section  EX1(a)  (ii)
      to Appendix FM for the reasons I have given.


  21.  Having rejected the appeal under the Immigration Rules I must go  on
      to consider the matter outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8.
      I adopt the step-by-step approach required  by  the  House  of  Lords
      decision in Razgar [2004] UK HL  27.  The  three  Appellants  have  a
      family life together in this country and they  have  each  a  private
      life. Their family life can be continued elsewhere in  Bangladesh  as
      they will be returned as a family  unit  and  I  do  not  accept  the
      arguments put forward as to why they would face difficulties in  that
      regard.  It  might  be  argued  that  there  would  be  a   loss   of
      communication with family members and other supporters.  I  can  only
      repeat that those people did not come along to court to give evidence
      to be questioned about that and the weight  that  I  can  ascribe  to
      their written statements untested in cross examination is a necessity
      somewhat limited. I accept that they would like the Appellant and the
      children to remain in this country and that they  would  support  the
      Appellant and the children if the three Appellants  were  allowed  to
      remain but I do not find their evidence supports the contention  that
      the Appellants must remain in this country or that there would  be  a
      lack of support from these people once the Appellant had returned.


  22. The removal of  the  Appellants  would  be  in  accordance  with  the
      legitimate aim of immigration control because there has been  a  very
      substantial evasion of immigration control in this case.  As  I  have
      indicated the Appellant seeks  to  minimise  her  overstaying  but  I
      consider that it was more premeditated than she is prepared to admit.
      The question under the Razgar principles is whether the  interference
      in the Appellants' private lives and  family  life  caused  by  their
      removal to Bangladesh is proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued.
      I adopt the reasons that I have given earlier when  finding  that  it
      was reasonable to expect the children to return to  Bangladesh  since
      for all practical purposes the wording of the Immigration Rule is the
      same as the wording of section 117B (6) in the 2002 Act. Such private
      and family life as the Appellants have built up in this  country  has
      been built up whilst their immigration status here was precarious and
      as the Upper Tribunal  indicated  in  Rajendran,  that  is  of  great
      significance. For the reasons which I have given above  and  which  I
      repeat here I find that the Respondent's decision to refuse to  grant
      leave to remain to the Appellants  is  a  proportionate  interference
      with the private and family lives  built  up  by  the  Appellants.  I
      therefore dismiss the appeal under both the Immigration Rules and the
      Human Rights Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. I remake the decision  by  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeals under the Immigration Rules and  the  Human  Rights
    Convention against the decisions of the Respondent.

The Appellants' appeals are dismissed.

I make no anonymity order in relation  to  the  Appellant  as  there  is  no
    public policy reason for so doing. There will be an anonymity order  in
    relation to the 2nd and 3rd Appellants.


Signed this 7th day of July 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was allowed at first instance and I have  dismissed  the  appeal  and
therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 7th day of July 2017

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU041002015
                                                                 HU041012015
                                                                 HU041022015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 11th of April 2017                  |                              |
|Prepared on 21st of April 2017               |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                          SHOTNA B - 1st Appellant
                             NF - 2nd Appellant
                             MAH - 3rd Appellant
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Miah, Solicitor
For the Respondent: Mr P Armstrong  , Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

   1. The Appellants are all citizens of Bangladesh.  The  first  Appellant
      (who I shall refer to as the Appellant) was born on 20th of  February
      1979 and is the mother of the 2nd and 3rd Appellants who were born on
      30th of January 2001 and 2nd  of  February  2005  respectively.  They
      appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 30th of July 2015
      to refuse them leave to remain pursuant to Appendix FM and  paragraph
      276 ADE of the Immigration Rules. Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Cameron sitting at Taylor House on 21st of July  2016  allowed  their
      appeals and this matter comes before me as an onward  appeal  by  the
      Respondent against that decision. For the sake of convenience however
      I shall continue to refer to the parties as they were known at  first
      instance.

The Appellant's Case

   2. The Appellant came  to  the  United  Kingdom  with  her  husband  and
      children on a visitor's visa on 13th of September 2008 and overstayed
      thereafter. She separated from her husband in 2010 but did not return
      to Bangladesh as her husband had made the decision for the family  to
      stay, she had nowhere to go in Bangladesh and the children wished  to
      stay in this country. Her parents-in-law live in Bangladesh  and  she
      has a sister who lives there but neither her sister nor her  parents-
      in-law would be able to look after her if  she  returned  there.  The
      Appellant's parents were currently in London living with her brother.
      The Appellant had a number of other family members in  this  country.
      She was supported by her family and friends who would give  her  food
      and clothes. Her son the 3rd Appellant  received  free  school  meals
      from the London Borough of Tower Hamlets. The children  understood  a
      little Bengali but otherwise spoke English.

The Decision at First Instance

   3. The Judge found that both children had been in the United Kingdom  in
      excess of 7 years and it was not reasonable to expect either of  them
      to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  see  paragraph  276  ADE  (iv).  The
      Appellant had used her brother's address as a care of address and for
      the purposes of obtaining school places for  her  children.  However,
      the Appellant had told the Judge that she could  not  live  with  her
      brother. The Appellant's evidence as to how she supported herself  in
      the family was described at paragraph  67  of  the  determination  as
      "somewhat confusing". The Judge found that it would not be reasonable
      to expect the Appellant to return to her  in-laws  in  Bangladesh  or
      expect them to support the family upon return. The Appellant and  her
      children had established a family life together and had a substantial
      private life. The children could undertake  education  in  Bangladesh
      but there would be a  disruption  to  it  in  the  case  of  the  2nd
      Appellant less so in the case of the 3rd  Appellant.  The  children's
      connections to Bangladesh had weakened over the period they have been
      in this country. At paragraph 89 the Judge wrote that  he  had  taken
      into account the fact that the Appellant did not have leave to remain
      and overstayed  her  visit  visa  as  a  result  of  the  Appellant's
      husband's  decision.  He  found   the   Respondent's   decision   was
      disproportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  pursued  and  allowed  the
      appeals.


The Onward Appeal

   4. In her grounds of  onward  appeal  the  Respondent  argued  that  any
      assessment of the reasonableness of expecting children to  return  to
      their country of origin should be two sided. The Tribunal had  simply
      listed features in favour of not removing the children to  Bangladesh
      but not taken account  on  the  other  side  of  the  scales  of  the
      children's nationality, their familiarity  with  Bangladeshi  culture
      through their family and social connections, their  language  ability
      and their good health. There was no reason why the children could not
      settle back into Bangladesh after a brief period of readjustment.


   5. The Judge's assessment should also have included an understanding  of
      how the children came to be in their current situation. The timing of
      the applications under the Rules were the  result  of  a  familiarity
      with immigration procedures. The children's  immigration  status  was
      kept deliberately uncertain with the possible intention of maximising
      the abuse of procedures. The Appellant's appeal was on  the  back  of
      the children's cases and thus stood or fell with them. The Article  8
      assessment carried out by the Judge did not have due  regard  to  the
      public interest as expressed by matters such as language ability  and
      the absence of any financial independence. MA  Pakistan  [2016]  EWCA
      Civ 705 required inclusion of the adverse immigration history as part
      of the balancing exercise. Paragraph 89  of the determination  simply
      noted this rather than acted on it.


   6. The application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  refused  at  first
      instance by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew who said that the
      grounds were essentially a disagreement  with  the  findings  of  the
      Judge which were open to him on the evidence.  The  Judge  had  taken
      note of the heritage of the Appellants  and  their  connections  with
      Bangladesh as well as having regard to the public interest.


   7. This led the Respondent to renew her application  for  permission  to
      appeal. The renewed grounds added one further point by relying on the
      Court of Appeal decision of Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803.  This  held
      that the requirement that little weight should be given to a  private
      life established at a time when a  person's  immigration  status  was
      precarious might be overridden where the private life in question had
      a  special  and  compelling  character.   In  order  to  justify   an
      exceptional case compelling reasons  would  have  to  be  shown.  The
      grounds argued that the Judge's decision was contrary to section 117B
      (2) and (3) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  It
      was in the public interest for a person to be able to  speak  English
      and be financially independent. In this  case  the  absence  of  such
      factors should weigh against the Appellants.


   8. The renewed application came before Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on the
      21st of February 2017. In granting permission to appeal he found that
      the Respondent's grounds disclosed an arguable error of law.  It  was
      arguable that the Judge failed to take into account  sufficiently  or
      at all the public interest when carrying out the  balancing  exercise
      and reaching his findings on reasonableness, contrary to MA Pakistan.
      The Judge also failed to take into account the public interest as set
      out in section 117B (2) and (3) of the 2002 Act given the Appellant's
      language and financial position. The materiality of an error would be
      an issue for the Upper Tribunal. There was no Rule 24  response  from
      the Appellant.

The Hearing Before Me

   9. For the Respondent, it  was  argued  that  the  first  error  in  the
      determination was the  Judge's  misinterpretation  of  reasonableness
      within the Immigration Rules. Following MA Pakistan  the  immigration
      history of the parents was relevant. The mother's visa had expired on
      13 December 2008 and yet no application for regularisation  was  made
      until 7 years later in May  2015.  This  was  a  blatant  attempt  to
      circumvent  the  rules.  The  Judge  had  failed  to   consider   the
      immigration status of  the  parties  when  conducting  the  balancing
      exercise. There was nothing  exceptional  about  this  case  that  it
      should be allowed outside the Immigration Rules. Whilst the  children
      might be being educated in  this  country,  following  the  Court  of
      Appeal dicta in EV Philippines,  the  United  Kingdom  could  not  be
      expected to educate the world. The family were still being  paid  for
      by the British taxpayer. The Appellant would have been aware of  what
      she needed to do to regularise her status but did not  do  so.  There
      was little evidence about her in-laws and in any event the  Appellant
      had a sister in Bangladesh. The Appellant did not speak English  well
      which would restrict her ability to work.


  10. For the Appellant, it was argued that if the Upper Tribunal  were  to
      find a material error of law in  the  First-tier  decision  the  case
      should be heard de novo  at  the  First-tier  but  with  the  Judge's
      findings of fact preserved. Whilst it was correct  that  one  of  the
      children was receiving free school meals that was because it was  the
      policy of the London Borough of  Tower  Hamlets  not  to  means  test
      school meals, every child had a free meal.


  11. The Tribunal, it was submitted had taken all  relevant  matters  into
      account. At paragraph  8  the  Judge  had  set  out  the  Appellant's
      immigration history. There was no requirement for  the  Judge  to  go
      beyond what was already said. The Judge had  given  the  Respondent's
      case a fair hearing. At paragraph 89 the Judge made it clear that  he
      had considered the fact that the Appellant  did  not  have  leave  to
      remain and overstayed, the Judge was not required  to  go  into  more
      detail than that. The Judge had also considered whether or not  there
      was anyone else  the  Appellant  could  return  to.  The  Appellant's
      grandmother had passed away and there were no other  family  members.
      The Respondent in her grounds of onward appeal was  disagreeing  with
      the  Judge's  findings  of  fact  that  for  example  the  sister  in
      Bangladesh or her in-laws were unable to support the Appellant.


  12. At paragraphs 75 to 77 the Judge dealt with the best interests of the
      children and the disruption they would face if  returned.  The  Judge
      was well aware of the children's heritage. The Respondent was arguing
      that the Appellant should have brought herself to  the  attention  of
      the authorities but the authority of MA Pakistan did not say that the
      7-years residence must be lawful  continuous  residence  before  very
      strong reasons were required to remove children who  have  been  here
      for that time. EV Philippines could be distinguished from the present
      case. In that case  the  application  was  made  2  years  after  the
      children had arrived whereas  here  the  children  had  been  in  the
      country for more than 7 years. In looking at the case under Article 8
      a holistic approach had to be taken. The case  of  Ruppiah  could  be
      distinguished. The Judge had correctly balanced the  public  interest
      against the claims made by  the  Appellants  and  had  arrived  at  a
      finding open to him.  It  was  not  surprising  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal had refused to grant permission to the  Respondent  in  this
      case.

Findings


  13. As Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb pointed out the crucial issue  in  this
      case was whether it was reasonable to expect the two child Appellants
      to leave the United Kingdom and return to  Bangladesh.  In  order  to
      carry out a proper assessment of reasonableness the Judge  needed  to
      take into account all relevant factors and to be able to explain  the
      reason for the decision such that the losing party could see why they
      had lost. The Judge  needed  at  least  to  have  set  out  the  more
      important points briefly or otherwise which weighed in  the  balance.
      The difficulty in this case is that it is not at all clear  what  the
      Judge has taken into account on the Respondent's side of the  scales.
      This was a family with a poor immigration history. Even if the  Judge
      were  minded  to  reject  the  submission  that  the  Appellant   had
      manipulated the position (by waiting 7 years before  drawing  herself
      to the attention of the authorities) there  had  been  a  substantial
      breach of immigration control by reason of the very long period  that
      the Appellant had lived in this country unlawfully.


  14. During that time both children had  had  access  to  the  educational
      system and thus were a burden to the public purse. That too  was  not
      taken into  account  by  the  Judge.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the
      Appellant overstayed because of the instructions of her  husband  but
      as the Respondent pointed out in the onward grounds of appeal many of
      the  Appellant's  family  had  migrated  to  this  country  and  were
      therefore  familiar   with   the   immigration   system.   In   those
      circumstances, and given the apparent coincidence that the  Appellant
      brought herself to the attention of the authorities once the children
      had been here for seven years, it is difficult to overlook the  issue
      that the Appellant may have been deliberately avoiding the  attention
      of the authorities to better her position. The apparent disregard  of
      that  point  by  the  Judge  may  have  affected  his  assessment  of
      reasonableness within the Immigration Rules.


  15. The case of MA Pakistan is authority  for  the  proposition  that  in
      assessing reasonableness one does not simply focus  on  the  children
      themselves but must take into  account  wider  factors  such  as  the
      parent's immigration history.  It  was  argued  before  me  that  the
      paragraph in the Immigration Rules which stipulated 7 years residence
      said nothing about whether that residence should be  lawful  or  not.
      Little weight attaches to this argument since one still has  to  look
      at a  parent's  immigration  history  and  if  they  have  been  here
      unlawfully the unlawful residence may  still  weigh  in  the  balance
      against the Appellant. The  decision  in  MA  Pakistan  was  recently
      confirmed by the Court of Appeal in the decision of  AM  [2017]  EWCA
      Civ 180. In  that  case  notwithstanding  that  the  children's  best
      interests were to remain in the UK, the Judge held that  they  should
      be refused leave to remain which necessarily  meant  that  the  other
      three applicants' cases had to fail also. The reason in that case was
      that their parents had shown a blatant disregard for immigration law,
      choosing to remain illegally on the expiry of their visas.  They  did
      not seek to regularize their status for many years.


  16. As in the instant case before me the Appellants in AM had  put  their
      case  on  the  basis  that  the  appropriate   test   was   that   of
      reasonableness under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. In AM
      the Court  of  Appeal  rejected  the  argument  that  there  was  any
      difference  in  the  definition   of   reasonableness   between   the
      Immigration Rules at paragraph 276ADE and  outside  the  Rules  under
      section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act. The Judge was required to carry out
      a balancing exercise between the competing  interests  in  the  case.
      Whilst the Judge set out the Appellant's case in some  detail  it  is
      hard to see from  reading  the  determination  what  factors  on  the
      Respondent's side of the argument were taken into account.


  17. The Judge mentioned that the Appellants did not have leave to  remain
      and overstayed their visas  but  it  is  not  possible  to  see  from
      paragraph 89 what weight if any the Judge gave to that consideration.
      It is not the case that the Judge  viewed  this  appeal  through  the
      prism of the Immigration Rules. What is required in this case is  for
      the proportionality exercise to  be  carried  out  again.  This  will
      entail giving due weight to both sides of the balance in  determining
      first of all under paragraph 276ADE the reasonableness  of  expecting
      the children to leave the United Kingdom. If  the  Appellants  cannot
      succeed under the Rules it will be necessary to go on to consider the
      case outside the Immigration Rules taking into account the  statutory
      provisions referred to in the grounds of onward appeal.


  18. I have considered the application to have this matter  remitted  back
      to the First-tier for this to be done but I do not  consider  such  a
      course to be necessary. That is because there is  not  a  substantial
      degree of fact finding to be carried out but rather what is  required
      is an assessment of proportionality  on  the  basis  of  the  present
      position with perhaps some evidence which I accept may be  necessary.
      One point which I raised with the Appellant's solicitor was what  the
      Judge meant at paragraph 68 of his determination when he referred  to
      the Appellant living  "at  various  addresses  on  an  ad  hoc  basis
      returning to her brother's on her evidence at the weekend". Taken  at
      face value this paragraph would appear to suggest that the  Appellant
      was living a peripatetic existence with her children moving from  one
      address to another and  only  staying  for  short  periods  with  her
      brother. That might bring the  family  to  the  attention  of  social
      services (although I have seen no evidence of any such  involvement).
      If the Judge did not mean that it is difficult to  see  what  he  did
      mean. When I raised this point neither advocate was  able  to  assist
      me.


  19. Some rather better evidence should therefore be provided as  to  what
      are the living conditions of the children since  otherwise  paragraph
      68 might by itself be taken  to  be  a  factor  in  the  Respondent's
      argument that it is reasonable to expect the children  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom. The Appellant should also be in a  position  to  give
      better evidence as to how she supports herself and her  family  given
      the Judge's description of the Appellant's evidence at  paragraph  67
      as "somewhat confusing". It  is  not  clear  from  the  determination
      whether the children's father has any form of contact with them or in
      anyway supports them. The Appellant could also deal with this  aspect
      in an updating statement. Any such further evidence should  be  filed
      and served at least 14 days before the resumed hearing.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I set it aside and allow the Respondent's  appeal  against  the
    First-tier's decision.  The rehearing of the appeal and the remaking of
    the decision will take place on the first available date at Field House
    time estimate 2 hours

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 25th day of April 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was allowed at first instance and  therefore  there  can  be  no  fee
award.


Signed this 25th day of April 2017


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


