
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04339/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st November 2016                 |On 30th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Ingnatius [E]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Krushner of Counsel instructed by Jesse Douglas
                    & Aaskells Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Pickup
    made following a hearing at Manchester on 29th April 2016.





Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  23rd  May  1968.   He
    appealed against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  3rd
    August 2015, refusing his application for leave to remain in the UK  on
    human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant entered the UK in November 2014 on a multivisit visa and,
    within his extant leave, applied for further leave to remain on private
    and family life grounds on the  basis  of  his  relationship  with  his
    partner and their three children, all of whom are British citizens.

 4. The respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellant  was  related  as
    claimed to the children but the issue  was  resolved  by  DNA  evidence
    which concluded conclusively that he was the father of the children.

 5. The judge  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  subsisting
    relationship with his partner and  that  he  jointly  shared  with  her
    parental responsibility for the three children.

 6. The judge recorded that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules since, having entered as a visitor, he did not
    meet the eligibility requirements of Appendix FM and  did  not  provide
    satisfactory evidence that he was living with his partner for a  period
    of  two  years  before  the  application  was   made.    Although   the
    relationship is of longstanding, he had  been  living  and  working  in
    Italy for some ten years, visiting the family in 2006, 2008,  2009  and
    has been living here since 2014.

 7. The judge considered the appellant's family life circumstances  outside
    the Rules, having regard to the  best  interests  and  welfare  of  the
    children, and he concluded that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    them to leave the UK.  Their best interests were undoubtedly to  remain
    here with their mother.

 8. He then took into account, as he was required to do,  Section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act, including Section 117B(6) which provides:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             UK."

 9. The judge recorded that the IDI on family migration,  paragraph  11.2.3
    states that save in cases involving  criminality,  the  decision  maker
    must not take a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer  of
    a British citizen child where the effect of that decision would  be  to
    force the British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of  that
    child.

10. It also states that:

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer."

11. The section then indicates that, if there is no  satisfactory  evidence
    of a genuine and subsisting parental relationship, or where the conduct
    of the parent or primary carer gives rise  to  considerations  of  such
    weight as to justify separation, it may not  be  appropriate  to  grant
    leave.

12. The judge recorded that the  family  life  which  existed  between  the
    appellant and  his  family  members  could  properly  be  described  as
    entirely precarious.  He had no legitimate expectation of being able to
    remain in the UK.  He had  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He had circumvented immigration  control  to  enter
    and join his family by practising deception.

13. He then wrote as follows:

         "In all the circumstances of this case I find that there are strong
         public interest considerations, quite apart from those  in  Section
         117B(1) to (3) which justify requiring this appellant to leave  his
         family and make proper application from outside the  UK  for  entry
         clearance.   In  particular  he  has  sought  to  circumvent  entry
         clearance  requirements  for  settlement  with  his   partner   and
         children.  I also bear in mind that he has had a very limited  role
         in the upbringing of the children prior to arriving in  the  UK  in
         November 2014; at the date of application he had been a part  of  a
         family unit less than six months.  I accept that he  has  now  been
         with them for some eighteen months and that the family  life  bonds
         between the  appellant  and  his  family  will  have  strengthened.
         However his conduct is a weighty public interest consideration that
         justifies refusal of the application and to require  him  to  apply
         for  entry  clearance  through  the  Rules.   His  absence  may  be
         temporary,  but  no  more  than  the  family  life  situation  that
         prevailed before he came to the UK in  November  2014.   It  is  of
         course also open to Ms [E] and the children to join  the  appellant
         in  Nigeria,  or  Italy  whilst  he  makes  application  for  entry
         clearance, though that will be a matter of their choice."

14. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

15. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of  grounds,  but
    in particular that the judge had misapplied Section 117B which makes it
    clear that the public interest does not require removal of a parent  of
    a British citizen child where it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK.  It was not open to the judge to go behind  this
    section in constructing an alternative public interest consideration as
    confirmed by the president in Treebhawon [2015] UKUT 00674.

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Ford  in  relation  to  that
    ground.



The Hearing

17.  Mr  Diwncyz  accepted  that,  following  the  decision  in  R  on  the
    application of MA and Others [2016] EWCA Civ  705,  that  the  decision
    could not stand.  He did not seek to argue that I  should  do  anything
    other than to substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

18. In MA, the Court of  Appeal  analysed  the  structure  and  meaning  of
    Section 117B, in particular 117B(6), and Alias LJ held as follows:

         "17. Sub-Section (6) falls into a  different  category  again.   It
             does not simply identify factors which bear  upon  the  public
             interest question.  It resolves that question in  the  context
             of Article 8 applications  which  satisfy  the  conditions  in
             paragraphs (a) and (b).  It does so by stipulating  that  once
             those conditions are satisfied, the public interest  will  not
             require the applicant's removal.  Since the interference  with
             the right to private or family life  under  Article  8(1)  can
             only  be  justified  where  there  is  a  sufficiently  strong
             countervailing public interest falling within Article 8(2), if
             the public interest does not  require  removal,  there  is  no
             other basis on which removal could be justified.  It  follows,
             in my judgment, that  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Section
             117B(6) must be read as  a  self-contained  provision  in  the
             sense that Parliament has stipulated that where the conditions
             specified  in  the  sub-Section  are  satisfied,  the   public
             interest will not justify removal.  It is  not  legitimate  to
             have regard to public interest considerations unless  that  is
             permitted, either explicitly or implicitly, by the sub-Section
             itself.

         18.  Ms Giovannetti QC, Counsel for the Secretary of State,  argued
             otherwise.  She contended  that  there  may  be  circumstances
             where even though the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) are
             satisfied and the applicant is not liable for deportation, the
             Secretary of State may nonetheless refuse leave to  remain  on
             wider public interest grounds.  But as she had to accept, that
             analysis requires adding  words  to  sub-Section  (6)  to  the
             effect that where the conditions  are  satisfied,  the  public
             interest will not normally require  removal,  because  on  her
             approach, sometimes it will.  I see no warrant for  distorting
             the unambiguous language of the Section in that way.

         19.  In my judgment, therefore, the only questions which courts and
             Tribunals need to ask when applying Section  117B(6)  are  the
             following:

             (i)  Is the applicant liable to deportation?  If  so,  Section
                  117B is inapplicable and instead the  relevant  code  will
                  usually be found in Section 117C.

             (ii) Does the applicant have a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with the child?

             (iii)    Is the child a qualifying child as defined in Section
                  117D?

             (iv) Is it unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?

          1. If the answer to the first question is no, and  to  the  other
             three questions is yes, the conclusion must be that Article  8
             is infringed."

19. Accordingly, the judge, having found that the appellant was not  liable
    to  deportation,  that  he  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship with his children, that they were qualifying children  and
    that it was unreasonable to expect them  to  leave  the  UK,  erred  in
    having regard to other public interest considerations,  and  dismissing
    the appeal.  It was not open to  him  to  apply  an  external  test  in
    relation to the public interest question  since  the  wording  of  sub-
    Section 117B(6) sets out in terms that the  public  interest  will  not
    justify removal where the conditions in the sub-Section are  satisfied.





Notice of Decision

20. The Immigration Judge erred in law.  His decision is set aside.  It  is
    remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]   Date 30 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

