
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04902/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 27 November 2019                       |On 18 December 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                 Agatha [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ogunbiyi, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who in a
    decision, promulgated on the 24th July 2019 dismissed her appeal
    against the decision to refuse her human rights claim. Permission to
    appeal was granted on the 13th September 2019.


 2. The background to the appeal is set out in the decision of the FtTJ and
    the decision letter issued by the Secretary of State. The appellant is
    a citizen of Malawi. At the age of three she moved to Zimbabwe with her
    mother and lived there with her mother and two siblings (her brother
    and sister). The appellant's mother left Zimbabwe in 2000 with her
    brother. The appellant and her sister remained in Zimbabwe living with
    the appellant's grandmother. The appellant's mother had entered the
    United Kingdom as a visitor. It is recorded that she received a
    telephone call from her mother in Zimbabwe advising her not to return
    and she decided to remain in the United Kingdom illegally. She also
    made a claim for asylum in 2009 using what was effectively her
    Zimbabwean identity.

 3. The appellant and her sister came to the United Kingdom on 16 December
    2003 on a visitor's Visa. Each of them was travelling on Malawian
    passports. Their entry to the United Kingdom was made possible with the
    assistance of their father who was at the time the Malawian High
    Commissioner to the United Kingdom. It is said that her father
    contacted the Malawian embassy in Zimbabwe following which the
    appellant and her sister were issued with a letter confirming their
    status and following this they were able to enter the United Kingdom.
    At the time of her entry to the United Kingdom she was 18 years of age
    and enrolled in school. She completed her A-levels and then enrolled
    with a university. She has also enrolled in further courses and
    graduated in 2013 and thereafter obtained paid employment.

 4. On 9 January 2015 the appellant was convicted for possession of a
    passport with a full indefinite leave to remain vignette, contrary to
    section 4 of the Identity Documents Act 2010 and fraud by false
    representation contrary to section 2 of the Fraud Act 2006.

 5. There is a copy of the sentencing remarks in the papers before the
    Tribunal. It demonstrates that the appellant was a co-defendant
    alongside her mother and that both the appellant and her mother were
    convicted after a trial before a jury. It was as a result of the
    counterfeit endorsement which allowed the appellant to remain in the
    United Kingdom to live, study and work. The appellant was sentenced to
    6 months imprisonment on each offence to run concurrently and that the
    sentence would be suspended for a period of 12 months. There were two
    requirements attached to the suspended sentence order; first the
    requirement of residence and a requirement that she should be subject
    to a curfew requirement.



 6. On 2 July 2015 she made a human rights claim for leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom. It was refused on the 16 August 2016 and was certified
    as clearly unfounded with an out of country appeal. Following
    proceedings for judicial review of that decision, on the 31 July 2018
    the decision was quashed by a consent order made by the Court of Appeal
    and remitted to the respondent to take a fresh decision. There is a
    copy of the consent order in the papers. It states that the proceedings
    for judicial review challenging the certification of the appeal was
    refused at an oral hearing however, on 18 February 2018 the Court of
    Appeal granted permission on the basis that although the appellant "has
    an unattractive immigration history, the Secretary of State may
    arguably have failed properly to take into account the fact that her
    sister is in the UK". The consent order with its reasons makes it plain
    that the Secretary of State had based its decision on an incorrect
    factual premise as the decision letter stated that the appellant's
    witness statement of 15 June 2015 "makes it clear that your sister is
    currently living in Malawi and would thus be able to assist in your
    integration". As it had been since clarified in a judicial review claim
    form that her sister was only Malawi temporarily to obtain a Visa to
    come back to the United Kingdom as a spouse of a British citizen. It is
    recorded that the "Secretary of State accepts that he erred in the
    decision by regarding this as a "clear" statement that the appellant's
    sister was living in Malawi. As the article 8 ECHR balance carried out
    in the decision was predicated on this mistaken belief that the
    appellant sister was living in Malawi and therefore available to assist
    the appellant's integration on return, the Secretary of State accepts
    that the matter should be reconsidered in a fresh decision."

 7. The application made in July 2015 was refused in a decision letter
    issued on 1 March 2019. The respondent set out the appellant's
    immigration history and considered her claim in the context of her
    factual circumstances. She could not meet the suitability requirements
    as it was considered that her presence in the United Kingdom was not
    conducive to the public good by reasons of her conviction on the 9th
    June 2015 ; she could also not meet the eligibility immigration status
    requirement as she was currently in the UK without leave. As to her
    private life, this was considered under paragraph 276 ADE, and that in
    the light of her period of residence since 2003 she could not meet
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iii) nor (vi) on the basis that there were no
    very significant obstacles to her integration to the country to which
    she would have to go if required to leave the UK. In this respect, the
    respondent set out that the appellant had spent the majority of her
    life outside of the UK in Malawi and Zimbabwe and whilst she stated
    that she could not speak any of the languages of Malawi, she could
    speak English which is the official language of Malawi. As she had
    stated that her father lived in Malawi, and although she also stated
    that she had little contact with him, there was no evidence that he
    would be unwilling to assist her.

 8. The respondent considered whether there were circumstances which lead
    to unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant in order to
    demonstrate that a grant of leave was appropriate. However, the
    respondent concluded that there were no such circumstances taking into
    account her immigration history and that she had established a private
    life in the knowledge that she had no lawful basis of stay having
    entered as a visitor which expired in 2004, her status in the UK was on
    a temporary basis and that there was no legitimate expectation that she
    could remain. It was noted that she had resided in the UK unlawfully
    using a false indefinite leave to remain vignette and was sentenced to
    a suspended sentence of imprisonment of 6 months( suspended for
    12months) alongside a curfew requirement  and electronic tagging.  She
    had spent the majority of her life outside the UK in Malawi and
    Zimbabwe and it was not accepted that she could not re-establish a
    family and private life in Malawi. It had been stated that her father
    lived in Malawi and although it was aimed that she had little contact
    with him, no evidence had been provided that he would be unwilling to
    provide assistance. It was considered that she had unlawfully worked
    and studied in the UK and the qualifications gained would assist her on
    obtaining employment on return. As regards her family members, she
    could maintain contact with them using modern methods of communication.
    It was also noted that her mother had no leave to remain and could
    return to Malawi with her. She was also able to speak English which was
    the official language of Malawi. The application was therefore refused.


 9. The appellant sought to appeal that decision and the appeal came before
    the FtTJ on 11 June 2019. In a decision promulgated on 24 July 2019,
    and after hearing the evidence of the appellant, her mother, and a
    witness called on her behalf he dismissed the appeal.

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision. Permission to
    appeal was granted on 13 September 2019.


11. Thus, the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal. I heard submissions
    from each of the advocates.

12. Mr Ogunbiyi, who appeared on behalf of the appellant before the FtTJ,
    relied upon the written grounds and in addition made the following oral
    submissions which I summarise below.

13. He submitted that there had not been a proper assessment of the appeal
    and that the evidence before the FtTJ was that the appellant last lived
    in Malawi when she was aged three (30 years ago) and that there was
    evidence that the appellant had no contact with her father set out in
    her witness statement at paragraph 11 where she stated that she had no
    relationship with him and was in no position to expect any help as he
    had not given any help in the past 33 years of her life. At paragraph
    15 her witness statement made reference to her sister who was forced to
    go to Malawi to apply for a spouse Visa and that as she was estranged
    from their father and there were no family members she had to stay at a
    hotel. When her application was refused she had to ask a husband to
    come to Malawi to support her as she was lonely and isolated. He also
    referred to the evidence given by Mr M, in his witness statement filed
    20/5/19, he stated that the appellant "does not have a good
    relationship with her father who resides in Malawi. She barely talks
    about and when she does, she does not have much to say she barely knows
    him or talk to him." Therefore the finding at [32] in which the judge
    did not accept that the appellant had no contact with the father or
    that he would assist his daughter if she were returned to Malawi had no
    evidential basis in light of the evidence from the appellant and her
    witness Mr M.


14. He submitted that the judge failed to take into account the evidence
    given by the appellant relating to her sister who had gone to Malawi to
    obtain entry clearance but had lived in a hotel and did not stay with
    any family members. That was an explanation accepted by the SSHD. He
    submitted that the judge gave no reasons for rejecting the evidence and
    if we did give a reason at [33] it was speculative.

15.  Mr Ogunbiyi also submitted that the factual recitation set out by the
    judge at paragraph 13 was wrong (which made reference to her father
    contacting the embassy in providing a letter enabling both the
    appellant and her sister to enter the United Kingdom). He submitted
    that in any event it was speculative to state that something which
    happened 15 years ago would mean that he could do that at the date of
    the hearing.

16. At [39], the FtTJ made reference to the evidence of the appellant's
    mother who had said she had no information about the appellant's
    father. Mr Ogunbiyi submitted that the judge gave no weight to her
    evidence, not as a result of any inconsistency but based on the fact
    that she was an untruthful witness having been convicted of criminal
    offences and that this was an improper basis upon which to reject the
    evidence. The judge should have considered the factual context that the
    mother had separated from her husband 30 years before and there'd be no
    contact between them.

17. The grounds also assert that the judge was wrong to make adverse
    findings based on the appellant's sister's absence at the hearing at
    paragraphs [33- 34]. The tribunal had been informed that she had given
    birth to a child at the hearing which had been adjourned when a list of
    witnesses had been sought from the people who provided statements. The
    appellant sister was not included in the list. The judge did not ask
    any questions in relation to the child's birth and was wrong to reach
    the conclusion needed based upon "unfounded suspicion".  In his oral
    submissions he stated that she could not give evidence because she had
    difficulties and that she had completed a statement previously. He
    further submitted that whilst the judge had stated that the sisters
    evidence would have been useful there was evidence given by the
    appellant and also by Mr M concerning contact with the appellant's
    father therefore his view of the sister's absence affected the FtTJ's
    judgement.

18. He submitted that the judge failed to carry out a proper
    proportionality test by failing to take into account that she had left
    Malawi at the age of three, that she did not speak the language, she
    had no contact with her father who was living there and would find it
    difficult to live in Malawi, she had no connections there and that they
    taken together were "very significant obstacles to her reintegration"
    and that the judge failed to apply this objectively on the facts which
    were not disputed. The judge had speculated about the father's position
    and the appellant's father was not a career diplomat and owed his
    ambassadorial post to his political affiliation. Therefore there is no
    evidence to conclude that the appellant's father with supporter but
    there was evidence to the contrary, set out in the appellant's
    evidence, the sisters evidence, evidence in the reasoning of the Court
    of Appeal and her mother's evidence.

19. Mr Ogunbiyi submitted that the judge failed to take account of the
    sentencing remarks and that the appellant was under the full control of
    her mother when the offence was carried out and that she was 18 years
    of age when she entered and that no one had told her that she had no
    right to be in United Kingdom. He submitted the sentencing remarks did
    not show that she contrived in the offences but that she had turned a
    blind eye. The Secretary of State was required to consider the public
    interest in the light of a conviction in the judge in his sentence
    remarks did not find that her criminality was at a high level.

20. The judge also failed to take into account the evidence of her
    supporting witnesses who made reference to her employment, her
    education and general character references. The only reference to that
    evidence is at [40]. Consequently the judge undertook a flawed
    proportionality exercise and that the appeal should be allowed.

21. Mr Mills, senior presenting officer appeared on behalf of the
    respondent. There is no rule 24 response.

22. He submitted that in essence the complaints made were a lengthy
    disagreement with an adequately reasoned judgement given by the FtTJ.
    Whilst the grounds took issue with the availability of help from the
    father, even if the appellant's father was not in Malawi, the appellant
    was a 34-year-old adult who had graduated from university. The argument
    advanced in behalf of the appellant that she had no contact with the
    father and therefore the appeal should be allowed failed to take
    account of the other parts of the evidence which included that she was
    an adult, she had graduated and there was no evidence to say that
    someone who was a single woman could not live in Malawi and that even
    if everything had been accepted it was open the judge to dismiss the
    appeal.

23. He submitted that the judge did not engage in speculation. The factual
    matters set out at paragraph 13 had been taken from the appellant's own
    application (see letter at A5) and that the appellants evidence was
    that the appellant's father who was the Malawian High Commissioner had
    arranged for them to have letters so that they could enter the United
    Kingdom as a visitors. Therefore he submitted on her own evidence her
    father assisted her 15 years ago. Whilst there were witnesses who said
    there had been no successful contact since then, this was not
    undisputed as counsel had suggested. Whilst there had been no
    presenting officer present the judge made reference to the Surendran
    guidelines at paragraph 4 which states that the respondent's absence
    does not mean that facts are proved therefore the judge was entitled to
    consider the evidence.

24. As to [39] it was open to the judge to make those findings concerning
    the appellant's mother's evidence. She had been convicted of a serious
    fraud and the judge was entitled to consider the appellant's
    credibility which was "zero credibility in light of her conviction. The
    appellant said she had no contact with her father, but that evidence
    was also tainted by her conviction. As to the submissions made about
    her sentence, counsel cannot go behind that conviction and at the time
    false ILR was purchased it was used to gain university education at a
    time when she was an adult. Whilst she stated that she did not know
    about this, that was an argument put before the jury which they
    rejected. Therefore the only thing that she had produced had been the
    oral evidence, the judge was entitled not to place weight upon it.

25. As to her sister's evidence, the judge was entitled to take account of
    her absence. She was a witness who could contribute to the evidence
    because she went to Malawi to obtain entry clearance and whilst she was
    there she was able to get the contact details of her father. We do not
    know what the contact details were, but it was recorded at [33] that
    the appellant's evidence in court was that her sister was the one who
    was able to get her father's contact details and pass on to the
    appellant. Therefore the inference is that the appellant's sister knew
    where her father was that she had not given evidence as to how she had
    got those details. This was obviously material evidence and she had
    produced a witness statement and there was no evidence provided in June
    that she could not come to court two months later and also no
    adjournment been sought. Mr Mills submitted that the burden was upon
    the appellant and when material evidence had not been provided and
    given its likely materiality, it was open to the judge to place weight
    on the absence of that witness.

26. Mr Mills also observed that in the submissions made by Mr Ogunbiyi he
    stated that the appellant's father was not a career diplomat and was a
    friend of the president however there was no evidence to support any of
    that. The FtTJ had not speculated as to the position of her father and
    was entitled to place little weight on the evidence of Mr M (at [40]),
    given that he had given no details other than reporting what the
    appellant had said.

27. In terms of the rules, he submitted very significant obstacles
    reintegration required a high threshold which the judge was well aware
    of at[19]. She had continuing links in Malawi to her father and that
    there was a likelihood that he was someone who could assist her, at[36]
    she was an adult who had had employment in the United Kingdom and
    therefore could find employment in Malawi and he rejected Counsel's
    "bald assertion" as a limited or no employment opportunities in Malawi,
    at [37] she spoke English which is the main language in Malawi and had
    a high level of education from the United Kingdom which would increase
    her prospects of employment on return. Therefore the judge found that
    the appellant had not made out her case that there were very
    significant obstacles to her reintegration and at [41], reached the
    conclusion that there were no unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
    appellant, which is the correct test therefore having looked at the
    matters outside the rules and under the rules.




Decision on the error of law:

28. I have carefully considered the written grounds and the oral
    submissions of the parties and have done so in the light of the
    decision of the FtTJ. I am satisfied that the decision reached does
    disclose the making of an error on a point of law. I shall set out my
    reasons for reaching that decision.


29. The issue that the FtTJ had to decide was whether the decision made by
    the respondent was unlawful under section 6 of the HRA 1998. A court
    must accord "considerable weight" to the policy of the Secretary of
    State at a "general level": Agyarko paragraph [47] and paragraphs [56]
    - [57]; and see also Ali paragraphs [44] - [46], [50] and [53]. This
    includes the policy weightings set out in Section 117B. To ensure
    consistency with the HRA 1998 and the ECHR, section 117B must, however,
    have injected into it a limited degree of flexibility so that the
    application of the statutory provisions would always lead to an end
    result consistent with Article 8: Rhuppiah (ibid) paragraphs [36] and
    [49].

30. The test for an assessment outside the immigration rules is whether a
    "fair balance" is struck between competing public and private
    interests. This is a proportionality test: Agyarko (ibid) paragraphs
    [41] and [60]; see also Ali paragraphs [32], [47] - [49]. In order to
    ensure that references in the immigration rules and in policy to a case
    having to be "exceptional" before leave to remain can be granted, are
    consistent with Article 8, they must be construed as not imposing any
    incremental requirement over and above that arising out of the
    application of an Article 8 proportionality test, for instance that
    there be "some highly unusual" or "unique" factor or feature: Agyarko
    (ibid) paragraphs [56] and [60]. The proportionality test is to be
    applied on the "circumstances of the individual case": Agyarko (ibid)
    paragraphs [47] and [60].

31. As Mr Mills observed, the decision of the FtTJ is not structured in
    that way and whilst there is reference to that approach it was not
    applied in that way. However, the issue was whether despite its
    structure, the decision dealt with all matters of substance.

32. The decision letter set out that the appellant could not meet the
    immigration rules for a number of reasons; she could not meet the
    suitability requirements under S-LTR 1.6 as it was considered that her
    presence in the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good in
    the light of her conviction and also that there were very significant
    obstacles to her reintegration to Zimbabwe and/or Malawi. The fact-
    finding of the FtTJ in relation to those two issues are not entirely
    straightforward. As to the suitability issue, there is no reference to
    any assessment in this regard. Whilst there was reference made to the
    appellant's private life having developed in the UK at a time when her
    stay was "precarious" (although in fact it was unlawful residence), and
    that she was charged and sentenced (at [31]), there was no reference to
    the view taken of this either in line with her evidence or in light of
    the sentencing remarks. Whilst Mr Mills accepts that there is no
    reference to this, either when making an assessment under the rules or
    in the overall proportionality balance and submits that this can only
    be to the appellant's benefit, I would agree in general terms. The
    issue of her conviction may weigh heavily on the public interest side
    of the proportionality balance. However, the issue arises that it is
    not known what view the FtTJ took about this. This is particularly so
    when considering the written and oral evidence of other witnesses who
    attended the Tribunal and gave evidence asserting the good character of
    the appellant since that conviction and her position in the community.
    The FtTJ at [40] considered the latter evidence only on the basis that
    they would support her if she were given leave in the UK and that it
    added little to whether she could be returned to Malawi. An assessment
    of the appellant's oral evidence and that of the witnesses concerning
    her conviction and her conduct since and seen in the light of the
    sentencing remarks was part of that evidential assessment which was not
    carried out. I cannot accept the submission made on behalf of the
    appellant that the sentencing remarks effectively exonerated her; they
    did not (see page 10 of AB) but nonetheless it was an issue which
    required consideration and analysis.


33. I also do not accept the submission made that the evidence of the
    supporting witnesses should have been given more weight when
    considering the content of their evidence relating to the appellant's
    father and her contact to him. As Mr Mills submitted, the written
    evidence of their knowledge of this issue was sparse. By way of
    example, the witness statement of Mr M made reference to the appellant
    not having a good relationship with her father. There was nothing
    beyond that in the witness statement. Therefore, having considered
    submissions made on behalf of the appellant, the FtTJ's finding at [40]
    could be said to be open to the FtTJ. However I am satisfied that when
    considering the issue of whether the appellant had contact with her
    father or whether there was strong inferential evidence concerning
    this, the FtTJ failed to make a full assessment of the evidence. There
    was evidence in the judicial review proceedings which made reference to
    the appellant's sister. It is important to properly consider those
    proceedings which are set out in the statement of reasons. The decision
    was quashed on the basis that the respondent had accepted that there
    was a material error of fact in the previous decision letter. It had
    made reference to the appellant's witness statement which the
    respondent interpreted as saying that her sister was currently living
    in Malawi and therefore the respondent considered that that was
    evidence to demonstrate that her sister would be able to assist with
    her reintegration. However the appellant later clarified that witness
    statement in the judicial review proceedings to state that her sister
    was only in Malawi temporarily to obtain a visa to enter the United
    Kingdom as a spouse. Thus it was accepted by the respondent that it was
    factually incorrect to state that the appellant's sister was living in
    Malawi (see page 18 of AB). Whilst Mr Ogunbiyi refers to it being an
    unchallenged fact that the appellant's sister's stayed in a hotel it
    does not necessarily follow that she had no contact with her father but
    in any event the issue was not considered by the FtTJ .


34. A further evidential issue arises from the consideration of the
    appellant's mother's evidence. The FtTJ made a wholesale rejection of
    her evidence at [39] by stating that he did not accept evidence because
    he did not find her to be a truthful witness. Mr Ogunbiyi submitted
    that the FtTJ gave no reasons for rejecting her evidence, both written
    and oral evidence given, other than on the basis of her conviction. I
    would agree with the submission made by Mr Mills that it would be open
    to the FtTJ take as a starting point as an assessment of credibility
    her conviction and conduct as set out in the sentencing remarks. The
    FtTJ did make reference to this as a starting point, however, as she
    had given oral evidence alongside short written evidence, it was
    incumbent on the FtTJ to give reasons to why he rejected her evidence
    beyond that conviction. There was no reference to the oral evidence
    that she had given although it may have been limited as to why he found
    her to be untruthful.


35. A further issue arises from the FtTJ's consideration of the evidence of
    the appellant's sister. She had made a witness statement for the
    proceedings dated 24 April 2019 but did not attend the hearing to give
    evidence. The FtTJ stated at [33] that the lack of attendance was
    "startling" and in relation to the reason given for her non-attendance
    at related to her pregnancy was an "extraordinary omission" from the
    witness statement. The grounds assert that the FtTJ was wrong to make
    an adverse finding on the sister's absence and the FtTJ did not ask
    questions about her child. Mr Ogunbiyi has now provided photos to show
    the appellant sister did give birth to a child although that does not
    explain why she did not attend the hearing which was in June. Mr
    Ogunbiyi refers to their being "difficulties" in his oral submissions
    but did not elaborate any further. In my judgement, the FtTJ's view
    that the appellant's sister was a witness of relevance was undoubtedly
    right -she had been to Malawi and would have had first-hand knowledge
    of the matters relied upon by the appellant and those in support of the
    submissions made by counsel. However I do not consider that the
    evidence could necessarily demonstrate that her absence should be taken
    as damaging to the appellant as the FtTJ found at [35] given that no
    further questions had been asked about her absence and that there was
    some evidence in the statement of reasons and the appellant's evidence
    on this issue.


36. For those reasons I am satisfied that the decision discloses the making
    of an error on a point of law and those issues may have been material
    to the outcome.



37. As to the remaking of the decision, in reaching that  decision  I  have
    given careful consideration to the  Joint  Practice  Statement  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and  Upper  Tribunal  concerning  the  disposal  of
    appeals in this Tribunal.


     "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to proceed to
    re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
    Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:-
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
    (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

38. As the errors are set out above relate to the assessment of evidence
    both oral and written evidence as well as to the overall
    proportionality balance, it is my view that it will be necessary when
    remaking the decision to make an assessment of that oral evidence
    alongside the written evidence from the witnesses called. Mr Ogunbiyi
    referred to matters in his submission such as the profile of the
    appellant's father (see grounds at [ii]) which did not feature in the
    evidence but may have some relevance. Also the FtTJ made reference to
    the appellant's evidence given at [33] which made reference to her
    sister being able to pass on her father's contact details. It is not
    said in what context that evidence was given or why. Other issues set
    out above refer to evidence. I have therefore concluded that it is in
    the interests of fairness and justice for the appellant that the appeal
    should be reheard, and I have reached the overall conclusion that it
    requires the consideration of all of the evidence, for findings of fact
    to be made and the most appropriate venue for this is the First-tier
    Tribunal.




Notice of Decision


39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and the decision shall  be  set  aside  and  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds                     Date     16/12/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


