
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04892/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th March 2018                            |On 20th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         hafiz awais ahmad quereshi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Rehman of Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Shore  promulgated  on  26  June  2017,  in  which  Mr
    Quereshi's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  application  for
    leave to remain on private and family life  grounds  dated  2  February
    2016 was allowed.  For ease I continue to refer to the parties as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal, with Mr Quereshi as the  Appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born  on  16  June  1989,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom on 8 April 2011 with leave to enter as
    a Tier 4 General Student Migrant with leave to remain  valid  until  11
    August 2012.  He was granted further leave to remain on the same  basis
    until 30 September 2014.  On 22 September 2014, the  Appellant  applied
    for leave to remain and varied the application on  28  August  2015  to
    become an application for leave to remain based on private  and  family
    life in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 2 February 2016 on the  basis
    that the Appellant did not meet the requirements for leave to remain as
    a partner in Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as he was not married
    to his partner nor had they been cohabiting for the  required  two-year
    period.  In any event,  the  Appellant's  partner  was  not  a  British
    citizen nor settled in the United Kingdom.  The  Respondent  considered
    the Appellant's private life under paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration
    Rules but concluded that there were no very  significant  obstacles  to
    his reintegration into Pakistan, a country where he had lived  for  the
    first 21 years of his life.  The Respondent did not consider that there
    were any exceptional circumstances for  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules by reference to his relationship  with
    his partner and her then 10-month-old son who was a British citizen and
    his best interests.

 4. Judge Shore allowed the appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  26  June
    2017 in the following terms, "the  Appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  in
    respect of entry clearance as a parent under EX.1(a) under Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules  and  in  respect  of  entry  clearance  under
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules".  In particular,  Judge  Shore
    found the Appellant to be in a genuine relationship with  his  partner,
    albeit not satisfying the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    Appendix FM,  and  also  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his partner's son  and  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom  such
    that the requirements of  paragraph  EX.1(a)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules  were  met.   He  further  found  that  he  would  be
    unreasonable for the Appellant's partner to return to Pakistan  because
    she was at risk of return there.  Overall it was considered that  there
    were exceptional circumstances and the refusal of leave to remain would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  Appellant  and  his
    partner's  son  such  that  removal   would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with their right to respect for private  and  family  life
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The appeal

 5. The Respondent appeals on  two  grounds.   First  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in allowing the appeal under paragraph EX.1(a) of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules given that the Appellant could not
    meet the wider requirements for a grant of leave to remain set  out  in
    R.LTRPT.1.1(d) of Appendix FM, specifically he could not meet those  in
    E-LTRPT.2.3.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing
    to give reasons for the findings of a parental  relationship  and  that
    there would be unjustifiably harsh consequences if  the  Appellant  was
    removed from the United Kingdom.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Parks on 29 December 2017  on
    all grounds.

 7. At the hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer relied on the  first
    ground of appeal as set out in writing  and  on  the  general  lack  of
    reasons in the decision of  Judge  Shore  such  that  it  remained  the
    Respondent's position that the decision should be set aside.   However,
    the Respondent  did  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his partner's  son  and  that  it
    would be unreasonable for the child to leave the United  Kingdom.   The
    Home Office Presenting Officer therefore submitted  that  the  decision
    should be remade to  allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  by
    reference to section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002.

 8. There were no substantive submissions on behalf of  the  Appellant  who
    agreed with the Respondent's submissions and proposed  course  in  this
    appeal.

Findings and reasons

 1. In light of the Respondent's  submissions  and  agreement  between  the
    parties as to the outcome in the appeal, I give only brief reasons  for
    my findings as follows.

 2. I find that Judge Shore materially erred in law in two respects in  the
    decision under appeal.  First, he allowed the  appeal  under  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules despite the fact that this
    was a human rights appeal which could  only  therefore  be  allowed  or
    dismissed on human rights grounds and not specifically by reference  to
    any particular provision of the Immigration Rules  (however  of  course
    satisfaction of those rules would be relevant to  an  assessment  under
    Article 8).   The  appeal  was  also  allowed  by  reference  to  entry
    clearance which is misconceived as this was  an  in  country  right  of
    appeal where the Appellant had been  lawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since April 2011.  Further, Judge Shore  failed  to  recognise  in  any
    event that paragraph  EX.1(a)  in  Appendix  FM  is  not  of  itself  a
    freestanding requirement further to which  leave  to  remain  could  be
    granted, but one of three separate requirements for leave to remain  as
    a parent set out in R-LTRPT.1.1(d) of Appendix FM,  not  all  of  which
    could be met by the Appellant.

 3. Secondly, the decision states a number of conclusions for which  little
    or no adequate reasons are given, including  as  to  the  relationships
    between the Appellant and his partner and her son;  the  reasonableness
    of his partner's return to Pakistan based on being at  risk  of  return
    when there was nothing to suggest that she  had  even  made  an  asylum
    claim, concluding that there would be unjustifiably harsh  consequences
    in the Appellant's removal and in referring to findings of  exceptional
    circumstances in an earlier paragraph in the decision  which  contained
    no such findings at all.  The failure to give adequate reasons for  the
    findings made and for allowing the appeal is a material error  of  law.
    For these two reasons it is necessary to  set  aside  the  decision  of
    Judge Shore and for the decision to be remade.

 4. In light of the clear concession by the Respondent that  on  the  facts
    she is satisfied that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his partner's  son  and  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable for the child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  such  that
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    applies, it is not be necessary for me to consider further the evidence
    in  this  appeal  or  make  any  specific  findings.   I   accept   the
    Respondent's submissions on the facts and  allow the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds as the Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would
    be a disproportionate  interference  with  his  right  to  respect  for
    private and family life under Article 8 European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights by reference to section 117B(6) which  states  that  the  public
    interest does not require a person's removal where he has a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child (in this  case
    a British citizen) and it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
    to leave the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remake the  decision
under appeal.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]         Date         12th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

