
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04831/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/04826/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2020                  |On 9 September 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     TO
                                     BO
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, further to directions issued  by  the
Upper Tribunal on 12 June 2020.

The appellants, sister and brother, are nationals  of  Nigeria  born  on  14
June 2001 and 26  September  2003  respectively.  They  appealed,  on  human
rights  grounds,  against  the  respondent's  decision   to   refuse   their
applications for entry clearance to settle in the UK as  the  dependants  of
their aunt, HB, pursuant to paragraph 297 of the immigration rules.

The appellants' applications were refused on the basis that  the  respondent
was not satisfied that the documents produced demonstrated  that  they  were
related as claimed to the UK sponsor, that there was  no  evidence  relating
to their father or his whereabouts, that  the  documents  provided  did  not
confirm that their grandfather was unable to care  for  them  and  that  the
evidence did not demonstrate that the sponsor could  adequately  accommodate
them in the UK.

The appellants appealed against that decision.  Their appeal  was  heard  on
14 October 2019 in the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Black. The  relationship
between the appellants and the sponsor and the  accommodation  available  in
the UK were no longer in dispute. Judge Black found  that  the  evidence  in
the form of text exchanges between the sponsor  and  the  appellants'  elder
sister T, referring to T's father and to T's dad,   contradicted  the  claim
that the appellants' father had abandoned them shortly after  the  death  of
their mother, leaving them in the sole care of  their  elderly  grandfather.
The judge therefore rejected the appellants' claim that they  did  not  have
adequate support in Nigeria and concluded that their  father  was  available
to provide them with support. She found  that  there  were  no  serious  and
compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  made  the  appellants'
exclusion from the UK undesirable for the  purposes  of  paragraph  297  and
that the respondent's decision  was  proportionate  and  not  in  breach  of
Article 8.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the  appellants  on
the grounds that the judge had made an  unreasonable  inference  that  their
father was alive because of the references in the messages  to  "dad",  when
both their grandfather and their carer were referred to as  "dad",  just  as
the sponsor was referred to "mum" and  "ma",  in  accordance  with  Nigerian
culture, and it was unfair for the matter  not  to  have  been  put  to  the
sponsor at the hearing so that she could  provide  an  explanation.  It  was
asserted that the reference to the appellants' "daddy" having a birthday  on
25 November 2018 showed that the reference was not to  their  father,  whose
date of birth was 10 December 1965.

Permission to appeal  was  refused  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but  was
subsequently granted in the Upper Tribunal on 13 March 2020.

The case was then reviewed by the Upper Tribunal due  to  the  circumstances
relating to Covid 19. In a Note and Directions sent out  on  12  June  2020,
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds indicated that she had  reached  the  provisional
view that  the  question  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
involved the making of error of law and, if so, whether the decision  should
be set aside, could be made without  a  hearing.  Submissions  were  invited
from the parties.

Written submissions have been received from both parties, both of  whom  are
content for the matter to be dealt with on the papers under rule 34. In  the
circumstances, and having had regard to the limited nature of the issues  in
this case, I find no reason not to proceed to determine the  matter  without
an oral hearing and consider that no unfairness arises from doing so.

In the rule 24 response from the respondent, Ms Fijiwala  submits  that  the
judge did not err in law by failing to put the  issue  in  relation  to  the
messages to the appellants or the sponsor and that the burden of  proof  was
on the appellants to establish their case  and  clarify  the  evidence.  She
noted, with regard to the issue of the appellants' father's  birthday,  that
there was no evidence of the date of birth  for  their  grandfather  or  the
carer to show that the reference was in fact to one of them.

The appellants' solicitors, in  their  submissions,  reassert  that  it  was
unfair for the  judge  to  make  inferences  about  the  appellants'  father
without first putting the matter to the  sponsor  to  explain,  particularly
when the sponsor was referred to "ma" and "mum" in the  messages  and  there
was evidence of  the  appellants'  father's  date  of  birth  in  the  birth
certificate at pages 179 of the bundle showing that the reference  to  "dad"
could not be to him.

    Discussion and Findings

Having considered the grounds of appeal and the  submissions  made  by  both
parties, I cannot find merit in the assertion that the judge acted  unfairly
by drawing an  adverse  conclusion  from  the  apparent  references  to  the
appellants' father in  the  text  messages  adduced  in  the  appeal  bundle
without inviting an explanation from the  sponsor.  That  was  the  evidence
before the judge and she was entitled to draw the conclusions that  she  did
from a matter which plainly and obviously  cast  doubt  on  the  appellants'
claim to have been abandoned by their father. As Ms Fijiwala submitted,  the
burden of proof lies upon the appellants and it was for them to clarify  the
entirely reasonable inference from  that  evidence  that  their  sister  and
their sponsor were in contact with their  father.  The  appellants  had  the
benefit of legal representation at  the  hearing  and  therefore  had  ample
opportunity fully and properly to present the evidence and  to  clarify  any
matters before the judge, particularly given  that  they  were  fully  aware
from the refusal decision that the issue of their father's  whereabouts  was
a matter of dispute, as the judge noted at [22].

Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman on  the  basis  that
the appellants, had they been given an opportunity to  explain,  could  have
shown that the reference to "daddy's birthday" in the text messages  related
to the date of birth of their grandfather. However, it is relevant  to  note
that the medical report at page 181 of the appeal bundle,  and  paragraph  9
of the sponsor's  statement  at  page  3,  both  refer  to  the  appellants'
grandfather's date of birth as 9 April 1926. As such, the birthday  referred
to in the text message at page 160 of the bundle,  25  November  2018,  does
not support the claim that the references to "dad" and "father" were to  the
appellants' grandfather. I also note that  the  appellants'  grandfather  is
referred to as "grand dad" in the message of 21 November 2017 at  page  146,
and as "grandpa" on 7 October 2018, at page 159, which is then  followed  by
a reference to "Dad", again undermining any  claim  that  the  reference  to
"dad" was in fact a reference to the appellants' grandfather.

The appellants' grounds also state  that  the  appellants  referred  to  the
carer as "dad" or "father", suggesting  that  the  references  in  the  text
messages could have been to him. However, whilst the judge referred at  [30]
to evidence of full-time domestic help,  there  was  no  suggestion  in  the
evidence  that  there  was  anything  verging  on   a   sufficiently   close
relationship such that the domestic help would be referred  to  as  "father"
or "dad". The sponsor's statement, at paragraphs 2 and 9, when referring  to
the appellants' grandfather's age and his inability to care for  them,  does
not even refer to there being a carer and neither is there  any  mention  of
such in the statements from the appellants.

In the circumstances, there was no reason for the  judge,  on  the  evidence
before her,  to consider that the references in the text messages  to  "dad"
and "father" could have related to any other  person  than  the  appellants'
father, irrespective  of  the  birth  certificate  at  page  179.   She  was
accordingly perfectly entitled to draw  the  adverse  conclusions  that  she
did. She was not required to ask the appellants to explain  their  evidence,
but was entitled to rely on that which had been presented  before  her.  The
appellants were not deprived of an opportunity  to  clarify  their  evidence
and there was no unfairness in the judge drawing the  conclusions  that  she
did from the evidence.

For all these reasons it seems to me that the judge was  perfectly  entitled
to conclude that the appellants' father was available in Nigeria to  provide
them with parental care  and  to  take  parental  responsibility,  that  the
requirements  of  paragraph  297  were  therefore  not  met  and  that   the
respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance to join their  aunt  in  the
UK was not in breach of their Article 8 rights. The grounds do not  disclose
any errors of law in the judge's decision.




    DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeals stands.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 4 September 2020
