
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04508/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |Determination Promulgated          |
|On: 26 April 2017                     |On: 10 May 2017                    |
|                                      |                                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            MR ABIODOUN SULAIMON
                       (No anonymity directionS made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr P Singh of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.      The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State for the  Home
   Department.

       The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 17  August  1977.  For
       the sake of convenience, I shall continue to refer to the parties as
       they were referred to before the First--tier Tribunal.

   2. First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appellant's  and  his  wife  and
      three children's  appeals  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights against the decision of the respondent made
      on 6 August 2015 refusing his application for leave to remain on human
      rights grounds.

   3. Permission to appeal to  the  respondent  was  granted  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge JG McDonald on 9 November 2016. Upper  Tribunal  Dr  HH
      Storey in a decision dated 10 January 2016  found  that  there  was  a
      material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
      set it aside. He adjourned the case  and  retained  it  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal for hearing and stated that further fact-finding necessary in
      the appeal is of limited scope.




   4. Upper Tribunal Judge Storey said that it is clear from the case of  MA
      Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705, that the fact that there is a  qualified
      child is a relevant consideration and one that might be said to  point
      to it being in his interest to remain in the United Kingdom, but it is
      equally clear that the assessment of reasonableness must take  account
      of the conduct of the claimant and his wife  and  said  that  such  an
      assessment has yet to be made.



   5. Judge Storey stated that to  be  adequate  legally  and  factually,  a
      proper assessment of the best interests of the child must be based  on
      a careful consideration of the likely circumstances  of  the  claimant
      and family, if returned as a unit to Nigeria. He further  stated  that
      an objective evaluation needs to be made on the  question  of  whether
      the claimant and his wife would be able to get a job in Nigeria,  both
      of whom had previously worked in that country.   Judge  Storey  stated
      that so far as concerns the evidence of the claimant, his wife and her
      sister regarding their circumstances in the United Kingdom, however he
      saw no reason for why the Judge's  positive  findings  regarding  that
      should not be preserved.

6.      Thus, the appeal came before me.

   First-tier Tribunal's Findings.


7.       The respondent allowed the appellant's  application  to  remain  in
   the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules on the bases of his  and
   his children's private life in the United Kingdom.



8.       The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal,  concluding
   that



          [58]. Section 117B of the Act confirms  that  the  maintenance  of
          effective immigration control is in the public interest, and  that
          it is also in the public interest that persons who seek  to  enter
          or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially  independent.
          Furthermore, little weight should be given to a private life of  a
          person which was established when that person was  in  the  United
          Kingdom unlawfully.


          The hearing


9.       At the hearing, there was no oral evidence and I heard  submissions
   by both parties. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Singh relied on the rule
   25 notice of 6 August 2015. He submitted that it was  not  accepted  that
   the appellant came to this country in 1995 because  he  is  not  able  to
   succeed under the long residence rules  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
   appellants have been in this country unlawfully. He accepted  that  there
   are now two qualifying children because the second  child  is  now  seven
   years old, the older child is eight years old and the youngest  child  is
   three years old. It was submitted that the children are not at a critical
   stage of their education  and  have  no  health  problems.  Even  if  the
   children do not speak the language Yourba, they can  learn  it  with  the
   help of their parents but in any event English is the spoken language  in
   Nigeria. He submitted that even if the children have been in this country
   for seven years, significant weight should be given to that fact but that
   is not where the story ends. Even if it is in the best interests  of  the
   children  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  is  not   considered
   unreasonable for them to leave with their parents who have had no  lawful
   status in this country. I should apply  the  test  of  reasonableness.  I
   should consider the wider public interest and  the  parents'  immigration
   history. The elements in paragraph 116 are not restrictive and  therefore
   it must be taken into account that the appellant and the children if they
   are allowed to live in this country, will have recourse  to  public  fund
   such as the NHS and schooling.




10. He further submitted that the children are very young  and  referred  me
   to the case of Azmi Moyed and others [2013] UKUT where it is stated  that
   the children's connections the United Kingdom become more important  from
   ages of 4 to 11. The fact that the appellant claims that he does not have
   contacts in Nigeria, does not mean he will be unable to obtain employment
   in Nigeria. The  appellant  cannot  equate  employment  with  not  having
   contacts in Nigeria. The parents have worked in Nigeria in the  past  and
   therefore they can get jobs on their return.  They  can  establish  their
   social economic network on their return Nigeria.  There  is  no  evidence
   that the mosque community will not continue to support the  appellant  in
   Nigeria given that the cost of living in Nigeria is less than the support
   they give the appellant's family in the United Kingdom.



11.  Mr Coleman on behalf of the appellant's stated that there are  now  two
   qualifying children and the case becomes stronger. He submitted that  the
   worst that can be said about the parents is that there are  over  stayers
   but asked me to consider that there are no aggravating factors  in  their
   immigration history.  He submitted that factual basis of  this  case  has
   been preserved by Judge Storey in his decision on  finding  an  error  of
   law.



12. He stated that the eldest child is nearly a British citizen  because  he
   has been here for nine years and would be entitled to citizenship at  the
   age of 10. The appellants have developed no skills in the United  Kingdom
   that they can take back to Nigeria to enable them to find  jobs  as  they
   have not worked in the United Kingdom. This is relevant for the  children
   because their parents  will  not  have  any  financial  support  and  the
   appellant's wife has no family. The appellant worked as a domestic worker
   and his wife worked as a kitchen assistant  in  a  hospital  in  Nigeria.
   English is the language of the household. The older child is  in  primary
   school and has good attendance and academic achievements.  The  knowledge
   of Yourba of the children is very weak. The appellant  sister's  evidence
   was that the appellant has nothing to go back to in  Nigeria.  The  elder
   children are inducted into the education  system  and  have  no  ties  in
   Nigeria. There will be significant disruption  to  education  and  social
   development for the children. They have cousins in this country who  they
   have grown up  together  and  have  family  life  with  them.  Therefore,
   reasonableness of removal has to be assessed against  all  these  factors
   taken together.




13. I was referred to case law two support  the  appellant's  case.  It  was
   emphasised that the children are born in this country as opposed to those
   who are born elsewhere and come to this country. He considers this to  be
   a significant factor to be taken into account in favour of  the  children
   of the appellant. Children born in this country are in a better  position
   because they have no connection with any other country.




       Assessment under Article 8




14. An error of law has been established in the decision of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and it has been set aside. I have heard evidence and submissions
   to enable me to remake the decision  in  respect  of  Article  8  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights.




15. The evidence of the appellant and his wife was found by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal to be largely credible and it was accepted  that  the  appellant
   and his wife live together with their three children as  a  close  family
   unit. It is accepted that both the eldest children of the  appellant  are
   integrated  into  the  education  system  in  the  United   Kingdom   and
   progressing well with their educational development as evidenced by their
   school reports. There are now two qualifying children the eldest child is
   9 years of age and the second child is now aged 7 in the  youngest  child
   is three years of age.




16. Given that  Judge  Storey  preserved  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge in respect of the  evidence  of  the  witnesses  who  gave
   evidence before the First-tier Tribunal. The evidence which  is  accepted
   is  that  the  appellant  does  not  have  any  family  in  Nigeria.  The
   appellant's sister-in-law stated in her evidence  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal that her family and  that  of  the  appellant  help  each  other
   financially but would not be able to send any financial  support  to  the
   appellant's family if they were returned to Nigeria.




17. There was no dispute that the appellant does not meet  the  requirements
   of the Immigration Rules. The appellant's application was  made  pursuant
   to Article 8 of the European convention on Human Rights in respect of him
   and his three children's private life in the United Kingdom.




18. I have considered Lord Bingham's step by step approach in  the  case  of
   Razgar, R (on the Application of) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and in  so  doing
   recognised that at all stages of the Article 8 assessment  when  deciding
   whether there is a family or private  life,  when  deciding  whether  any
   existing family or private life is the subject of an interference  having
   grave consequences and when deciding whether  any  such  interference  is
   proportionate to the legitimate public end sought  to  be  achieved,  the
   approach is to take into account a wide range of circumstances  including
   the appellant's previous family and personal circumstances and the likely
   developments in the future.




19. It is not in dispute that the appellant has not lived  in  this  country
   lawfully and his immigration status as  always  been  precarious.  Having
   said that I cannot consider the children's  parents  adverse  immigration
   history when I consider  the  children's  best  interests  which  are  my
   primary responsibility but in line with the case of  MA  Pakistan  [2016]
   EWCA Civ 705, it is equally clear that the assessment  of  reasonableness
   must take account of the conduct of the claimant and his  wife  and  said
   that such an assessment has yet to be made. The appellant  and  his  wife
   have always been in this country unlawfully. They had three  children  in
   this country when they were here  unlawfully.  They  now  rely  on  these
   children's private life to continue to live with them in this country.




20. I take into account that the children are not British citizens  and  are
   not entitled to  rely  on  the  public  purse  and  receive  the  special
   treatment and care on social services of  this  country.  It  is  clearly
   stated in EV Philippines [2014] E  WCA  7874  that  if  the  parents  are
   removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with
   them. Because the best interests of children are  to  remain  with  their
   parents. In EV Philippines, it was stated that "although it is of  course
   a question of fact for the Tribunal, I cannot  see  the  desirability  of
   being educated at the public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefits
   to the children of remaining  with  their  parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
   provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world".




21. The appellant does not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
   and I must consider whether there are any exceptional circumstances where
   the appellant and his family should succeed under Article 8 when they are
   not able to succeed under the Immigration Rules which are  by  and  large
   Article 8 compliant.




22. I find that two of the children are  qualified  children  who  are  aged
   seven and nine and I accept that the nine-year-old would be  entitled  to
   British citizenship at the age of 10 as submitted by the appellant.



23. The evidence is that the appellant's parents when they lived in  Nigeria
   were on low income jobs. The appellant's wife was working  as  a  kitchen
   assistant and the appellant worked as a domestic worker. The evidence  of
   the appellant is that he and his wife  have  not  worked  in  the  United
   Kingdom and have relied on support from their family and the  mosque  and
   therefore have not acquired further skills to find jobs in Nigeria.

  24. In light of the case of EV Philippines, I ask  the  material  question
      which is - is it in the best interests of the child to remain in  this
      country or to be removed with their parents to Nigeria. This balancing
      exercise is central with the consideration for the  need  to  maintain
      immigration control. I accept that the welfare and the best  interests
      of the children must be that they can be looked after on their  return
      to Nigeria by their parents in light of the evidence that they have no
      family network or contacts in Nigeria to help them  settle  down  into
      the country. I have considered the observations in Zoumbas  [2013]  UK
      C70  that  the  best  interests  of  the  child  must  be  a   primary
      consideration but considered that it  does  not  have  the  status  of
      paramount consideration.


  25. I consider the case law including Azmi-Moyed and it was required  that
      the Judge to find whether it would be reasonable for a child  who  has
      lived in the United Kingdom for seven years to leave the country.  The
      case also states that the children's connections  the  United  Kingdom
      become more important from ages of 4 to 11.  The  qualifying  children
      are aged nine and seven.


  26. As the starting point in my assessment, I find that the best interests
      of the children lie with living with their parents wherever they live.
      The appellant's parents have no immigration status in this country and
      have lived here unlawfully and therefore will be returned  to  Nigeria
      unless I find that it is in their children's best interests  for  them
      to live in  this  country  because  their  children's  best  interests
      require it.


  27. I have given careful consideration of the likely circumstances of  the
      appellant's children if returned as a family unit to Nigeria.  I  have
      taken into account all the factors relevant  to  their  well-being  if
      returned to Nigeria. I do not accept that contacts  are  necessary  in
      Nigeria to enable the  appellant  and  his  wife  to  be  employed  in
      Nigeria. They were working in Nigeria before they came to  the  United
      Kingdom. They claim not to have worked in this country and have  lived
      on the support of others for over a decade which is  not  particularly
      credible but for the purposes of this decision,  I  accept  that  they
      have not worked in this country.


  28. Even if the appellant and his wife have not worked in this country, no
      credible reason has been given for why they cannot get jobs in Nigeria
      given that they worked in that country before they came to the  United
      Kingdom. I accept that the jobs in Nigeria may not be as  highly  paid
      as jobs in this country, but the standard of life is not as  expensive
      as in this country. This means that the appellant  and  his  wife  can
      look for jobs on their return and to look after  their  children.  The
      evidence is that the appellant has been supported by  his  family  and
      the mosque for over a decade, therefore there is  no  reason  for  why
      they cannot receive financial assistance for the  time  it  takes  for
      them to settle down in Nigeria.


  29. Nigeria has an education system which  the  appellant's  children  can
      access. It is accepted that English is widely spoken  in  Nigeria  and
      therefore their lack of knowledge of Yourba will not  undermine  their
      ability  to  be  educated.  They  can  learn  the  language  with  the
      assistance of their parents. The evidence is  that  the  children  are
      doing very well at this country, which will help  them  to  adapt  the
      system of education in Nigeria. At these ages, they  are  not  in  any
      pivotal stage of their education. They have just reached  the  age  of
      seven and nine and this is less significant to a child's than a  child
      in their teenage years as stated in Azmi  Moyed  that  the  children's
      connections to the United Kingdom become more important from ages of 4
      to 11. The children are young enough  to  adapt  easily  to  life  and
      education in Nigeria.


  30. I have made a careful examination  of  all  relevant  information  and
      factors in this appeal and come to a conclusion that it would  not  be
      unreasonable to expect the children to return to  Nigeria  with  their
      parents and siblings as a family unit. I have taken into  account  the
      respondent's interest of the economic well-being of this  country  and
      that the continued residence of the appellant's family in this country
      would put a further burden on the public purse. I have considered  the
      best interests of the children, notwithstanding the  extra  burden  on
      the public purse.


  31. I therefore find that there is a material error of law in the decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  set  it  aside.  I  substitute  my
      decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal pursuant to Article  8  of
      the European Convention on Human Rights.

           DECISION

             The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed

              I substitute my decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Dated this 6th day of May 2017
