
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04785/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2019                     |On 18 March 2019                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 ABDUL MAJID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Chaudhry, instructed by AK Action Bureau
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 7 September 2018, I found that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law and I set aside its decision. My reasons
    were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, Abdul Majid, was born on 13 July 1942 and is  a
         male citizen of Pakistan.  He applied for  entry  clearance  as  an
         adult dependent relative seeking to join a sponsor  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  His application was refused by a decision  of  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer (Sheffield) dated 1 February 2016.  The appellant
         appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge T  Jones)  which,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 21 August 2017, dismissed the appeal.   The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The appeal proceeded on Article  8  ECHR  grounds  only.   The
         appellant complains that the judge failed  to  consider  Article  8
         adequately.  Judge Jones concluded that the decision not  to  issue
         entry clearance to the appellant was proportionate.

         3.   I find that the decision should be set aside.   I  reach  that
         decision for the following reasons.  As Judge Parker noted  in  her
         grant of permission to appeal (28  December  2017),  Judge  Jones's
         consideration of the appellant's ability to meet  the  requirements
         of Appendix FM of  HC  395  (as  amended)  is  unimpeachable.   The
         appellant did not meet the requirements of the relevant Immigration
         Rules.  However, I agree  with  Judge  Parker's  observation  that,
         having decided to proceed to consider Article 8  at  all,  it  must
         follow that the judge had identified circumstances which  justified
         such a consideration.  However, the  judge's  reasons  for  finding
         that the decision was not disproportionate [27] turns the  argument
         back on itself again by simply setting  out  the  reasons  why  the
         appellant could not meet Appendix FM.  Had the  appellant  met  the
         requirements of  Appendix  FM,  there  would  have  been  a  strong
         argument for allowing his appeal on Article 8 grounds.  Having  not
         met those requirements, it would have been open to Judge  Jones  to
         have  observed  that  there   was   no   evidence   of   compelling
         circumstances  or,  alternatively,  to  have  given   reasons   for
         proceeding with an Article  8  analysis  and  then  dismissing  the
         Article 8 appeal, again with reasons.  Instead, he has delivered  a
         circular argument which leaves a reader of his decision unclear  as
         to why the Article 8 appeal was dismissed.

         4.   In the circumstances, I set aside Judge Jones's decision.  His
         findings of fact in relation to the ability  of  the  appellant  to
         meet the requirements of Appendix FM are preserved.   The  Tribunal
         will remake the decision following a resumed hearing on a  date  to
         be fixed in Bradford (before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane).   Both
         parties may adduce further evidence.  If they do so, they must send
         to the other party and to the Upper Tribunal copies of any  written
         evidence upon which they may respectably seek to rely no later than
         10 days prior to the resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  21  August
         2017 is set aside.  The  judge's  findings  regarding  Appendix  FM
         shall stand.  The Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge  Lane)  will
         remake the decision following a resumed hearing on  a  date  to  be
         fixed at Bradford (two hours).

         No anonymity direction is made."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 11 March 2019, I  heard  evidence
    from to two of the appellant's sons, Mr [MM] and  Mr  [RM].  They  each
    gave an account of the arrangements that have existed in  recent  years
    by which they and their brothers (there are  five  sons  in  all)  have
    taken it in turns to travel to Pakistan to look after the appellant.  I
    find that the evidence which I heard was truthful although  I  do  find
    that both witnesses have played down the financial impact  which  these
    arrangements have had upon their families and those of their  siblings.
    The visits have been for several weeks at a time and  resulted  in  the
    case of Mr [RM] in the  loss  of  his  job.  The  evidence  which  both
    brothers gave regarding their financial  circumstances  indicated  that
    they each maintain a family home, a  mortgage  and  a  family  on  very
    limited income. I accept that the brothers will help each other out but
    I find that that is not an arrangement which can be sustained into  the
    long-term. I also find that, although savings in airfares and  loss  of
    employment income  would  be  achieved  if  the  appellant  moved  from
    Pakistan  to  the  United  Kingdom,  the  finances  of  the  sponsoring
    brothers,  even  when  considered  collectively,  are  such  that   the
    appellant is more likely than not to  have  to  rely  on  public  funds
    should he come to live in this jurisdiction.

 3. I preserved the First-tier Tribunal's finding that  the  appellant  was
    unable to meet the requirements of Appendix FM of HC 395 (as  amended).
    I criticised the First-tier Tribunal judge for failing  to  explain  in
    greater detail why the Article 8 ECHR appeal had failed. The  appellant
    should be aware that Appendix FM  is  intended  to  be,  in  effect,  a
    codification of the law relating to Article 8  ECHR.  If  an  applicant
    fails to meet the requirements of Appendix FM then his or  her  chances
    of establishing a right to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  under
    Article 8 ECHR outside the rules are slim. This is because, unlike some
    other provisions of the Immigration Rules, Appendix FM is  intended  to
    address  most  of  the  circumstances  which   arise   in   immigration
    applications and appeals which relate to family life.

 4. One of the reasons why the appellant failed to satisfy Appendix FM  was
    that he could not show that the required level of care in Pakistan  was
    not available or that there was no person in  that  country  you  could
    reasonably provide it or that it was unaffordable. The burden of  proof
    in immigration appeal rests on the appellant and I found that the First-
    tier Tribunal was right to conclude that no evidence had been  provided
    to prove that other individuals or agencies could not provide the  care
    which the appellant requires. Like Judge Jones, I  have  no  difficulty
    accepting that the appellant is in poor health and needs help.  I  also
    do not doubt that the sponsoring brothers in the United Kingdom feel  a
    personal, social and cultural obligation to provide that help  to  him.
    However, the failure of the appellant to show that he cannot access the
    help he requires within Pakistan  is  not  only  determinative  of  his
    application under Appendix FM but also the appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds. The appellant is outside United Kingdom  so  the  decision  to
    deny him entry clearance has no  effect  upon  his  circumstances.  The
    impact which it has upon his private and family  life  has  to  be  set
    against the public interest which in this instance is  enhanced  by  my
    finding that the appellant would have to rely upon public funds. I have
    no doubt that the current care arrangements take a heavy  toll  on  the
    appellant's sons but I find, weighing that impact  against  the  public
    interest concerned with denying the appellant entry clearance, that the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision is proportionate.

Notice of Decision

 5. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 13 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
