








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04820/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th December 2018                         |On 11th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                             Ms Mary Khey Mogato

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Griffiths of Counsel instructed by Legal Rights
                    Partnership

For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on the 22nd May  2018  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the  appellant's  claims  based  on  human  rights
    specifically Article 8 of the ECHR. The appeal was dealt  with  by  the
    judge as a paper case.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker on 30th October 2018. Thus the case appeared before  me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

    It is  arguable  the  judge  made  contradictory  findings,  failed  to
    consider relevant documentation that was before him and failed to  make
    adequate findings on whether the appellant met the requirements of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  thus  failed   to   consider   proportionality
    adequately.

Factual background

 5. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on 12 May 1987.  She
    entered the United Kingdom on 5 September 2010 as a student.  The  visa
    was valid until 6 November 2012. On 3  October  2012  she  applied  for
    leave to remain as the partner of an EEA national. She  was  granted  a
    residence card which was valid from 4 February 2014  until  4  February
    2019.The appellant's marriage to the EEA  national  ended  in  divorce,
    when the appellant discovered that her husband was  in  a  relationship
    with another woman. It does not appear that the appellant  pursued  EEA
    rights further.

 6. On 6 September 2017 the appellant made an application  based  on  human
    rights for leave to remain in the United Kingdom. On 25 January 2018  a
    decision was made to refuse the appellant's application. It is  against
    that decision that the appellant has appealed. The appellant paid for a
    paper appeal.

 7. In the appeal the appellant was seeking to rely upon  her  relationship
    with her partner,  Mr  Maco  Minxelle  Meguell  G  Benwell,  a  British
    Citizen. It was claimed by reason of her relationship she was  eligible
    to make an application under section R-LTRP of Appendix FM.

 8. Whilst the letter of  refusal  examines  in  detail  whether  appellant
    qualified under the rules, it was accepted  before  me  that  the  only
    ground for refusing the application under  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    that the appellant had failed to produce an A 1 IELTS  Certificate.  In
    principle it was accepted that if the appellant had  produced  a  valid
    certificate the application  would  have  succeeded  under  the  rules.
    Further as the Immigration Rules were the government's response to  the
    obligations under Article 8 if the appellant qualified under the rules,
    that would be a significant factor  in  assessing  the  proportionality
    issue under Article 8. It was accepted that no other  issue  was  being
    taken by the respondent.

 9. With regard to the grounds of appeal the only issue pursued  before  me
    was whether the appellant had submitted a valid A1 IELTS certificate to
    the Tribunal within the time limits set by the Tribunal and before  the
    decision  was  promulgated.   That  raised  the   questions   was   the
    certificate genuine; was the certificate lodged with the Tribunal;  and
    when was the certificate lodged with the Tribunal

10.   The timings for various emails are important.  The  appellant  claims
    that she had by email lodged with the Tribunal the required certificate
    on the 15th February 2018. She had attached a copy of  the  certificate
    with the email. The appellant in her grounds of appeal  notes  that  at
    the time that she lodged the certificate her appeal had not been  given
    an Appeal Reference Number and she had therefore used her  Home  Office
    Reference Number.

11. The appellant in her  grounds  acknowledges  that  the  Appeal  Notice,
    itself, required that once she, the appellant, had received  an  appeal
    number she had at that stage  to  lodge  all  her  documents  with  the
    Tribunal using the appeal number. The appellant  accepts  that  at  the
    time of lodging the appeal she did  not  re-submit  her  evidence,  the
    certificate.

12. However subsequent to that the appellant received a  notification  that
    she should lodge her evidence by the 1st May 2018. On the 30th April by
    email the appellant re-sent her certificate by email.

13. There is on the file email correspondence to verify that  the  document
    was sent. It is unclear as to when exactly the emails were connected to
    the file, but they are stamped as received at Hatton Cross on the  15th
    May. It may be that the emails were only connected to  the  file  after
    the case had been issued to Judge Khan and he had returned the decision
    for promulgation.

14.  The appeal was dealt with on the papers. Ostensibly it was issued  for
    paper hearing  on  2  May  2018  and  the  decision  in  the  case  was
    promulgated on 22 May 2018.

15. Stamps on the emails indicate that the emails were received  at  Hatton
    Cross on the 15th May 2018. However the emails  are  dated  30th  April
    2018 and therefore confirm the appellant's account that  she  had  sent
    the email and the certificate to the Tribunal on that date, within  the
    time set by the notices.

16. It was accepted before me that the emails did prove that  the  Tribunal
    was in possession of the emails and certificates before the paper  case
    was issued to Judge Khan but it appears that they were only put on  the
    file after the case had been issued to and  the  decision  returned  by
    Judge Khan.

17. Judge Khan in dealing with the appeal, through no fault  on  his  part,
    states that no documents in support of the appeal have been received by
    the Tribunal. That in the circumstances is wrong.

18. On behalf of the respondent Ms Isherwood required time to check whether
    the certificate was genuine. It was accepted that  if  the  certificate
    was  genuine  and  not  tainted  in  any  way  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the rules. If there was a challenge to  genuineness  of
    the certificate, that would have to be determined in a hearing  in  the
    First-tier. I therefore gave  Ms  Isherwood  one  week  to  notify  the
    Tribunal as to whether the certificate was accepted as genuine.

19. By email dated 12th  December  Ms  Isherwood  has  confirmed  that  the
    certificate is accepted as genuine. The email  also  confirms  that  in
    light of the facts the appeal stands to be allowed. For the reasons set
    out I allow the appeal of the appellant against the decision  of  Judge
    Khan and substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

20. I allow the appeal of the appellant and set the decision of Judge  Khan
    aside.

21. I substitute a decision allowing the appeal of the appellant.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 12th December 2018

