
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/04394/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 July 2017                     |On 21 July 2017                   |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                 YASIR BUTT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms S Shafaatulla, solicitor, of Five Star
(International) Ltd.
For the Respondent: Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge P A Grant-Hutchison promulgated on 13  December  2016,  which
dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was  born  on  20  December  1984  and  is  a  national  of
Pakistan. The Appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK as the  spouse
of a British Citizen. On 5 August 2015, the Secretary of State  refused  the
Appellant's application.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge P A Grant-Hutchison ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  31  May  2017,  Judge  Adio  gave
permission to appeal stating

      "1. The appellant  seeks  permission  to  appeal  in  time  against  a
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge PA Grant-Hutchison) who  in
      a decision promulgated on 13 December 2016 dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse to grant  leave  to
      remain on  family  and  private  life  grounds.  The  grounds  in  the
      permission application argue that the appellant's partner was born  in
      and has spent her life in the UK and she has never lived  in  Pakistan
      and not visited since childhood. The Judge failed to attach due weight
      to this. It was also argued that the sponsor's mother and  sister  are
      heavily reliant  on  her  for  day-to-day  care  and  assistance  both
      physical and emotional. It is argued that the Judge did not apply  the
      correct standard of proof.


      2. The Judge  found  that  there  are  obstacles  but  these  are  not
      significant however the Judge did not seem to analyse that the sponsor
      is a British citizen who is pregnant  and  who  is  entitled  to  such
      medical care in the UK on the basis  of  her  citizenship.  The  Judge
      seems to concentrate on the fact that the sponsor is from a  Pakistani
      ethnic background and not mentioning that she is  a  British  citizen.
      Bearing in mind the sponsor's ill-health the fact that she assists her
      sister and the emotional and physical care  involved  it  is  arguable
      cumulatively that there is an error of law  in  the  Judge's  decision
      evaluating whether he obstacles faced by the sponsor is significant. I
      find that there is an arguable error of law."

The Hearing

6.(a) For the appellant, Ms Shafaatulla moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
told me that the focus is entirely on [18] of  the  decision.  She  told  me
that the Judge had made both an error of fact and an error of law there.  At
[18] the Judge records that the sponsor is pregnant. She  told  me  that  at
the date of hearing the sponsor was not pregnant, and that no  evidence  was
led to suggest that she was. Ms Shafaatulla told me that the sponsor is  now
pregnant.

(b)  Ms  Shafaatulla  told  me  that  the  Judge's  conclusion  at  [18]  is
incorrect. She told me  that  the  evidence  indicated  that  the  appellant
provides significant  day-to-day  personal  care,  including  toileting  and
bathing, to her sister. She told me that the appellant's  mother  is  unable
to provide that support and care  because  the  appellant's  mother  suffers
from depression and panic  attacks.  The  appellant's  sister  suffers  from
fibromyalgia, depression, slipped discs and  trapped  nerves.  She  told  me
that the Judge had failed to give adequate consideration to the evidence  of
the amount of support that the sponsor gives her sister.

(c) Ms Shafaatulla emphasised that  the  sponsor  and  her  family  are  all
British citizens, and that the sponsor has not visited  Pakistan  since  she
was a child. She referred me to Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11,  and  told  me  that
the Judge has applied too high a test. She told me  that  the  circumstances
in this case amount to insurmountable obstacles as defined  in  EX2  of  the
immigration rules. She urged me to allow the appeal  and  to  substitute  my
own decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision.

 7. For the respondent, Mr Matthews told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors, material or otherwise. He told me that the Judge  considered
all relevant factors, then made a decision which applies the  correct  legal
test, set out in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11. He told me that  there  can  be  no
criticism of the Judge's fact-finding process, that the Judge  took  correct
guidance in law and that the Judge took account of all relevant  factors  in
the appellant's case before reaching conclusions well within  the  range  of
conclusions reasonably available to the Judge  to  reach.  He  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8. This case turns entirely on  consideration  of  the  appellant  sponsor's
article 8 family life. The focus in this appeal is on  paragraphs  EX.1  and
EX.2 of appendix FM to the immigration rules.
9. Paragraphs EX.1(b) & 2 say
       'EX.1. This paragraph applies if
             (b) the applicant has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
             with a partner who is in the  UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen,
             settled  in  the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
             humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles
             to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.
       EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)   "insurmountable
       obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which  would  be
       faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing  their  family
       life together outside the UK and which  could  not  be  overcome  or
       would entail very  serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
       partner.'
10. What is plead is that the sponsor's commitment to her mother and  sister
creates very significant difficulties  for  the  appellant  and  sponsor  to
continue their family life outside the UK.

11.  It  was  held  in  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11  that  the  definition  of
"insurmountable  obstacles"   at   EX.2   as   meaning   "very   significant
difficulties which would be faced by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
continuing their family life together outside the UK and which could not  be
overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the  applicant  or  their
partner" was consistent with Strasbourg case law.   The  court  referred  to
the case of Jeunesse v Netherlands.  Leave to remain would not  normally  be
granted in cases where an applicant for leave to remain  under  the  partner
route was in the UK in breach of immigration laws, unless the  applicant  or
their  partner  would  face  "insurmountable  obstacles"  (as  defined)   in
continuing their family life together outside the UK.  Even in a case  where
such difficulties did not  exist  leave  to  remain  could  nevertheless  be
granted  outside  the  rules  (according  to  the  IDIs)   in   "exceptional
circumstances"  i.e.  "circumstances  in  which  refusal  would  result   in
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual  such  that  refusal  of
the application would not be proportionate".  The rules  and  IDIs  together
were compatible with Article 8.  This was  not  to  say  that  decisions  in
individual  cases  would  necessarily  be   compatible   with   Article   8.
"Exceptional circumstances" did not mean that a unique  or  unusual  feature
was  to  be  sought  and  in  its  absence  the  application  rejected.    A
proportionality  test  had  to  be  carried  out.   A  court   or   tribunal
considering whether a  refusal  of  leave  to  remain  was  compatible  with
Article 8 in the context of precarious family life  had  to  decide  whether
the refusal was proportionate in the particular case  before  it,  balancing
the strength of the  public  interest  in  the  removal  of  the  person  in
question against the impact on  private  and  family  life.   In  doing  so,
whilst also considering  all  factors  relevant  to  the  specific  case  in
question, it should give appropriate weight  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
policy, expressed in the rules and instructions, that  the  public  interest
in immigration control can be outweighed, when  considering  an  application
for leave to remain brought by a person in the UK in breach  of  immigration
laws, only  where  there  are  "insurmountable  obstacles"  or  "exceptional
circumstances" as defined. "The critical issue will  generally  be  whether,
giving due weight to the strength of the public interest in the  removal  of
the person in the case before  it,  the  article  8  claim  is  sufficiently
strong to outweigh it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with  precarious
family life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to  outweigh  the
public interest in immigration control".

12. The challenge to the Judge's decision focuses entirely on  [18]  of  the
decision. No criticism is made of any other part of the decision.

13. At [18] of the decision, the Judge records that he considers the  health
of the appellant and the sponsor,  and  the  sponsor's  commitments  to  his
sister and her mother, as well as the sponsor's  lack  of  familiarity  with
Pakistani culture and life. The Judge explains that he does not accept  that
only the sponsor can care for her ailing family members. The  Judge  accepts
that there are obstacles, but finds that

      "They are not significant ones."

14. In R (on the application of Luma Sh Khairdin) v  SSHD  (NIA  2002:  Part
5A) IJR [2014] UKUT 00566 (IAC) it was held  where  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
considering,  pursuant  to  section  11  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
Enforcement Act 2007, whether there is an error of law in  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal involving Article 8  proportionality,  the  task  of
the Upper Tribunal is confined (at that point) to  deciding  if  the  First-
tier Tribunal's assessment of where to  strike  the  balance  was  unlawful,
according to the error of law principles set out in  R  (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA
Civ 982. In R (Iran) v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982  the  Court  of  Appeal  was
took the firm view that a decision on proportionality of an  Adjudicator  or
Immigration Judge who has properly directed himself can only  be  overturned
on reconsideration on traditional public law grounds.

15. At [12] of the decision, the Judge  correctly  reminds  himself  of  the
standard & burden of proof. Between [13]  and  [17]  of  the  decision,  the
Judge takes correct guidance in law, which is not the subject  to  challenge
in this appeal.

16. The Judge's findings of fact and his proportionality balancing  exercise
is found in [18] of the decision. It is suggested  for  the  appellant  that
the Judge applies too high a threshold, but the final two sentences of  [18]
are manifestly correct in  law.  What  the  Judge  says  in  the  final  two
sentences of [18] is entirely consistent with what is said in Agyarko

17.  The  facts  argued  for  the  appellant   relate   to   the   sponsor's
circumstances - her  British  citizenship,  her  lack  of  familiarity  with
Pakistan, and her obligations to her mother and sister who both suffer  from
disabling conditions. Those are precisely the factors that  were  considered
by the Judge in the analysis at [18] of the decision. In  reality,  what  is
now argued is a disagreement with the weight the Judge afforded each of  the
factors plead for the appellant and sponsor.

18. In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT  254  (IAC)   the  Tribunal
said that "Giving weight to a factor one way or  another  is  for  the  fact
finding Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely give  rise  to  an
error of law". In the decision promulgated on 13 December  2016,  the  Judge
clearly took account of each strand  of  evidence  and  reached  conclusions
which were well within the range of conclusions available to him.

19.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

20. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.



CONCLUSION

21. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

22. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 20 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

