
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04162/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 September 2019                   |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMAD SAJID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant against a Decision
and Reasons of Judge McLeese in the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 24
May 2019.  The judgment followed a hearing at Newport on 1 May 2019.

The appellant, a national of Pakistan born on 9 September 1984 had made an
application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his private and
family life. The application was refused by the Secretary of State on 18
February 2019.

The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was in a relationship with
an Indian national with ILR in the UK. His Indian national partner was also
pregnant. It was argued before the judge that they were in a genuine and
subsisting relationship and therefore had family life together which they
would not be able to enjoy in Pakistan because his Indian partner would be
unable to relocate to Pakistan with him.

The judge dismissed the appeal having found the appellant's favour with
regard to the relationship being genuine and subsisting but against the
appellant on the basis that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the
relationship continuing in Pakistan, there were no very significant
obstacles to the appellant's integration into Pakistan and there were no
unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant in the appeal being
refused.

Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 5
August 2009.

The judge granting permission found it arguable that the first-tier
Tribunal had attached insufficient weight to the identification by the
appellant of the relevant issues concerning the relationship between
Pakistan and India and the impact of that relationship on citizens of those
countries going to each other's countries for settlement.

The grounds then suggest that the judge erred in his finding that the
appellant had said that his wife could go to Pakistan with him when she had
only said that it was possible. The grounds suggest that the evidence
indicated that it was quite simply not possible for either party to the
couple to live in the other's country.

It is suggested that the judge gave inadequate consideration to their
evidence about the visa requirements each would need to go to the other's
country. Essentially, the complaint was the judge had not paid adequate
attention to the difficulties faced between Indian nationals settling in
Pakistan and Pakistan nationals settling in India.

The matter was listed for an initial hearing before me on 20 September 2019
and both the appellant and his representatives were notified of the hearing
date. On the morning of the hearing the Tribunal received a letter from the
appellant's representatives indicating they had not been instructed to
represent him on the 20 September but the appellant had confirmed that he
would be attending in person. In the event the appellant did not attend and
had still not attended at 1230 when the case was called on. I therefore
proceeded in his absence.

Having read the Decision and Reasons of Judge McLeese with care I can find
no error of law in that decision either material or otherwise.

The judge found against the Secretary of State and in favour of the
appellant in relation to the nature of the relationship at paragraph 27 and
at paragraph 28 expressed himself satisfied there was family life between
them. The judge noted that the partner is an Indian citizen aged 35 who has
indefinite leave to remain in the UK and who is working but six months
pregnant. The judge noted that she would be prepared to go to Pakistan with
the appellant but would prefer to remain in the UK. Having checked the
record of proceedings, that was indeed the evidence before the judge. Again
in accordance with the evidence before the Judge, he found that neither
party had produced any real evidence that it would not be possible for
either to enter the other's country as a spouse and the evidence they gave
with regard to visa requirements were extremely vague and seemed to relate
to difficulties in obtaining copies of documents rather than any real
issues in obtaining visas.

The judge also noted misleading evidence in that the appellant had
indicated in his witness statement that he had no ties whatsoever with
Pakistan, whereas in fact he is in regular contact with his mother and
brother and is in telephone contact with them several times a week. The
judge also noted that the appellant had given misleading evidence about his
wife's language difficulties, stating that she could not speak Urdu whereas
in her own evidence she confirmed that she did.

The judge noted that he had been told that the Indian partner would not be
safe in Pakistan but also noted he had been provided with no evidence to
that effect. At paragraph 38 the judge noted that whilst he was aware that
there were difficulties between the two countries, there was no evidence
before him to support the contention that the Indian national partner could
not live and work in Pakistan. Life might be a little difficult but that
did not amount to insurmountable obstacles.

I can determine no error of law in the judge's reasoning. He took all of
the evidence into account and reached properly reasoned conclusions based
on the evidence.

This is a case where permission to appeal should not have been granted.

I therefore find the grounds are not made out and there is no material
error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's judgment.  The appeal therefore
to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed [pic]                            Date 20 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed [pic]                            Date 20 September 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin













