
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04322/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 November 2019                   |On 3 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE DOVE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                    S A h
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian instructed by Descartes Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq.  He appealed to  a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  1
    February 2018 refusing a human rights claim.

2.   The appellant claimed to have been in the United Kingdom since  January
    2001.  He made an unsuccessful asylum application but on 20 August 2010
    he was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

3.   On 27 August 2015  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  possession  with
    intent to supply  Class  A  controlled  drugs  (cocaine)  and  Class  B
    controlled drugs (cannabis)  and  sentenced  to  five  years  and  four
    months' imprisonment.

4.   He had claimed to be in a relationship with an  EEA  national  partner,
    Ms K, who was resident in the United Kingdom.  In his grounds of appeal
    he asserted that the decision was unlawful under section 6 of the Human
    Rights Act, referring among other things to the best interests  of  his
    EEA national partner.  However, he subsequently sought and was  granted
    permission to amend his grounds on introducing a new  matter.   He  had
    learned while in prison that he was the father of  a  British  national
    child.  After he was released from prison he and Ms K broke up  and  he
    made contact with the child's  mother,  Ms  S,  a  DNA  test  confirmed
    paternity and since then he has had regular contact with  his  daughter
    M, who lives with her mother.  Ms  S  is  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights as a worker.  The respondent consented to the appellant's
    relationship with the child and with her mother being introduced as new
    matters, and the judge as  well  as  giving  permission  to  amend  the
    grounds of appeal permitted amendment to include  an  Article  3  claim
    with regard to conditions on return to Iraq in the absence of  required
    identification documents.

5.   The judge set out the relevant Immigration Rules,  noting  reliance  on
    the relationship with the appellant's daughter  who  was  born  in  the
    United Kingdom who it was submitted was entitled to British citizenship
    although the judge noted there was  no  evidence  that  that  had  been
    confirmed but proceeded as if she were a British citizen.

6.   The daughter, M,  was  born  in  2014.   The  appellant  contacted  M's
    mother, Ms S, on Facebook and met her in May 2018 and he began to see M
    the following month.  His case was that he  and  his  daughter  quickly
    bonded and he had frequent contact with her  and  he  and  the  child's
    mother recommenced their relationship and now planned to live together.



7.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant, Ms S and  the  appellant's
    sister-in-law with regard to the nature and quality of the relationship
    with M.  The appellant lives in Guildford whilst Ms S  and  M  live  in
    Southend-on-Sea which is some 80 miles away.  He said that  he  visited
    them every week and occasionally more  during  weeks  when  he  was  in
    Southend and that he spoke with them daily.

8.   The judge accepted what appeared to be the reality that  the  appellant
    had regular contact with his daughter but considered  that  his  actual
    parental role was limited.  She noted  that  he  lived  a  considerable
    distance away from the child and her mother and at most he  picked  her
    up some mornings and dropped her off at nursery, but he did not collect
    her and therefore the time spent with her  during  the  week  was  very
    short.  He also saw her at weekends although that had not yet been  for
    a period of twelve months.

9.   The judge noted a letter from Andrew Green of 8 April  2019  confirming
    that  the  appellant  was  still  subject  to  licence  following   his
    imprisonment and he was the  appellant's  responsible  officer,  having
    been working with him since February 2019.  He said that the  appellant
    had settled in well and presented as remorseful, evidencing his ability
    to recognise triggers to his offending and made a conscious  effort  to
    avoid pro-criminal influences and appeared  dedicated  to  desist  from
    criminality.  He prioritised his family and spoke of his  focus  to  do
    so.

10.  The letter also referred to a good support network in Surrey  including
    the appellant's partner and their daughter, though the judge noted that
    in fact the letter was inaccurate as the  couple  live  a  considerable
    distance apart and if the  appellant  is  considered  to  have  a  good
    support network in Guildford where he lives if he now proposed to  move
    to Southend, he would be  a  considerable  distance  from  the  support
    network.

11.  The judge went on to consider whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  M
    to live in Iraq and concluded that it would not be reasonable to expect
    her to live in the IKR from where the appellant comes, or any region of
    Iraq.   Nor would it be reasonable to expect her mother to live  there.



12.  The judge went on to consider whether the impact on M  and  her  mother
    would be unduly harsh if the appellant was to be  deported.   She  took
    into account the decisions of the Upper Tribunal  in  KMO  [2015]  UKUT
    00543 and MAB [2015] UKUT 00435 with regard to the  meaning  of  "undue
    harshness".

13.  The judge summarised the effect  of  these  cases  as  being  that  the
    appellant must show  that  on  balance  the  impact  on  the  child  is
    inordinately or excessively harsh.  The judge  took  into  account  the
    line of cases referring to the Secretary of State's duty to have regard
    to the welfare of children affected by his decision, under  section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009,  and  the  best
    interests of the child beginning with the  decision  of  the  House  of
    Lords in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.

14.  The judge went on then to consider the evidence concerning the  child's
    best interests, including the contact at the weekend, the fact that the
    relationship was fairly new and noting that her primary carers were her
    mother and her grandmother.  She noted that the child now knows she has
    a father but the reality is that he lives a long distance away and  she
    lives with her mother and maternal grandmother and also has an aunt who
    lives nearby.

15.  The judge went on to note the fact that the offence  committed  by  the
    appellant was very serious.  M's mother had not explained why  she  had
    so quickly agreed to the appellant coming  into  her  daughter's  life,
    being aware of his previous background  and  his  recent  release  from
    prison.  She went on to say that the public interest in the appellant's
    deportation had to be weighed against the  impact  on  a  fairly  young
    child who has been seeing her father for a few months.   In  regard  to
    the public interest the appellant relied on probation letters regarding
    the appellant settling back into  the  community  and  also  the  OASys
    Report.  The judge considered  from  this  that  the  offender  manager
    appeared not to have any information from the CPS or  the  findings  of
    the sentencing judge with regard to the appellant's actual role in drug
    dealing and the person who was close to the source.  He  scored  a  low
    risk of reoffending and low risk of serious harm and  produced  a  drug
    test certificate dated 13 August  2016  and  certificates  relating  to
    various  other  matters  such  as  food   safety,   hygiene,   English,
    mathematics and personal and social skills.

16.  The judge went on to consider whether pursuant to  section  117C(6)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described in Exceptions 1
    and 2 in sub-sections (4) and (5) and concluded that, bearing  in  mind
    the serious nature of the offence and its type and the profound harm to
    society and other factors, balanced against  the  very  recent  limited
    contact which the appellant  had  with  his  daughter,  the  precarious
    nature of the relationship with her mother who was  her  primary  carer
    and was able to look after her while working full-time assisted by  her
    mother who came to the United Kingdom specifically for that purpose, it
    would not be unduly harsh for the  appellant  to  be  deported  and  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  She would remain living with her  mother
    and other family members in an environment in which she is  comfortable
    and which her mother said was confirmed by social services.  There  was
    no evidence that she was not thriving.

17.  The judge went on to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules,
    noting positive factors such as the appellant's new  relationship  with
    his daughter and her mother and his relationship with his  sibling  and
    his sibling's family; on the other hand the fact that he had  not  been
    living with them for a significant period of time  before  he  went  to
    prison, and noting also evidence concerning depression and anxiety from
    which  the  appellant  suffers.   The  judge  found   the   appellant's
    circumstances did  not  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  him  being
    deported from the United Kingdom.

18.  The judge went  on  to  consider  Article  3,  noting  the  appellant's
    evidence that he had never had a passport and did not have a CSID.   He
    said his parents were deceased, his younger brother had recently sought
    asylum in Italy and he had lost contact with his two other brothers who
    were in Iraq.  He had an uncle living in Switzerland  who  appeared  to
    make regular visits to Iraq and his brother, who gave evidence, and who
    lives in the United Kingdom, has  visited  Iraq  within  the  last  few
    years.  He has a British passport and said he had no knowledge  of  how
    to obtain a CSID in Iraq.

19.  The judge noted that a CSID was required in order to facilitate  travel
    and obtain financial assistance from the authorities.  She bore in mind
    that the appellant was not from a contested area but had been born  and
    lived all his life before coming to the United Kingdom in  Suleymaniya.
    His brother, uncle and sister-in-law had been able to travel to the IKR
    without difficulty.  The judge noted what had been said in the  country
    guidance  in  AAH  concerning  the  ability  of  a  maternal  uncle  in
    possession of a CSID to  assist  in  locating  the  original  place  of
    relocation of an individual's mother  and  there  the  trail  could  be
    followed to the place where her records were transferred upon marriage.
     The judge considered that simply deciding not to  make  any  enquiries
    was not a reasonable explanation and that the appellant had  failed  to
    show that he was not in a position to make  contact  with  male  family
    members in his home area to obtain material needed to  obtain  a  CSID.
    He noted that no supporting evidence such as a  death  certificate  had
    been produced to support the claim that the  appellant's  parents  were
    deceased, and in his interview for the OASys assessment  the  appellant
    had given an account of a close-knit family in Iraq and  no  reasonable
    explanation had been offered as to why neither he nor  his  brother  in
    the United Kingdom had information of  the  whereabouts  of  their  two
    remaining male siblings in Iraq and also their uncle who was  evidently
    in contact with people in  Iraq.   The  appeal  was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal the
    decision of the judge with regard  to  the  Article  8  and  Article  3
    issues.  The Secretary of State provided a Rule 24 response.

20.  In his submissions Mr Chakmakjian relied on and  developed  the  points
    made in the grounds of appeal.  He argued first with regard to  grounds
    5 and 6 that the judge had failed to  apply  the  correct  standard  of
    proof with regard to Article 3, which by itself, he argued  was  fatal,
    and had also failed to  give  adequate  reasons  with  respect  to  the
    evidence concerning the ability of the appellant to obtain a CSID.  The
    remarks about the family being close-knit had been made  in  the  OASys
    Report concerning his childhood in Iraq more than two decades  earlier.
    No reasons were given for assuming that  the  appellant's  uncle  could
    help him in getting a CSID when the uncle was resident in  Switzerland.
    No reasons were given for not accepting that  the  appellant's  parents
    had passed away, and reference was made to the appellant  referring  to
    his father suffering a stroke  in  2015  and  having  fears  about  his
    healthcare.

21.  The other matters concerned in particular an argument  that  the  judge
    had failed to consider the best interests of the  child  as  a  primary
    consideration as was required.  It was also argued that the  judge  had
    erred in including the seriousness of the offence in the assessment  of
    undue harshness, contrary to what had been said in KO (Nigeria) in  the
    Supreme Court.  The judge had  failed  to  consider  the  child's  best
    interests prospectively, bearing in mind  the  positive  obligation  to
    promote the best interests of the child, including the  requirement  to
    pursue measures enabling family ties to be developed.   The  judge  had
    failed to consider future family life and the obligation to promote it.
     There would be a definite or permanent severance between the appellant
    and his daughter.

22.  It was also argued that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  relevant
    matters such as the appellant's  family  life  with  his  partner,  his
    private life and length of residence and issues  of  rehabilitation  in
    the evaluation of proportionality.  In particular with  regard  to  the
    latter  there  was  substantial  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
    rehabilitation and low risk of reoffending and the judge had failed  to
    consider matters in the round.

23.  In his submissions Mr Lindsay relied  on  the  Rule  24  response,  and
    argued that though there were imperfections  in  the  decision,  mainly
    with regard to  self-directions  in  law,  the  law  had  been  applied
    properly in substance.  Though the judge did  not  refer  to  the  best
    interests of the child being a primary consideration, she had cited  ZH
    and section 55.  In any event, in light of the appellant's sentence  of
    five years and four months, the threshold was  very  high.   There  was
    nothing in the evidence to show that the case was beyond the normal run
    of deportation  cases.   It  was  a  consequence  of  deportation  that
    families were split.

24.  Though the judge's reference to KMO was wrong, it was not a case  where
    the undue harshest provision was in play  as  a  matter  of  law.   The
    threshold went over and above the exceptions.   The  self-direction  at
    paragraph 85 was correct and also at paragraph 100.  Everything  needed
    to go into the balance and the  conclusions  were  not  perverse.   The
    judge had carried out a proper balancing exercise.  Proper  regard  had
    been given  to  the  likely  difficulties  the  child  would  face,  in
    particular at paragraphs 86  and  93.   Although  paragraph  34  in  PF
    (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 1139 was  quoted  by  the  appellant  in  the
    skeleton, there had been a consideration of undue harshness in  effect.
    There was no error of law.

25.  Likewise with regard to ground 4, there  was  no  indication  that  the
    judge was unaware of the relationship and incapable of weighing  it  in
    the proportionality balance.  There was a choice for the family whether
    the partner went to Iraq.  The appellant's skeleton referred to  Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813, but the appellant could not argue he would not  be
    able to integrate.  He had  not  shown  that  he  had  no  capacity  to
    participate in life on return or be accepted and develop relationships.
     No material weight should be attached to the low risk  of  reoffending
    as argued in the Rule 24 response.  The absence of offending  was  what
    society expected.  It was true as argued in the skeleton  at  paragraph
    21 that there were rare circumstances where rehabilitation could play a
    role, but there was an absence of such circumstances here.

26.  The absence of stating of the standard of proof with regard to  Article
    3 was not fatal as the judge had made safe findings and it could not be
    said that on the basis of those findings the appellant could succeed on
    the basis of the proper standard being applied.  The judge was aware of
    the situation of the maternal uncle.  She had found the appellant could
    get a CSID with his uncle's help and proper  enquiry.   The  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that a person who said he could not get a CSID  on
    return where a relative could help could not show he could  not  obtain
    it unless he showed he had made proper enquiries and that had not  been
    done.  No death certificates  had  been  produced  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to draw inferences from the lack of evidence.  With regard  to
    the OASys Report and the point at paragraph 26C, the judge could not be
    expected to deal with every item of the evidence and there was a lot of
    evidence in this case.  The main reasons for dismissing the appeal have
    been set out.  There was no reason to suspect that the  judge  was  not
    fully in command of the facts of the appeal.

27.  By way of reply Mr Chakmakjian argued that what was said  at  paragraph
    85 about the best interests of the  child  was  insufficient.   It  was
    clear from PG (Nigeria) that KO was still to be followed with regard to
    exception 2.  The judge had not explained how the constituent  elements
    were weighed and why.  The points made with  regard  to  the  child  at
    paragraphs 46 and 50 were not brought into the conclusions at paragraph
    86.  There  was  a  lot  of  objective  evidence  including  AAH  about
    difficulties for returnees in Iraq and the decision was contaminated by
    the erroneous Article 3 findings.  With regard to lack of  reoffending,
    rehabilitation went much further and reference was made  to  paragraphs
    53 to paragraph 58 of the skeleton before the judge.  Protection of the
    public was relevant.  It could be unfair to require a judge to refer to
    everything, but the reference to a  close-knit  family  came  from  the
    OASys Report so the judge must have looked at that page.

28.  We reserved our decision.

29.  The appellant's sentence was one of 60 months and hence he is a  person
    who falls within the regime in deportation cases concerned with  people
    who are sentenced to four or more years' imprisonment.  Thus under Rule
    398(a) the deportation of a person from the United Kingdom is conducive
    to the public good and in the public interest because  they  have  been
    convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a  period
    of imprisonment of at least four years, and the Secretary of State will
    consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and if it does  not  the
    public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors
    where there are very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  Neither of those two  paragraphs
    is applicable in this case because both  paragraph  399  and  paragraph
    399A are applicable only to people falling within paragraph  398(b)  or
    (c) and those are people either whose conviction was for  a  period  of
    less than four years but at least twelve  months  or  they  are  people
    whose offending has caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a  persistent
    offender showing a particular disregard for the law.

30.  It is clear from section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act that in the case of  a
    foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    at least four years the public  interest  requires  deportation  unless
    there are very compelling circumstances over and above those  described
    in Exceptions 1 and 2.  Exception 1 does not apply, and Exception 2  is
    concerned with cases where the appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner  or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child and  the  effect  of  his
    deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

31.  This then is the context in which  the  Article  8  claim  fell  to  be
    decided by the judge.

32.  The absence of any reference to the best interests of the  child  being
    a primary consideration, at paragraph 85 of the  judge's  decision,  in
    our view has no materiality to it.  As was pointed out by  Mr  Lindsay,
    the judge was clearly aware of the section 55 duty and  also  the  best
    interests of the child with consideration of  the  case  law  beginning
    with ZH (Tanzania).  It was not necessary for the judge  to  spell  out
    the well-known fact that the best interests of the child are a  primary
    consideration.  We do not agree that the absence of a reference to this
    being a primary consideration in any sense contaminates the  Article  8
    assessment.  The judge  clearly  gave  detailed  consideration  to  the
    child's best interests, noting for example in paragraph 86 that  it  is
    generally in the child's best interests to live with both  parents  and
    noting relevant evidence in that regard elsewhere at paragraph  86  and
    also at paragraph 93.

33.  Nor do we see any error with regard to the KO (Nigeria) point.   It  is
    clear from PF (Nigeria), as pointed out by the respondent in  the  Rule
    24 response, that section 117C(6) cases bring the public interest being
    back in play as opposed to the situation under section  117C(5),  which
    was also the view expressed earlier by the Upper Tribunal in NS  [2019]
    UKUT 122 (IAC).  It is true as pointed out in the appellant's  skeleton
    that in PF the court went on to  say  that  a  consideration  of  undue
    harshness will not necessarily be unhelpful even when  section  117C(6)
    applies, but of course it is the case that the judge in any event  gave
    consideration to undue harshness and did so  on  the  proper  basis  of
    taking  into  account  the  appellant's  criminality  as  well  as  the
    situation of his daughter.

34.  As regards ground 3, again we see no error  of  law  in  this  respect.
    The  judge  gave  full  consideration  to  the  implications  for   the
    appellant's daughter of separation from her father.  It was observed at
    paragraph  86  that  the  centrality  of  her  life  and  her   current
    understanding is that she has a father but he  lives  a  long  distance
    away and she lives with her mother and maternal grandmother and has  an
    aunt living nearby and none of this would  alter  if  her  father  were
    removed, save being able to spend time with him.  The judge also  noted
    at paragraph 83 that the daughter would remain living with  her  mother
    and other family members in an environment in which she is  comfortable
    and there was no evidence that she was not thriving.  Clearly the judge
    was aware of the impact of separation on the child, but  equally  given
    the limited extent to which a relationship between  the  appellant  and
    the child had developed, the findings were fully open to her.

35.  As regards ground 4 the first point is  failure  on  the  part  of  the
    judge to give any or any  adequate  weight  to  family  life  with  the
    partner.  The judge  had  accepted  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine
    relationship with Ms S.  The judge did however also note,  for  example
    at paragraph 93, that the relationship is precarious.  She clearly  had
    some doubts about the relationship in that she considered, at paragraph
    82, that it was not unreasonable as a supposition that the relationship
    had been engineered, but she said that however whether or not it was  a
    cynical ploy the evidence was that the  appellant  had  been  regularly
    seeing the child since May 2018.  The fact of the matter as  the  judge
    noted is that the appellant lives in Guildford and his partner lives in
    Essex, some 80 miles apart.  The revival of the  relationship,  as  the
    judge noted, is relatively recent, having developed since the appellant
    was released from prison in  April  2018.   In  light  of  the  judge's
    conclusions about the precarious nature of the relationship we consider
    that the conclusions to which she came in that regard in the context of
    proportionality were fully open to her.

36.  The judge was also fully aware of the amount of time the appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom.  It is unclear what evidence was  given  to
    the judge of private life other than the duration of it, and of  course
    it has to be seen in the context of the  significant  criminal  offence
    that was committed that must have  disrupted  the  appellant's  private
    life to a marked extent during his time in prison.  It does not  appear
    that evidence beyond friendships, day-to-day existence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the duration of his time here was provided  to  the  judge.
    Again, there is no materiality to any restricted consideration of  this
    point.

37.  As regards the issue of risk  and  rehabilitation,  forming  a  further
    part of ground 4, the quotation from Binbuga [2019] EWCA Civ 551 in the
    grounds is of relevance, noting that rehabilitation will  generally  be
    of little or no material weight in the  proportionality  balance.   The
    argument in the grounds that if the judge had  taken  material  matters
    such as rehabilitation and low risk of  offending  and  good  behaviour
    into account, together with the entry of his daughter into his life she
    would  not  have  dismissed  the  appeal  is  in  our   view   entirely
    unrealistic.  The judge was clearly aware  of  the  evidence  from  the
    offender manager, though she noted that he did not appear to  have  any
    information from the CPS or the findings of the sentencing  judge  when
    noting also the inaccuracy in the letter from Mr Green  concerning  the
    good support network, including the appellant's  partner  and  daughter
    which is of course not correct.  Neither individually nor  cumulatively
    do we consider the points raised in ground 4 show any error of  law  in
    the judge's decision.

38.  Bringing these matters together, it is  clear  in  our  view  that  the
    judge, although not always expressing herself as clearly as  she  might
    have done, and on occasions  misdirecting  herself,  for  example  with
    regard to KMO and MAB, nevertheless  considered  the  evidence  in  the
    context of the correct  legal  tests.   Undue  harshness  was  properly
    considered  and  the  judge  went  on  to  consider   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above the circumstances set out in Exceptions  1
    and 2, which were properly considered, in particular at paragraph 93 of
    the judge's decision.  The threshold is a very high  one,  and  a  case
    such as  this,  which  will  unfortunately  have  the  consequences  of
    separating a child from her father and her mother from her partner, are
    no more than the all too frequent consequences of deportation and  come
    nowhere near crossing  the  high  threshold  set  for  a  person  whose
    conviction is for more than four  years'  imprisonment,  as  the  judge
    properly found.

39.  As regards Article 3, the absence of any statement of the  standard  of
    proof in our sense does not in any sense flaw this decision.   A  judge
    cannot be expected in every case to set out what is  a  routine  point,
    that of the lower standard of proof in Article 3 cases.   It  does  not
    show an error of law in the judge's decision but no more than  a  minor
    omission of no materiality.

40.  As regards the issue of the CSID,  we  consider  the  judge's  findings
    were  properly  open  to  her.   She  noted  that  the  appellant  when
    interviewed by representatives from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK did not
    enquire about obtaining a passport or CSID.  His claim was based on the
    fact that he said his parents were deceased, his  younger  brother  had
    recently sought asylum in Italy and he had lost contact with two  other
    brothers who had been in Iraq.  His brother and his uncle who lives  in
    Switzerland had visited Iraq within the last few years.  He said  there
    was no-one in  Iraq  to  assist.   However,  as  the  judge  noted,  no
    supporting evidence such as a death certificate had  been  produced  to
    support his claim that his parents had died, and although in the  OASys
    assessment he gave an account of a  close-knit  family  in  Iraq  which
    related to some two decades earlier,  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude that there was no reasonable explanation for why  neither  the
    appellant nor his brother in the UK had information on the  whereabouts
    of their two remaining male siblings in Iraq.  It was also  proper  for
    the judge to note that they  have  their  uncle  who  is  evidently  in
    contact with people  in  Iraq.   It  was  relevant  to  note  that  the
    appellant's brother and uncle, and indeed his sister-in-law,  have  all
    been able to travel to the IKR without difficulty and to conclude  that
    simply deciding  not  to  make  any  enquiries  was  not  a  reasonable
    explanation.  As a consequence it was open to the judge  to  find  that
    the appellant had failed to show he was  not  in  a  position  to  make
    contact with male family  members  in  his  home  area  to  obtain  the
    material needed to obtain a CSID and as a consequence to conclude  that
    the Article 3 claim was not made out.

Notice of Decision

41.  Accordingly, we uphold the judge's decision in  respect  of  Article  8
    and Article 3, finding there to be no error of  law  in  her  decision,
    which is as a consequence maintained.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 2 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 2 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

