
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04046/2018
                                                               HU/09064/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2019                   |On 4 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               UPILITHA ERANKA ILLANGAKOON (FIRST RESPONDENT)
               ANISHA SURANTHI BANDUWANSA (SECOND RESPONDENT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Dhanji, Counsel


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou allowing the appeals of
    the appellants against the decision to refuse to grant them  indefinite
    leave to remain by reference to paragraph 322(5).

2.   The respondents are citizens of Sri Lanka.  They are husband  and  wife
    born on 8 April 1982 and 14 September  1986  respectively.   The  first
    applicant entered the UK as a Student Migrant on 6  October  2007  with
    entry clearance valid until  31  October  2009.   He  was  subsequently
    granted further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant until  13
    May 2016, following further  applications  and  latterly  following  an
    appeal which was allowed by a judge on 10 October 2013.

3.   On 15 December 2016 the first respondent applied for  leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 5 Migrant under the  Government  Authorised  Exchange  Scheme
    which was granted with leave to remain until 13 November 2017.   On  11
    September 2017 he made a human rights application for indefinite  leave
    to remain in the UK on the basis of completing 10 years' residence  and
    on the basis of his private life established  during  that  time.   The
    respondent  refused  the  application  in  the  light  of   the   first
    applicant's character and conduct it would be undesirable to allow  him
    to remain in the UK, having declared different income to  HMRC  and  UK
    Visa Immigration.

4.   The second respondent's application was based on  being  the  dependant
    of the first applicant.  Her application consequently failed with  that
    of the first applicant.

5.   The respondents claimed that to  remove  them  would  give  rise  to  a
    breach of their human rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.   At the hearing before the judge it  was  stated  by  the  Secretary  of
    State that the sole issue in this case related  to  whether  the  first
    applicant had been dishonest in completing his tax return for the  year
    ended 5 April 2011, thus engaging paragraphs 322(5) and 276B(ii)(c) and
    (iii).  The respondents' Counsel added that even  if  the  judge  found
    that the first respondent was dishonest in the submission  of  his  tax
    return, this needed to be assessed proportionately with regard  to  his
    achievements as a pharmaceutical scientist.

7.   The judge's findings of fact and credibility are set out at  paragraphs
    18 to 25.  At paragraph 23 the judge sets out what appears  to  be  the
    respondent's explanation, maintaining that he was aware his income from
    Taprobane Chem Limited in the form of dividends was fully disclosed  to
    the HMRC.  He believed that all the tax that was due from him had  been
    paid as he had entered into a payment plan  with  HMRC  in  respect  of
    unpaid tax for the financial years ending 5 April 2010, 2011  and  2012
    as stated in HMRC's letter of 24 September  2018.   Counsel  Mr  Dhanji
    referred to the HMRC guidance on  the  taxation  of  company  dividends
    which indicated that the Rules in respect of dividends prior to 6 April
    2016 were different from the current Rules.

8.   The judge held as follows at paragraph 24:

         "It is also significant that, having been advised by the respondent
         that he may not have fully paid the tax that was due from  him,  he
         completed a further tax return and paid his outstanding  tax.   The
         HMRC fact sheet sets out the circumstances in which a  penalty  for
         an inaccuracy may be charged or not.  It sets out eight  stages  in
         working out the amount of any penalty  which  includes  determining
         whether the individual had exercised reasonable care in  completing
         their tax return or whether they were aware that their  return  was
         inaccurate when they sent it.  The fact that HMRC appeared to  have
         charged no penalty indicates that, according to their  fact  sheet,
         the first appellant had exercised 'reasonable care'  over  his  tax
         affairs.  Therefore, taking these factors into  account,  balancing
         both sides of the  argument,  and  also  taking  into  account  the
         findings regarding his credibility and integrity in Judge Baldwin's
         determination and his honesty and general  good  character  in  the
         various letters of support, I accept that he was  not  deliberately
         dishonest in the completion of his tax returns  for  the  years  in
         question,  in  which  case  the  first  appellant   satisfies   the
         Immigration Rules".


9.   I accept the argument in the Secretary  of  State's  grounds  that  the
    judge erred in law by placing significant, if not sole, emphasis on the
    actions of HMRC as being determinative of whether the first  respondent
    acted dishonestly in his dealings with HMRC and UKVI.

10.  First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Holmes granted  permission  and  said  it
    was arguable that the judge failed to engage with or apply the relevant
    current jurisprudence; Khan [2018] UKUT 384, stating that although  the
    judge made no reference to this jurisprudence in her decision,  it  may
    be that it was never drawn  to  her  attention.   He  stated  that  the
    failure of HMRC to issue a penalty or to prosecute  the  applicant  was
    not determinative of the appeal.

11.  Mr Dhanji submitted in his Rule 24  reply  that  the  judge  cannot  be
    criticised for failing to  refer  to  the  judgment  in  Khan  as  that
    judgment was not reported until after the hearing of  the  respondent's
    appeal.  He argued that in any event the judge adopted a Khan compliant
    approach determining  the  issue  of  whether,  in  his  judgment,  the
    Secretary of State had proved that the first respondent  was  dishonest
    with his dealings with either HMRC or the UKVI,  critically  evaluating
    the explanation provided in response to the  evidence  adduced  by  the
    first respondent.

12.  I was not persuaded by Mr Dhanji's submission as paragraph 24 does  not
    indicate a critical evaluation of the explanation provided by the first
    respondent.

13.  I accept that the decision in Khan was not available to  the  judge  as
    it was not reported until after the respondent's appeal.  Nevertheless,
    I find that Khan provides an approach that  is  helpful  to  judges  in
    deciding cases like this.

14.  At paragraph 25 the judge found that as the first respondent  satisfies
    the  Immigration  Rules,  he  considered  that  his  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.  In  reaching  this  decision  the  judge  failed  to
    consider whether the respondent and his wife have established a private
    life in the UK.  I agree with Judge Holmes in his grant  of  permission
    that the reference to the public interest in the respondent's  pursuing
    their career is arguably inconsistent with the guidance to be found  in
    Thakrar (Cart IR; Article 8; value to the community) [2018]  UKUT  336,
    and indicative of a misguided approach to a private life appeal.

15.  I find for the above reasons that the judge erred in law.  The  judge's
    decision cannot stand.  It is set aside in order to be re-made.

16.  The respondents' appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross for rehearing by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Onoufriou.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  28 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

























