
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Numbers:
HU/04202/2017

                                           HU/04204/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 September 2018                   | On 01 October 2018                   |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                   mrs t b
                                  miss k b
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Syed Shaheen
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellants are nationals of Bangladesh born on 5 September 1984 and
    31 August 2015 respectively.  The appellants appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the respondent, dated 1  February  2017,
    to refuse the appellants' entry clearance as the spouse  and  child  of
    the sponsor on the basis that it was not accepted  that  the  appellant
    satisfied the financial requirements of Appendix FM, in accordance with
    Appendix FM-SE, based upon inconsistencies between the  sponsor's  bank
    statements and payslips.  In a decision promulgated on 24 January 2018,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fox dismissed the appellants' appeal.

 2. The appellants appealed on the grounds that:

      1) the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal appeared  to  have  applied  a
         higher standard of proof as he did not accept the evidence given by
         the sponsor and his  employer  including  oral  evidence  (and  the
         sponsor had now obtained HMRC evidence confirming his income);

      2) the Immigration Judge had failed  to  give  appropriate  weight  to
         family life and the effect of the decision  on  the  young  child's
         family life.

Discussion on Error of Law

 3. Although the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  granting  permission
    raised an entirely new ground in  relation  to  the  respondent,  which
    asserted that the respondent ought to have sought  clarity  from  HMRC,
    both parties before me accepted that it  was  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    adopted on behalf of the appellants, that were before me.  It  was  not
    established that the ground raised  by  the  Immigration  Judge  had  a
    strong prospect of success (see AZ  (error  of  law;  jurisdiction  PTA
    practice) Iran [2018] UKUT 00245)

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge identified that there was no dispute that
    family life existed and that the issue was confined to the satisfaction
    of Appendix FM-SE relating to the financial requirement ([28]).  It was
    identified that the only issue  was  whether  the  sponsor's  financial
    documents provided a  reliable  record  of  his  remuneration  for  the
    purposes of satisfying the financial requirement.  The judge heard from
    both the sponsor and the sponsor's employer and noted, by the sponsor's
    own evidence, that the documents had not provided a reliable record  of
    his remuneration and the sponsor agreed  with  the  employer  that  the
    credits  stated  in  the  payslips  were  not  commensurate  with   the
    remuneration  actually  received  and  did  not  represent  a  reliable
    chronology of the payment.

 5. The judge took into account that the sponsor  relied  exclusively  upon
    income derived from this employer.  The judge took into  consideration,
    at [32], that the  employer  had  provided  evidence  that  there  were
    anomalies in remuneration payments due  to  administrative  issues  and
    that delay had also occurred in  payments  and  that  the  sponsor  had
    experienced both underpayments and overpayments.

 6. The judge concluded therefore at [34], that the documentation was not a
    reliable reflection of the sponsor's employment, circumstances  or  his
    remuneration and that the sponsor had accepted that it was open to  the
    sponsor  to  approach  HMRC  to  obtain  reliable   evidence   of   the
    remuneration.  The judge also noted that it would have been open to the
    employer to  provide  reliable  evidence  of  the  employer's  national
    insurance contributions and pension provisions.  The  judge  concluded,
    in findings that are more than adequate and which were available to the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, that it should not be necessary to  consider
    subjective  explanations  for  anomalies  when  objective   documentary
    evidence is available and that despite the passage of time neither  the
    sponsor nor the  sponsor's  employer  had  approached  HMRC  to  obtain
    reliable evidence of income, notwithstanding their invitation  for  the
    respondent to do so and the judge  reminded  himself  that  the  burden
    remained with the appellant.

 7. Appendix FM-SE sets  out  the  evidence  that  was  required  and  this
    includes personal bank statements "corresponding to the same periods as
    the payslips" and that these should be "showing  that  the  salary  has
    been paid into an account in the name of the person".   The  respondent
    concluded that he was not  satisfied  that  the  payslips  provided  an
    accurate  reflection  of  the  claimed  income  which  means  that  the
    respondent was not satisfied that all of  the  specified  and  required
    information and documents had been provided.

 8. The judge reminded himself that the purpose of  Appendix  FM-SE  is  to
    ensure that reliable evidence is  provided  to  demonstrate  employment
    income and that the sponsor had failed to do so  in  substance  and  in
    form and therefore the appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It was not suggested that this conclusion  was  irrational  and
    the judge provided more than adequate reasons for  the  conclusions  he
    reached.  It is patently clear that the standard of proof  applied  was
    the balance of probabilities  (and  the  judge  had  properly  directed
    himself as to the burden and standard of proof at [12] to [17]).

 9. In SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 Richards LJ confirmed that
    the approach to Article 8 should be the same in Appendix  FM-SE  as  in
    respect of the substantive rules.   In  other  words,  that  compelling
    circumstances would be required to justify a grant of leave  where  the
    evidential Rules are not complied with.  I have also taken into account
    what was said by the Supreme Court in MM (Lebanon) [2017] USKC  10,  at
    paragraph 76, that the Tribunal is entitled  to  see  a  difference  in
    principle between the underlying public interest considerations and the
    working of the policy thought the detailed machinery of the  rules  and
    its application to individual cases.   The  former  would  include  the
    Secretary of State's assessment of levels of income required to avoid a
    burden on public resources.  By contrast, rules as to  the  quality  of
    evidence necessary to satisfy that test in a particular  case,  matters
    of practicality  rather  than  principle,  are  matters  on  which  the
    tribunal 'may more readily draw on its own experience  and  expertise'.
    It was precisely that flexible approach which was applied by the  judge
    in this appeal and he was entitled to reach the conclusion he did  that
    the appellant had not discharged the burden on him  in  the  particular
    circumstances that applied.  No error of  law  has  been  made  out  in
    ground 1.

10. In respect of ground 2, although Mr Kannangara argued  that  the  judge
    should have given weight to the statement of the employer in respect of
    the income being of the required level, given that there was a child in
    this case, I am not satisfied that this ground is made out.  The  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal properly directed himself that there  was  a
    child affected by the decision ([41])  and  reached  adequate  findings
    that the sponsor had had an opportunity to  register  the  child  as  a
    British citizen but had not done so and there was no reliable  evidence
    to demonstrate why the child's best interests could not  be  maintained
    by her remaining in Bangladesh with  her  mother  within  her  existing
    established environment and that the decision did  not  interfere  with
    the current arrangement.  The judge was satisfied that  Article  8  was
    engaged but was further satisfied, given the inability to  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules, that any interference was proportionate.  The  judge
    was of the view that a fresh entry clearance application with  reliable
    evidence  (and  as  already  noted  the   appellants'   representatives
    indicated that evidence has now been obtained) was an available option.



11.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error  of
    law  such  that  it  should  be  set  aside  and  is  maintained.   The
    appellants' appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

As the second appellant is a child I make an  anonymity  direction.   Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of their family.  This direction applies both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:  [pic]                      Date:  25 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed, I make no fee award is made.

Signed: [pic]                       Date:  25 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

