
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04291/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford via Skype for Business      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 May 2021                                 |On 21 July 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

              REDOUANE BOUDEMAGH                                   Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Bundock
For the Respondent: Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of Algeria who was born on 9  September
    1970. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of  the
    Secretary of State dated 30 January  2019  refusing  his  human  rights
    application. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated  on  23
    July 2020, dismissed  the  appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal, Mr Walker,  who  appeared
    for the Secretary of  State,  told  me  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that  its
    decision falls to be set aside. I agree and shall  give  brief  reasons
    for setting aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 3. It is not disputed that  the  appellant  suffers  from  serious  mental
    health problems. At [25], the judge  refers  to  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's medical expert witness, Dr Ali.  Dr  Ali  had  written  two
    reports which were before the Tribunal, the first dated April 2019  and
    the second (to the judge refers at [2]) dated 9 July 2019.  Whilst  the
    judge records Dr Ali's conclusions regarding the  appellant's  risk  of
    self-harm if removed to Algeria, the judge states, somewhat  obliquely,
    that the conclusions of the doctor 'lack quantification'. I assume that
    the judge means by this that the evidence lacks detailed  justification
    for the doctor's opinion. However, Dr Ali's first  report  contained  a
    detailed explanation for his opinion that the removal of the  appellant
    would be likely to cause a significant breakdown in his mental  health.
    I accept (as Mr Walker told me so does  the  Secretary  of  State)  the
    appellant's submission that the judge has not adequately dealt with  Dr
    Ali's evidence, in particular his first report. It is apparent that the
    judge's very brief reasoning at [25] has failed to address the totality
    of the medical evidence. It was possible for the judge to reject all or
    part of that evidence but he was required to consider all of it  before
    doing so.

 4. The error identified is, as both parties agree, sufficiently serious to
    warrant setting aside the decision.  The  remaining  grounds  are  very
    helpfully set out and developed in the skeleton argument of Mr Bundock,
    who appeared for the appellant before the Upper  Tribunal.  I  consider
    that, in addition to what I say at [3] above, the judge has also fallen
    into error for each of the other reasons advanced  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal. In addition, Mr Bundock submitted that the failure of the judge
    to deal with the relevant jurisprudence (in particular, AM (Zimbabwe) v
    SSHD [2020] UKSC 17) was an obvious  error  which  the  Upper  Tribunal
    should consider notwithstanding that the grounds of appeal do not raise
    it. Mr Walker raised no objection. I consider that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is so flawed that it is necessary for there to be a
    hearing de  novo  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  following  which  that
    Tribunal shall remake the decision.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall   stand. The appeal is returned  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to  remake  the  decision  following  a
    hearing de novo. Both parties may adduce new evidence  provided  copies
    of any evidence (including witness statements) are sent  to  the  other
    party and to the Tribunal at least 10 days prior to the hearing.




    LISTING  DIRECTIONS:  Manchester  or  Bradford:  first  available  date
    (contact Mr Bundock's clerk on [~] to arrange  the  next  hearing);  No
    interpreter  (if  the  appellant's  representative  seek  to  call  the
    appellant  to  give  evidence  and  consider  that   he   requires   an
    interpreter, they must contact the Tribunal immediately to arrange  for
    an interpreter to attend the hearing): 2 hours: Not Judge Loke.




         Signed                              Date 7 May 2021

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
