
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04126/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 September 2018                     |On 10 January 2019                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                          Johan Manuel Espino Cuevas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  Entry Clearance Officer - UKVS SHeffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mottershaw, instructed by Dicksons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Johan Manuel Espino Cuevas was born on 26  January  1999
    and is a male citizen of the Dominican Republic.  By a decision dated 9
    February  2017,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer   (ECO)   refused   the
    appellant's application to settle with his father (Alexandro  Espino -
    hereafter the sponsor) in the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  appealed
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  James)  which,  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 5 April 2018, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge O'Callaghan wrote:

         "In circumstances where the Tribunal has previously found that  the
         father  enjoyed  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant,  though
         several years before, it is arguably be an error  of  law  for  the
         judge to have not considered who held responsibility for him at the
         time of the application and decision.  That no one else had assumed
         responsibility may be an indicator that the  sponsor  continues  to
         enjoy sole responsibility."

 3. Judge James summarised the respondent's position as follows:

         "The respondent relies on the [refusal decision].   The  respondent
         asked me to note that there is evidence  of  the  appellant  having
         contact with his mother since he returned from the UK in 2010.  The
         respondent submits there are issues  relating  to  the  appellant's
         educational needs.  The sponsor does not appear to have  any  great
         knowledge of the  appellant's  situation.   Further  there  are  no
         documents to support the contention that the appellant has  been  a
         truant  from  school.   The  sponsor  has  no  knowledge   of   the
         appellant's educational achievements which  would  be  expected  if
         they spoke each day as has been asserted by the sponsor."

 4. The judge noted that at a previous Tribunal  (in  2010,  Judge  Gurung-
    Thapa) had  accepted  the  sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    appellant.  However, at that time the appellant was only aged 11 years.
     The date of the application which is the subject  of  the  appeal  the
    appellant was aged 17 years and 2 months.  The judge considered that he
    was not bound by the previous judge's finding given the lapse of  time.
    I  agree.   The  latest  Tribunal  was   required   to   consider   the
    circumstances of the appellant as at the date of the application  under
    appeal.

 5. The judge further noted [15] that the appellant's mother was alive  but
    it had been accepted by Judge Gurung-Thapa that  she  had  relinquished
    all responsibility for him.  The  judge  accepted  that  "this  remains
    unchanged."  The judge found that the appellant  had  not  had  contact
    with his mother for a number of years.

 6. At [16], the judge examined what evidence had been  provided  "to  show
    the sponsor has sole responsibility  for  the  appellant."   The  judge
    recorded that day-to-day  care  for  the  appellant  in  the  Dominican
    Republic is provided by the appellant's aunt.   The  judge  noted  that
    "the sponsor asserts that he is able to  make  decisions  for  his  son
    without providing any details of actual  decisions  made."   The  judge
    commented that the sponsor had produced a "small number  of  call  logs
    which show frequent contact."

 7. At [17], the judge found that the sponsor had

         "... no  knowledge  of  whether  the  appellant  has  obtained  any
         educational qualifications beyond knowing that he  had  passed  the
         exam to enter a secondary school.  He was aware that the  appellant
         had been truant from school because he had visited the  school  but
         he does not know how long it has been going on.  There has been  no
         challenge to the sponsor's  claim  that  he  has  been  financially
         supporting the appellant."

    At [18], the judge wrote:

         "The sponsor has not provided me with any examples of decisions  he
         has  made  for  the  appellant  in  relation  to   his   education,
         upbringing, religion and other important aspects of the appellant's
         life.  Indeed the sponsor appears to be remarkably unaware  of  the
         appellant's education (or lack of it) and accomplishments."

 8. At [20], the judge concluded:

         "Looking at the evidence in the round and bearing in mind  that  it
         is for the appellant to  demonstrate  that  the  sponsor  has  sole
         responsibility for him, I am not satisfied the  appellant  has  met
         the burden of proof.   I  accept  the  appellant's  mother  has  no
         responsibility  for  him  and  that  the   sponsor   supports   him
         financially but that is not sufficient.  A lack of any  significant
         evidence that the  sponsor  has  been  making  important  decisions
         regarding the appellant's upbringing cannot be overlooked."

 9. Ms Mottershaw, who appeared for the appellant, submitted that there was
    evidence of significant decisions taken by the father.  These  included
    the decision that the appellant should  come  to  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom, attend private  school  and  where  he  was  to  live  in  the
    Dominican Republic.  I note that the  judge  has  used  the  expression
    "lack of any significant evidence" as opposed to  "no  evidence".   The
    significance of the various items of evidence  was  a  matter  for  the
    judge.  The judge was, of course, well aware that  an  application  had
    been made for the appellant to come and live in the United Kingdom  and
    that the appellant attended private school.   However,  it  is  equally
    clear that the judge was not impressed by the  sponsor's  inability  to
    give any substantive detail regarding the decisions made in respect  of
    the appellant by the sponsor.  He was particularly unimpressed  by  the
    sponsor's inability to say anything about the appellant's education and
    accomplishments.  Findings made by  the  judge  at  [20]  were,  in  my
    opinion, available to him  on  the  evidence.   Those  findings  cannot
    properly be described as perverse or irrational.

10. Ms Aboni, who appeared for the Secretary of State, submitted  that  the
    judge  had  not  been  required  to  find  that,  simply  because   the
    appellant's mother  was  not  involved  in  his  upbringing,  then,  by
    default, sole responsibility must vest in the father.  She rejected the
    argument on which Judge O'Callaghan appears to have granted permission.
     I find that she was right to do so.  The burden of proof in the appeal
    rested on the appellant and the judge correctly found that that  burden
    was not discharged in respect of a 17 year old child simply by  proving
    that, because the appellant's mother had  no  responsibility  for  him,
    then sole responsibility vested in the  father.   The  appellant  lives
    with his aunt in the Dominican Republic and he is  himself  of  an  age
    when, notwithstanding his minority, he may be de facto self-reliant.  I
    find  that  it  does  not  follow  that  the  sponsor  must  have  sole
    responsibility simply because no one else has been shown to possess it.



11. I find also that the judge was justified at [21] to conclude that there
    were no serious or compelling considerations which made the appellant's
    exclusion from the United Kingdom undesirable.   It  was  open  to  the
    judge to find that there was no significant evidence to support such  a
    contention.

12. This is a somewhat unusual case in which a  previous  finding  of  sole
    responsibility has been followed by the return of  the  appellant  from
    the United Kingdom to live in his country  of  nationality.   I  accept
    that the circumstances at the date of the  application,  which  is  the
    subject of this appeal, are relevant and that  the  appellant's  return
    from the United Kingdom to  the  Dominican  Republic  and  out  of  the
    sponsor's day-to-day control here has rendered the previous findings of
    the Tribunal of very little relevance.  I agree  also  with  the  judge
    that it was for the appellant to prove his case  that  his  father  had
    sole responsibility for him and I can find  no  error  in  the  judge's
    approach to the evidence or his analysis of it.  His findings are fully
    supported by cogent reasoning.  In the  circumstances,  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

13. This appeal is dismissed.

14. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





