
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/04186/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th April 2017                        |On 3rd May 2017                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               mr jamil tokhi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Masood of Counsel instructed by Law Dale
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to Mr Jamil Tokhi as the Claimant.  He was the  Appellant
    when he was  successful  in  his  appeal  before  Judge  Trevaskis  who
    promulgated his decision on 19th August 2016.

 2. I summarise the Secretary of State's grounds in the following way.  The
    judge misdirected himself in finding that the Claimant met the terms of
    GEN1.2 in Appendix FM.  The parties had not been living together for at
    least two years prior to the date of the application.  Furthermore, the
    judge erred in finding that there existed "insurmountable obstacles" to
    such family life continuing in Afghanistan.

 3. Permission to appeal was initially granted in a limited way  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gibb but Upper Tribunal Judge  Kopieczek  concluded
    that there was no limit to the presented grounds that might  be  argued
    as set out by the Secretary of State.  No formal  Rule  24  notice  was
    lodged on behalf of  the  Claimant  although  I  was  referred  to  two
    bundles, one relating to the documentation that was  before  the  judge
    and the second bundle supplying supplementary documents  in  the  event
    that an error was found and the  decision  had  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

 4. For the Secretary of State Mr Bramble relied on his grounds.

 5. The judge had  been  wrong  to  find  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles for the Claimant if he were to be  returned  to  Afghanistan.
    Wholly inadequate reasons had been given to support a finding that  the
    threshold of EX.1 was met.  What the judge  should  have  done  was  to
    engage with an Article 8 assessment outside the Rules but he had failed
    to do that.  The decision should be set aside  and  sent  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

 6. In response to submissions from Counsel for  the  Claimant  and  to  an
    observation from me he said that the judge had  not  decided  the  case
    under Article 3 ECHR.  The judge had only said that it was "likely"  to
    amount to a breach of Article 3 ECHR in  paragraph  36.   The  test  of
    insurmountable obstacles had not been satisfied.

 7. For the Claimant Ms Masood  accepted  that  the  judge  had  not   been
    entitled to find that  the  Claimant  and  Mrs  Said  had  been  living
    together in a relationship akin to marriage  for  at  least  two  years
    prior to the date of application - that was simply wrong.   However  it
    was not a material error because at the date of hearing the parties had
    been living together for two years, and as such the  judge  could  have
    simply gone on to allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.   Furthermore,
    for reasons given by the judge, there were insurmountable obstacles  to
    the Claimant and his partner returning to  Afghanistan.  Perhaps    the
    judge had been quite generous in his findings that there was  a  breach
    of Article 3 ECHR but that was a long way from concluding he had made a
    material error of law and he had  given  his  reasons.   There  was  no
    material error of law and the decision should stand.

Conclusions

 8. It can readily be said that the decision of the judge is not  an  ideal
    one.  For example,  in  paragraphs  24  to  29  he  refers  to  various
    jurisprudence without indicating its significance  to  this  particular
    appeal;  the  decision  does  not  benefit  from  copious  citation  of
    authority.  He found that they qualified under Appendix FM  because  he
    concluded that the relationship began with their  first  face  to  face
    contact (paragraph 32) but, as both parties pointed out, the wording of
    the Rules is that they had to be living together for at least two years
    prior to the date of application which plainly they had not been.   The
    reference to "Bangladesh"  in  paragraph  36  is  unfortunate  and  was
    plainly an error.  Similarly, his findings on a private life were  that
    the Claimant satisfied the requirements of 276ADE but it  is  difficult
    to conclude that  the  judge  was  correct  to  find  that  there  were
    obstacles to his integration given  he had spent most of  his  life  in
    Afghanistan.

 9. The Secretary of  State  challenges  the  findings  that  the  claimant
    succeeds under the Immigration rules but it seems to me to be important
    to look at what the  judge  actually  stated.   What  he  said  in  his
    conclusion was that he was allowing the appeal on human rights  grounds
    (paragraph 40).  This does not refer to Article 8 as the judge said  he
    had not gone on to consider whether the Claimant  qualified  for  leave
    under Article 8 ECHR (paragraph 38).

10. It seems to me that there is confusion in the  grounds  of  application
    lodged by the Secretary of State.  It is acknowledged  that  the  judge
    allowed the Claimant's appeal on human rights grounds but  the  grounds
    go on to say "namely that the appellant succeeded on EX.1  to  Appendix
    FM".  If the judge had intended that then he  would,  presumably,  have
    said that he was allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules but it
    seems to me that he was relying  on  what  he  said  at  paragraph  36.
    Ignoring the misplaced reference to  Bangladesh  he  said  that  "there
    would be very serious hardship  for  the  appellant  and  Mrs  Said  if
    returned to Afghanistan which is  likely  to  amount  to  a  breach  of
    Article 3 ECHR".  The judge gave reasons for that and referred  to  the
    Amnesty International Report and a report 2015/2016 at page 72  of  the
    Claimant's bundle.  The passage under that page notes  that  there  are
    nearly three million Afghans who are refugees,  the  majority  of  whom
    were living in Iran and Pakistan.   Nearly  one  million  Afghans  were
    internally displaced in Afghanistan.  Many  thousands  of  people  were
    still living in camps and makeshift shelters where  overcrowding,  poor
    hygiene and  harsh  weather  conditions  increased  the  prevalence  of
    communicable and chronic diseases such as malaria and  hepatitis.   The
    judge concluded that Mrs Said would not be  able  to  find  work  which
    would provide the same level of income as in  the  United  Kingdom.   I
    might say that there was a discussion before me as to whether any other
    relative might provide support to the Claimant  and  Mrs  Said  but  it
    appears from the judge's decision that there was no direct evidence  on
    that.

11. Importantly, when the judge said that the conditions the Claimant would
    have to live in were "likely" to amount to a breach of Article 3 ECHR I
    infer that the judge was applying the reasonable degree  of  likelihood
    or real risk test which is what he was bound to do.   While  Ms  Masood
    did not hesitate to describe these findings as possibly generous to the
    Claimant (with which I agree) it seems to me that the judge gave  clear
    reasons for allowing the appeal under Article  3  ECHR.   Moreover  the
    grounds  of application are silent on Article 3 focusing on  the  issue
    of the Immigration  Rules  and  whether  there  existed  insurmountable
    obstacles for family life continuing in Afghanistan.  It  seems  to  me
    that when a judge says that he is allowing the appeal under  Article  3
    ECHR it is incumbent  upon  the  Secretary  of  State  to  specifically
    challenge such a finding.  The Secretary of State  has  elected  to  go
    down a different route.

12. On these findings I conclude that while there are errors in the judge's
    decision, taking them either individually or cumulatively they are  not
    enough to amount to a material error in law. The  judge's  findings  on
    Article 3 are clear in their terms and as has been  said  elsewhere  an
    unusually generous view of the facts does not necessarily translate  to
    an error of law.

13. It follows that the judge's decision that there would be  a  breach  of
    Article 3 ECHR if the Claimant was returned to Afghanistan must stand.

Notice of Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

15. I do not set aside the decision.

16. No anonymity direction was requested or is made.





Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date 2nd May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald







