
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04100/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2019                         |On 12 November 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                  D. M. L.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan of Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  G.
    Wilson promulgated on 13 May 2019 in which the Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed on human rights grounds.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 27  May  1945.  On  1  June
    2018 she entered the UK pursuant to entry clearance as a visitor. On 23
    November 2018, just prior to the expiry of her leave as a  visitor,  an
    application for leave to remain was made.


3.   The application was supported by representations  made  in  a  covering
    letter dated 12 November 2018. Although the covering letter is  lengthy
    and contains extensive recitation  of  provisions  and  case  law,  the
    meaningful details of the circumstances of the Appellant  are  set  out
    relatively briefly. It was  said  that  the  application  was  made  in
    respect of "Private Life medical reasons",  because  of  "deteriorating
    medical condition and strong family  life  with  [the  Appellant's]  UK
    family". In this latter regard it was stated that she is  supported  in
    the UK by her daughter, son-in-law, and granddaughter; assertions  were
    made as to "emotional and dependency ties", and  the  existence  of  "a
    very close-knit family" with no further  detail  or  evidence.  It  was
    claimed that the Appellant was unfit to travel,  had  no  one  to  look
    after her in India, and had "a long-term mobility condition and illness
    that affect her everyday life  that  cannot  be  cured".  It  was  also
    asserted that the Appellant "suffers from long term mental health";  in
    this latter regard the medical evidence submitted with the  application
    offers a current diagnosis of  depression,  but  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that this was a chronic or  long-term  condition;  indeed  the
    assertion in the covering letter is flatly contradicted by the  medical
    report which states that the Appellant "had no mental  health  problems
    in the past". (See further below in respect of the  medical  evidence.)
    It was claimed that the Appellant's medical condition "has deteriorated
    significantly  and  on  return  her  integration  into  India  is  very
    significant obstacles [sic.] as a result of her medical issue"; it  was
    further submitted "In order for [the  Appellant]  to  reintegrate  back
    into India would require her to be in good health, the right  frame  of
    mind and within good and reasonable physical and psychological health".
    It was additionally pleaded that  the  Appellant  had  been  a  regular
    visitor to the UK over the past 10 years and had always  complied  with
    the requirements of immigration control by returning  to  India  within
    her leave.


4.   I pause to note that in the circumstances of an absence of less than  6
    months there was nothing asserted to suggest  that  the  Appellant  had
    disengaged  from  life  in  India  such  that  she  would  require   to
    'reintegrate'. Further, aspects of the covering letter suggest  it  may
    have been drafted from a pre-existing template - for example mention is
    made of Bangladesh (rather than India) at paragraph 21, and  the  wrong
    gender is given at paragraph 33 - "...moves around his daily life  with
    family support...". This impression is reinforced by the  overlong  and
    unhelpful recitation of instrument and case  law,  and  the  relatively
    scant recitation of case specific facts.


5.   The application was supported by a medical report  dated  26  September
    2018 (Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal at  Annex  C).
    The report is  prepared  and  signed  by  a  single  practitioner,  but
    declares itself to be based on the examinations and opinions of a  team
    of practitioners: (see further below).


6.   The medical report does not provide any  opinion  as  to  current  care
    and/or support needs in respect of activities of daily  living.  Beyond
    the generalised assertion as to support offered by  family  members  in
    the UK, and a supporting letter dated 20 October 2018 from one  of  the
    Appellant's daughters (Annex D) which refers  to  taking  care  of  the
    Appellant every time she is in the UK and a willingness to support her,
    there is no meaningful evidence as to personal care needs, or otherwise
    any attempt to tailor  the  application  to  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules in respect of adult dependent relatives. Similarly in
    this context there was no evidence provided  with  the  application  in
    respect  of  past  medical  attention/treatment  in   India,   or   the
    availability in India of  medical  treatment  or  other  mechanisms  of
    support for personal care needs. (Although  the  Rules  in  respect  of
    adult dependent relatives are pre-entry rules, and  the  Rules  do  not
    provide for switching into this category,  inevitably  such  Rules  are
    relevant to a consideration of any application by an adult for leave to
    remain made in reliance upon Article 8 on the basis  of  personal  care
    needs.)


7.   The application for leave to remain - treated as a human  rights  claim
    - was refused by the Respondent on 19 February 2019 for reasons set out
    in  a  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  of  that  date.   The
    Respondent's decision was taken with particular reference to  paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules, and also pursuant to  a  wider  and
    more general consideration of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  It  was  not
    accepted  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's integration into India - the Respondent concluded  that  it
    would not be difficult for her to adjust to life back in India  because
    she had spent the majority of her life there and was familiar with  the
    language, environment, and culture. Further,  the  Respondent  did  not
    consider that any ties  with  family  in  the  UK  went  beyond  normal
    emotional ties; that contact with family  members  could  be  continued
    from India, family members could visit the Appellant in India,  and  it
    was also opened for her to apply for  appropriate  entry  clearance  to
    visit the UK in the future; that the Appellant could enjoy private life
    in India; that any financial  support  from  family  in  the  UK  could
    continue when the Appellant was in India; that the  Appellant  did  not
    appear to be suffering from any life-threatening condition and that the
    healthcare system in India should be capable  of  assisting  her;  that
    there was a possibility of support being provided through the  Assisted
    Voluntary Returns Scheme; and that safeguards could be put in place for
    the return journey to ensure safety during any flight.


8.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC. The Grounds of Appeal in the  Notice
    of Appeal focused on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), pleading "that there  are
    significant obstacles for reintegration", with particular reference  to
    the Appellant's age and "medical issues" and the deterioration  in  her
    "medical and mental health", on the basis that there was  no  realistic
    support nor any family in India, all family members are outside the UK,
    and the daughter who provides support is in the UK.


9.   At the appeal  hearing  the  Appellant's  case  appears  to  have  been
    pursued on essentially the same basis. The Appellant and her  daughter,
    'SSJ', both gave oral evidence. Whilst the  Judge  had  regard  to  the
    supporting medical evidence, it was noted:

         "The  Appellant's  capacity  to  participate  within  the  Tribunal
         proceedings was not drawn to  my  attention  prior  to  her  giving
         evidence. The Appellant's representative called  the  Appellant  to
         give evidence. However, the Respondent engaged  in  a  focused  and
         limited cross examination of  the  Appellant  and  no  issues  were
         raised by the Appellant's representative." (paragraph 22).

    As such it would appear that the Appellant was  able  to  engage  fully
    with the  proceedings;  no  contrary  claim  has  been  raised  in  the
    challenge to the Upper Tribunal.


10.  The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the Decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wilson promulgated on 13 May 2019.


11.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Saffer on 17 June 2019, but  subsequently  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Grubb on 30 July 2019. In material part the grant  of  permission
    to appeal is in these terms:

         "It is arguable that in assessing the appellant's claim under Art 8
         the Judge should  have  considered  the  appellant's  circumstances
         under the adult dependent relative (ADR) provisions of Appendix FM.
         Even [though] those do not apply to an in country applicant such as
         the appellant, they do arguably inform the Art 8 decision  if  only
         on a Chikwamba basis. Some of the Judge's findings might be applied
         across to the ADR rules and may affect the materiality of any error
         by him.

         It is also arguable that the Judge may have failed  fully  to  take
         into account the expert evidence. However, the grounds directed  to
         the issue of "family life" make no sense as the Judge accepted that
         there was  "family  life"  between  the  appellant  and  her  adult
         children in the UK (see [35])."


Consideration of 'Error of Law' challenge

12.  In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal Judge  successfully  essayed  a
    comprehensive evaluation of the evidence in the appeal and  the  issues
    presented on behalf of the Appellant in support of her case. The  Judge
    noted that there was essentially no  challenge  by  the  Respondent  in
    respect of primary facts; the Judge also made  findings  favourable  to
    the Appellant in respect of having established a private life in the UK
    with  extended  family  members  including  grandchildren,  and  having
    established a family life with her daughter in the UK. The Judge  found
    in the Appellant's favour in respect of the first two Razgar questions,
    and also identified that there was essentially no issue in  respect  of
    the third and fourth Razgar questions.


13.  The appeal was  dismissed  ultimately  with  regard  to  the  issue  of
    'proportionality'. The reasons for this were essentially  twofold:  the
    Judge concluded that the Appellant had  not  shown  that  she  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi); the Judge otherwise  concluded
    that the interference with the Appellant's Article 8 rights inherent in
    the Respondent's  decision  were  not  disproportionate  when  balanced
    against  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control. In reaching these conclusions it is manifest  that  the  Judge
    had regard to the best interests of the minor grandchildren present  in
    the UK (paragraph 32), and  also  the  public  interest  considerations
    pursuant to section 117B of the 2002 Act (paragraph 42).  Moreover,  it
    is plain on the face of the Decision that the Judge had very particular
    and careful regard to the medical/care issues that were at the core  of
    the Appellant's application and appeal.


14.  In respect of 'very significant obstacles to  integration  into  India'
    it is clear that the Judge understood that the  Appellant  was  relying
    upon her medical conditions and care requirements: this is expressed in
    terms at paragraph 34. The Judge  gave  careful  consideration  to  the
    evidence in respect of medical conditions and care requirements  across
    paragraphs 21-31 of the Decision. After careful  consideration  of  the
    grounds of challenge and the submissions of Mr  Khan,  and  mindful  of
    Judge Grubb's observation in granting permission to appeal that it  was
    arguable the First-tier Tribunal Judge may have  failed  to  take  into
    account the expert evidence (i.e. the medical evidence), I can identify
    no basis to impugn any of the Judge's analysis in this regard.


15.  The Grounds of Appeal argue that the Respondent  accepted  the  medical
    evidence, and the Judge fell  into  error  at  paragraph  23  in  being
    critical of the medical report; in this latter context it  was  pleaded
    that the Judge had failed to consider "all the medical  assessment  and
    transcripts, which were material, provided".


16.  Whilst it is be noted that the Judge  records  that  "The  Respondent's
    representative confirmed in closing submissions that he could not  look
    behind the medical evidence" (paragraph 23), I do not accept that  this
    amounted  to  any  specific  concession  in  the   appeal,   and   more
    particularly and in any event did not in any  way  restrict  the  Judge
    from  undertaking  his  own  independent  evaluation  of  the   medical
    evidence.


17.  The medical evidence on appeal comprised the report that was  submitted
    with the application together with certain  test  results  (Appellant's
    bundle pages 15-23), some prescription scripts  (pages  32-35),  and  a
    discharge summary from the emergency department at Ealing  Hospital  in
    respect of an attendance on 4 June 2018 (page 36).


18.  The latter document is dated 3 days after the  Appellant's  arrival  in
    the UK. It records that she presented complaining of  collapse  with  a
    possible  cause  of  diarrhoea/vomiting:  a  provisional  diagnosis  of
    suspected  infectious  gastroenteritis  was  made;  the  Appellant  was
    described  as  "well  and  asymptomatic"  in  Accident  and  Emergency,
    observations were normal, and clinical  examination  was  unremarkable;
    urine was normal; she was advised  to  ensure  good  fluid  intake,  to
    register with a GP and to send a stool sample if her condition had  not
    settled within a week, and also to return to A&E if there was fever  or
    she became unwell or severely unwell. There is no  apparent  follow-up.
    The  plain  implication  is  that  this  was  a   temporary   bout   of
    gastroenteritis that resolved itself, and was  not  indicative  of  any
    particular ongoing underlying medical condition.


19.  In such circumstances it is not surprising that the Judge's  focus  was
    on the medical report that had been commissioned by the  Appellant  and
    presented in support of the application, and was being re-presented  in
    support of her appeal.  The  Judge  correctly  identified  this  report
    (paragraph 21) and accurately summarised its contents  (paragraph  22).
    Then, having recorded the  Presenting  Officer's  observation  that  he
    could not  look  behind  the  medical  evidence,  the  Judge  made  the
    following comments:

         "However, the weight that is attached to such medical evidence is a
         matter for the Tribunal. The medical report is  very  limited.  The
         opinion section is limited to less  than  one  page.  There  is  no
         rationale as to why  the  author  draws  the  conclusion  that  the
         Appellant would be unable to travel. No rationale is provided as to
         why it will take one year for the Appellant to improve. There is no
         analysis as to whether the Appellant would be able to  travel  with
         the  assistance  of  the  Appellant's  daughter  or  whether  other
         alternative travel arrangements have been considered. There  is  no
         analysis as to whether  appropriate  treatment  could  be  obtained
         within India. In addition, the report cites the date of examination
         on 9 September 2018. The Appellant arrived in  the  UK  on  1  June
         2018. In oral evidence the Appellant's daughter stated her mother's
         condition has worsened since she  arrived.  However,  there  is  no
         analysis within the report as to why Appellant was able  to  travel
         to the UK in June 2018 and yet, within a relatively  short  period,
         was unable to return to India.  For  all  these  reasons,  I  place
         little weight upon the medical report's findings that the Appellant
         is not fit to travel and will take one year to recover."


20.  The medical report is not typical of the reports commonly seen in  this
    jurisdiction. As noted above although it has been prepared  and  signed
    by a single practitioner, it expresses itself  to  be  based  upon  the
    examinations and opinions of a team - the Harley Street Medical Express
    Clinic.  Without  expressing  a  view  as  to  the  appropriateness  or
    otherwise of such an approach in general,  in  the  instant  case  this
    gives rise to some unsatisfactory elements. I note:

         (i) Although the qualifications  and  experience  of  the  report's
         author are set out in considerable detail, the full  qualifications
         and experience of the other examining practitioners are not.

         (ii) Under the heading 'Seen by:' the names of three  practitioners
         are given on the covering sheet to the report - a GP, a  consultant
         in care of the elderly, and a consultant cardiologist. However,  in
         the body of the report it is stated that the Appellant "was seen by
         a consultant physician - care of the elderly, a cardiologist and  a
         psychiatrist". No mention is made of a GP.

         (iii) Moreover, the body of the report refers to  a  mental  health
         assessment being carried out by a  named  consultant  psychiatrist,
         whose name does not appear on the cover of the report as one of the
         practitioners who saw the Appellant.

         (iv) It is not overtly apparent that the author of the report  ever
         actually saw the Appellant, or examined or assessed her in  person.
         The author is not included in the  list  of  practitioners  on  the
         cover sheet by whom the Appellant was seen, and in such context the
         'first  person  plural'  -  "we"  -  references   to   seeing   and
         understanding the Appellant are ambiguous and might relate  to  the
         practice or team and not inevitably include the author.

         (v) Although the date of examination is given as 9 September  2018,
         it would appear from the various test results  that  the  Appellant
         must also have been seen on 10  September  and  16  September:  see
         Appellant's bundle at pages 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, and 23).


21.  The above matters were not alighted  upon  by  the  representatives  or
    Judge in the First-tier Tribunal - although they were  the  subject  of
    brief discussion in the Upper Tribunal. In such  circumstances  I  have
    not taken the above observations into account in considering whether or
    not the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law. These matters  are  set
    out by way of general observations and as matters that the medical  and
    legal advisers might wish to consider in the context  of  other  future
    cases. Of course, in the  event  of  this  particular  case  going  any
    further,  such  matters  might  yet   be   the   subject   of   further
    consideration.


22.  Be that as it may, it seems to me that  the  Judge's  analysis  of  the
    report is faultless. It is an extremely  limited  report:  the  opinion
    section is indeed less than one page; reasons for the  conclusions  are
    not discernible on the face of the report. Indeed Mr Khan  acknowledged
    as much in the course of submissions; he accepted  that  a  'rationale'
    could not be found within the opinion and conclusions - albeit  it  was
    his case that a rationale was apparent on a reading of  the  test  data
    (see further below). The Appellant is described as having  been  crying
    at the clinic, and her daughter was concerned about the withdrawal  and
    crying; on this basis it was considered "obvious that  she  has  severe
    mental health issues", and accordingly a mental health  assessment  was
    carried out. No further detail of  that  mental  health  assessment  is
    given save the diagnosis of  severe  retarded  depression;  nothing  is
    offered by way of history, symptoms, or analysis. Examination and  test
    results  are  stated  to  reveal  hypothyroism  [sic.],   hypertension,
    arthritis, and  vitamin  D  deficiency.  Nothing  further  specific  is
    attributed in the body of the report to either the cardiologist or  the
    consultant in care  of  the  elderly.  It  is  indicated  that  further
    investigation will  be  carried  out  into  the  possibility  that  the
    Appellant has tuberculosis: by the date of the hearing, approximately 7
    months later, there was no evidence that the  Appellant  was  suffering
    from tuberculosis; Mr Khan confirmed that there had indeed to date been
    no further concern that the Appellant might have  TB.  No  reasons  are
    given for the conclusion that the Appellant is considered  not  fit  to
    travel. The Judge is correct to identify that there is  no  exploration
    as to  whether  any  possible  difficulties  could  be  ameliorated  by
    travelling with a companion. The Judge's conclusion that little  weight
    should be attached to the opinion that it would take the Appellant  one
    year to recover is  entirely  sustainable  given  the  absence  of  any
    explanation or reason's for the expression of such an opinion.


23.  The Grounds of Appeal and Mr Khan's submissions seek to  criticise  the
    Judge's approach to the report on the basis that there was a failure to
    take into account the test data  included  in  the  Appellant's  bundle
    (pages 15-23). Implicit in this submission - as Mr Khan acknowledged  -
    is the suggestion that the justification for  the  conclusions  in  the
    report may  be  gleaned  from  such  data.  The  difficulty  with  this
    submission is that without the necessary medical expertise  it  is  not
    readily possible to make sense of  the  data.  For  example,  the  data
    includes such matters as  biochemical  analysis  of  blood  and  urine.
    Whilst it may be understood that  the  diagnoses  of  hypothyroism  and
    perhaps vitamin D deficiency were probably reached  in  consequence  of
    analysis of such data, there is nothing in the data that  a  non-expert
    could identify as informing the conclusion that the Appellant  was  not
    fit to travel. In any event it is not  suggested  that  there  was  any
    physiological reason for any mental health symptoms. It  is  of  course
    the purpose of the expert witness in preparing the  report  to  explain
    any pertinent test results. Mr Khan himself was not  able  to  identify
    anything in any of the data that specifically assisted in understanding
    the conclusions expressed in the report. As  such  Mr  Khan  could  not
    point to any piece of material evidence that the Judge  had  failed  to
    take into account.


24.  In the circumstances I reject Mr Khan's submission to the  effect  that
    the additional materials in the Appellant's appeal  bundle  provided  a
    basis for understanding the conclusions of the medical report, and that
    the Judge erred in either overlooking the data or otherwise in  failing
    to read it in conjunction  with  the  medical  report.  The  Judge  had
    adequate regard to the expert evidence  and  reached  conclusions  that
    were entirely sustainable.


25.  The expert evidence was silent on the Appellant's personal care  needs.
    No supporting evidence was filed in  respect  of  the  availability  of
    medical treatment in India, or the availability  of  personal  care  in
    India.


26.   The  Judge  gave  consideration  to  the  Appellant's  care  needs  by
    reference to the testimony of the Appellant and her daughter.


27.  It is be noted that beyond referring to the  diagnosis  of  depression,
    and assertions to the effect that the Appellant "cannot  get  by  [for]
    myself" (witness  statement  at  paragraph  9),  and  that  things  had
    deteriorated since coming to the UK, no particulars of the  Appellant's
    care needs were offered in the witness statements of the Appellant  and
    her daughter. Similarly, although assertions were  made  as  to  social
    care being unreliable in India, there was no detail and  no  supporting
    evidence.


28.  It does not  appear  that  there  was  any  greater  or  more  specific
    identification of the Appellant's particular personal care needs at the
    hearing. Be that as it may, it was related that  the  Appellant's  care
    needs had previously been met through the employment of a  maid/servant
    paid for by the Appellant's daughter (paragraph 24).  However,  it  was
    said that  this  relationship  had  broken  down.  The  Judge  noted  -
    accurately and sustainably - that such  a  circumstance  had  not  been
    raised hitherto whether in the course of the application,  the  grounds
    of appeal, or the witness statements - notwithstanding that the witness
    statements talked in general terms as to the  unreliability  of  social
    care:  the  Judge  considered  that  this  undermined  the  Appellant's
    credibility. However, in any event, the Judge went on to  observe  that
    even if it was accepted that there had been problems with the  previous
    maid/servant there was no evidence to  suggest  that  alternative  care
    could not be obtained. In my judgement the following passage is not  to
    be impugned:

         "There is no evidence before me to suggest that care could  not  be
         obtained.  In  their  witness  statements  the  Appellant  and  the
         Appellant's daughter state  that  care  is  unreliable  and  it  is
         impossible to conduct security checks upon carers. Whilst I  accept
         there may not be the same administrative rigour within India as  in
         the UK it does not necessarily follow that the Appellant  would  be
         unable to obtain appropriate care provision. Whilst I  accept  that
         the Appellant's daughter  has  young  children  within  the  United
         Kingdom which make it difficult for her to relocate to care for her
         mother, that is not to say that she could not take a short visit to
         investigate alternative care providers. In the absence of  evidence
         that such investigations have taken place together with evidence to
         demonstrate  why  such  alternative   care   provision   would   be
         unsuitable, I find that the Appellant has not [to] the  appropriate
         standard demonstrated that she  would  be  unable  to  obtain  care
         within India" (paragraph 27).


29.  Further to this, the  Judge  identified  that  the  cost  of  care  had
    previously been met by the Appellant's daughter, and that there was  no
    reason evident why  this  could  not  happen  again,  and/or  that  the
    Appellant's son in Ireland could not also contribute  to  the  cost  of
    care, or the process of obtaining suitable  care  (paragraph  28).  The
    Judge  also  considered  the  subjective  position  of  the   Appellant
    (paragraph 29). Yet  further  the  Judge  whilst  indicating  that  the
    medical evidence did not support the  notion  that  the  Appellant  had
    deteriorated since coming to the UK, nonetheless concluded even if that
    were the case there was no evidence to suggest that medical care  would
    be unavailable in India (paragraph 30). The Judge  also  observed  that
    there was no evidence to suggest that the Appellant would be unable  to
    access such medical treatment, noting that her daughter had been paying
    for her care in India and there was evidence in the Appellant's  bundle
    that the Appellant had attended medical appointments in India.


30.  Given such findings there was no prospect of the  Appellant  satisfying
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules in respect of adult dependent
    relatives: see Appendix FM, section EC-DR et seq. and Appendix FM-SE in
    particular at paragraphs 34 and 35.


31.  The Judge correctly identified that the Immigration  Rules  in  respect
    of  adult  dependent  relatives  "apply  only  to  those  who  make  an
    application from outside the UK" (paragraph 36). It is clear  that  the
    Judge  made  this  observation  in  the  context  of  considering   the
    applicability of the Immigration Rules to the Appellant's  case.  There
    can be no criticism in this regard.


32.  However, the Grounds of Appeal argue that the  Judge  should  have  had
    regard to the ADR rules in considering Article 8  notwithstanding  that
    the application was made from within the UK - and it is  to  this  that
    Judge Grubb refers in granting permission to appeal.


33.  In the premises, I do not disagree with  the  underlying  principle.  I
    have acknowledged as much at paragraph 6 above: "Although the Rules  in
    respect of adult dependent relatives are pre-entry rules, and the Rules
    do not provide for switching into this category, inevitably such  Rules
    are relevant to a consideration of any  application  by  an  adult  for
    leave to remain made in  reliance  upon  Article  8  on  the  basis  of
    personal care needs". However, in my judgement, this cannot  avail  the
    Appellant in the instant case.


34.  It is adequately clear that  the  Appellant  made  no  attempt  in  the
    application to 'plead in aid', or otherwise to place reliance  on,  the
    substance of the ADR rules. Nor is it apparent that any such submission
    was articulated  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Even  if  it  were
    otherwise, the simple reality is that no relevant evidence was advanced
    - either in support of the application or on appeal -  that  identified
    with any precision  the  Appellant's  long-term  personal  care  needs,
    and/or why such needs could not be met in India. Had  a  submission  in
    respect of the ADR rules been formulated  and  articulated  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal it would have been bound  to  be  rejected  on  the
    findings of the Judge - "I find that the Appellant  has  not  [to]  the
    appropriate standard demonstrated that she would be  unable  to  obtain
    care within India" (paragraph 27).


35.  Accordingly I also reject the aspect  of  the  challenge  based  on  an
    analogous consideration of the ADR Immigration Rules.


Notice of Decision

36.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    accordingly stands.


37.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 7 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
