
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04171/2017
     HU/04174/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Priory Courts, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2nd April 2019                     |On 08th April 2019                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                      Balvinder Kaur (first Appellant)
                      Shingara Singh (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - New delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr H Samra of Harbans Singh & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Shanahan (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 11th April 2018.

 2. The Appellants are Indian citizens born 15th July 1956 and 8th  October
    1962 respectively.  They are married.  They applied for entry clearance
    to visit their daughter and her family in the UK.

 3. The applications were refused on 1st  February  2017.   The  Respondent
    contended there was no right of appeal, but the Appellants appealed  on
    human rights grounds.

 4. The appeals were heard together by the judge on 6th  March  2018.   The
    judge found that Article 8(1) of the 1950 European Convention on  Human
    Rights was not engaged.  The judge found that the  Appellants  had  not
    proved that family life existed  with  their  adult  daughter  and  her
    family, which would engage Article 8.   The  judge  therefore  did  not
    consider it necessary to go on  and  consider  whether  the  Appellants
    could have met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The  appeals
    were dismissed.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 5. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    It was submitted that the judge had  erred  by  failing  to  take  into
    account that the Sponsor, the daughter  of  the  Appellants,  had  been
    granted humanitarian protection and therefore could not return to India
    to visit her parents.

 6. It was also contended that the judge had failed to engage with the fact
    that the Appellants wished to visit their grandson in  the  UK  on  his
    first birthday and take part in religious and cultural rituals.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge S H Smith of the FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  The grounds assert that the judge erred in failing  to  engage
             with the grant  of  humanitarian  protection  enjoyed  by  the
             Sponsor, the fact that the Sponsor cannot return to  India  to
             visit the Appellants, and the fact that the  proposed  purpose
             of the visit visa was to visit their grandson for cultural and
             religious purposes on the occasion of his first birthday.

         3.   There is an arguable error of law.  The judge did not consider
             whether any of the requirements of the Immigration Rules  were
             met, addressing the matter solely  on  the  basis  of  whether
             family life existed for the purposes of Article 8.   Arguably,
             the judge should have first addressed Article  8  through  the
             lens of the relevant Immigration Rules, before then addressing
             Article 8 outside the rules."

 8. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision should be set aside.



My Analysis and Conclusions

 9. At the  hearing  both  representatives  indicated  that  they  were  in
    agreement that the judge granting permission had in fact erred  in  law
    at paragraph 3 in finding it arguable that the judge should first  have
    addressed Article 8 through the lens of the  Immigration  Rules.   Both
    were in agreement that the starting point in appeals such as  this,  is
    to consider whether Article 8 is engaged.

10. Mr Mills submitted that the judge had  not  erred  in  law.   Mr  Samra
    submitted that the judge had erred by not taking into account that this
    was a rare or unique  case,  in  that  the  Sponsor  had  been  granted
    humanitarian protection.

11. The judge did not err in law in consideration of  these  appeals.   The
    judge adopted the correct legal approach.  That approach is firstly  to
    consider whether Article 8 is engaged.  If Article 8  is  not  engaged,
    then the appeals go no further, as they are human rights appeals.

12. The judge referred to the appropriate Upper  Tribunal  authorities  and
    Court  of  Appeal  authorities  at  paragraph  20  and  applied   those
    authorities correctly.  The judge went on to consider whether Article 8
    was engaged on the basis  of  family  life.   This  was  considered  at
    paragraphs 24-30 of the decision.

13. The judge noted at paragraph 24 that  the  Sponsor  had  not  seen  the
    Appellants since 2004, and had no contact with them  between  2004  and
    2009, but contact was resumed in 2009 and the  Sponsor  speaks  to  the
    Appellants on the telephone and Skype at least once a week.

14. The judge found at paragraph  26  that  the  relationship  between  the
    Sponsor and Appellants is that of  adult  daughter  and  parents.   The
    judge noted at paragraph 29 that the grandchildren are  aged  1  and  4
    years and have not met the Appellants.

15. The judge made reference to Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31  and  was  not
    satisfied on the evidence submitted that the relationship  between  the
    Appellants and the Sponsor and her family amounted to family life.  The
    judge took into account all material evidence and reached a  conclusion
    open to her to make on the evidence.  Her conclusion  is  supported  by
    the Court of Appeal case law referred to at paragraph  20  of  the  FtT
    decision.

16. Having found that family life did not exist, the judge was  correct  to
    conclude at paragraph 31 that  it  was  not  necessary  to  go  on  and
    consider the Immigration Rules.  Because Article 8 was not engaged, the
    Appellants could not succeed with their human rights appeal.

17. The fact that humanitarian protection had been granted to the  Sponsor,
    was not a relevant consideration when considering whether Article 8 was
    engaged.  The grounds upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted
    disclose a disagreement with the conclusion reached by the judge but do
    not disclose any error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose an error of law.   I  do  not  set
aside the decision.  The appeals are dismissed.



Anonymity

The FtT made no anonymity direction.  There has been no request made to  the
Upper Tribunal for anonymity, and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an  anonymity
direction.


Signed                              Date 2nd April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There are no fee awards.


Signed                              Date 2nd April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall












