



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/04328/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at: Field House             |               Decision and Reasons      |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On 19 April 2017                  |               On 3 May 2017             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                           Miss thi my Ngan Huynh
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, counsel (instructed by The Chancery
Partnership)
For the Respondent: Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Vietnam, born on  13  March  1986.  Her
      appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 4 September  2015,
      refusing her application for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis
      of long residence was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk,  in
      a decision promulgated on 17 August 2016. The appellant  indicated  to
      the First-tier Tribunal that she wanted the appeal to  be  decided  on
      the papers without a hearing. The  appeal  was  thus  decided  on  the
      papers.


   2. Judge Birk noted that the only  ground  of  appeal  available  to  the
      appellant was one based on her human rights. He noted at [8] that  the
      appellant in her grounds of appeal and  also  her  witness  statement,
      '....has only addressed the issue of the chronology and failures  that
      she alleged the respondent made in dealing with her applications'.


   3. He found at paragraph [9], when  trying  to  "extrapolate"  from  that
      information what is relevant for her human rights  grounds  of  appeal
      which appear to be based on her family and private life that  she  has
      family in Vietnam and it appears none in the UK. She therefore had  no
      family life in the UK. As for private life, she had been in the UK for
      about ten years and had been studying here. She had  not  argued  that
      she met any of the Immigration Rules in  respect  of  her  family  and
      private life.


   4. As it had not been argued that the  Immigration  Rules  had  been  met
      Judge Birk stated at paragraph [10], that in order  for  him  to  find
      that an Article 8 assessment is required, then the case of SS  (Congo)
      [2015] EWCA Civ 387 which takes into account R (on the application  of
      MM   (Lebanaon)   v   SSHD   [2014]   EWCA   Civ   985   "....provides
      guidance.....that compelling circumstances  are  required  to  justify
      such an an assessment and that they need to be identified".


   5. He considered the issues raised  in  her  grounds  of  appeal  and  in
      particular matters which referred to the murder case that she  claimed
      she had become innocently and legitimately involved in and the illness
      and passing of her father. The grounds of appeal also set out that she
      was able to return to Vietnam to visit, and also that her family  have
      monies for  her  study.  Those  matters  did  not  provide  compelling
      circumstances which required further  consideration  under  Article  8
      outside the Rules - [11].


   6. The  grounds set out in the application for permission  to  appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal  asserted  that:  the  First-tier  Judge  erred  in
      finding that there had been no issue that the  Immigration  Rules  had
      not been met; he failed to properly consider the appellant's  evidence
      in finding that there were no compelling circumstances and  failed  to
      engage with any of the submissions put forward by  the  appellant;  he
      failed to consider whether the appellant's legitimate expectation  had
      been frustrated by the respondent.


   7. On 22 February 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott Baker granted the
      appellant permission to appeal, stating that


     "......there was little reference to any of the evidence  submitted  by
the appellant or  any analysis of the same and few  findings  of  fact.  The
appellant had requested that    the appeal be determined on the  papers  and
it was incumbent on the Judge to    display an  engagement  with  the  facts
which he had arguably failed to do".


     The appeal


   8. Mr Sowerby relied on his grounds of  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
      respondent refused the application solely on the basis that there  had
      been a gap of more than 28 days  during  the  appellant's  ten  years'
      lawful residence.


   9. The Judge was obliged to consider the relevant Rules  even  though  it
      was a human rights appeal. There  had  been  no  findings  as  to  the
      misfortune that the appellant claimed had affected her. The  appellant
      had not been issued a Basnet notice. When she  submitted  her  Tier  1
      application on 28 February 2013 the respondent  returned  it,  stating
      that the appellant did not complete the payment  page.  She  contended
      that the form was completed  in  full.  She  then  submitted  a  fresh
      application on 5 March 2013 in which an HSBC cheque was stapled.


  10. That application was subsequently returned as invalid. The  respondent
      alleged that there were insufficient funds in the account and the HSBC
      bank returned the cheque unpaid. The appellant  contended  that  there
      had been more than sufficient  funds  to  clear  the  cheque  for  the
      application fee. In due course, after collecting a banker  draft  from
      her bank, she resubmitted a fresh application dated 5 March 2013. That
      application was subsequently granted on 3 May 2013.


  11. She thus stated that the  gap  related  to  a  single  occasion  which
      occurred beyond her control. She relied  on  the  Home  Office  policy
      guidance which required that the respondent consider any  evidence  of
      exceptional circumstances which prevented the applicant from  applying
      within the first 28 days of overstaying. That was a high threshold. It
      included delays from unexpected or unforeseeable  causes  such  as  an
      inability to provide the necessary documents. In this case there  were
      circumstances beyond the applicant's control.


  12. Mr Sowerby submitted that in finding that  there  were  no  compelling
      circumstances, the Judge did not consider or place any weight  on  the
      fact that the Bank's and Home Office errors  led  to  the  appellant's
      application being rejected. The Judge did not make any finding  as  to
      whether the decision maker had exercised a lawful discretion. Had  the
      Judge made findings and considered those matters, it would  have  been
      open to him to find that the  appellant's  case  disclosed  compelling
      circumstances warranting consideration outside the Rules under Article
      8.


  13. He referred to the Supreme Court's decision in R (on  the  application
      of Agyarko and Ikuga) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 at  paragraph  [48].  Lord
      Reed noted the secretary of state's view that the public  interest  in
      the removal of persons who are in the UK in breach of immigration laws
      is, in all but exceptional circumstances, sufficiently  compelling  to
      outweigh the individual's interest in family life with  a  partner  in
      the UK, unless there are insurmountable obstacles to family life  with
      that partner  continuing  outside  the  UK  was  challenged  in  these
      proceedings as being too stringent to be compatible  with  Article  8.
      The secretary of state has treated  'insurmountable  obstacles'  as  a
      test applicable to persons in the UK in breach  of  immigration  laws,
      whereas the the European Court treats "insurmountable obstacles" as  a
      relevant factor in relation to non settled migrants.


  14. However, this did not mean that that the secretary of state's test  is
      incompatible with Article 8. The  Rules  are  not  a  summary  of  the
      European court's case law, but a statement of the secretary of state's
      policy. That policy is qualified by the scope  allowed  for  leave  to
      remain to be granted outside  the  Rules.  If  the  applicant  or  his
      partner would face very significant difficulties in  continuing  their
      family life together outside the UK which could  not  be  overcome  or
      would  entail  very  serious  hardship,  then   the   "insurmountable"
      obstacles test will be met, and leave will be granted under the Rules.
      If that test is not met, but the  refusal  of  the  application  would
      result in unjustifiably harsh consequences such that refusal would not
      be proportionate, then leave will be granted outside the Rules on  the
      basis that  there  are  "exceptional  circumstances".  The  Rules  and
      Instructions are therefore  compatible  with  Article  8.  That  is  a
      question of fact  that  must  be  determined  in  dependently  by  the
      Tribunal in the light of the particular circumstances of each case.


  15. Mr Sowerby submitted that there were such circumstances  operating  in
      this case. The Judge erred in failing to make any findings as  to  the
      circumstances.  Further, the Judge  failed  to  consider  whether  the
      respondent had undertaken a procedurally fair decision making process.
      The grounds of appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  contended  that
      the respondent failed to act fairly and rationally and to observe  the
      requirements of a procedurally fair decision making process. The Judge
      prevented  himself  from  determining  whether  the   respondent   had
      undertaken such a  fair  decision  making  process.  The  respondent's
      failure  to  act  fairly  and  rationally  amounted  to  a  compelling
      circumstance.


  16.  Nor  did  the  Judge  consider  whether  the  appellant's  legitimate
      expectation had been frustrated by the respondent. The appellant had a
      legitimate expectation that the gap in applying for further  leave  to
      remain would be disregarded.


  17. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Clarke submitted that this has been  a
      misconceived appeal from the beginning.  The  appellant's  appeal  was
      limited to human rights. The appellant was informed by the  respondent
      in the decision dismissing her application that she  had  a  right  of
      appeal under s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
      as the respondent has decided "to refuse your human rights claim." She
      was informed that she may appeal against  the  refusal  of  her  human
      rights claim on the grounds that the decision is unlawful under s.6 of
      the Human Rights Act 1998.


  18. Judge Birk noted at [9] that the appellant had made  no  reference  to
      issues relating to family life or private life under  Appendix  FM  or
      paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.


  19. The fact that she had been here  for  ten  years  did  not  constitute
      compelling or exceptional circumstances. There had been no substantive
      contention made nor any facts produced with regard to either family or
      private life in  the  UK.  She  had  not  lived  here  for  20  years.
      Paragraph 276ADE recognises that an inference can be  drawn  from  the
      fact of such lengthy residence in the UK.


  20. The appellant would have to show an interference with respect  to  her
      family and private life in the UK. No such attempt had been made other
      than to contend that the decision was  unfair  in  the  circumstances.
      The Judge did not have jurisdiction under the Rules.


  21. In order for there to  be  compelling  circumstances  resulting  in  a
      disproportionate interference with her human rights under  Article  8,
      the appellant needed to demonstrate interference with regard  to  such
      private or family life. Nothing, however, had been set out apart  from
      the secretary of state's policy.


  22. There was no evidence as to how the appellant lives, how  she  engages
      in the community and what the nature of any private life is. These are
      matters relevant to the  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
      decision under Article 8. Moreover, Agyarko related to a distinct  set
      of facts. It focused on the potential separation of partners.


  23. In reply Mr Sowerby submitted that had the Judge found that the  Rules
      were satisfied, he could have found that that that was a matter  which
      affects proportionality of the decision. He referred to  the  decision
      in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT  00112.   There,
      the Tribunal held that in the case of appeals brought against refusals
      of entry clearance under Article 8, ECHR, the  claimant's  ability  to
      satisfy the Immigration Rules is not the question to be determined  by
      the  Tribunal  but  is  capable  of  being  a  weighty,  although  not
      determinative,  factor  when  deciding   whether   such   refusal   is
      proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.


      Assessment


  24. The appellant elected to have her appeal decided on the papers.  Judge
      Birk had before  him  her  grounds  of  appeal,  in  which  the  legal
      framework regarding paragraph  276B  of  the  Rules  as  well  as  the
      respondent's policy guidance on "long residence" was referred  to  and
      set out. The  factual  background  relating  to  the  gap  between  24
      February 2013 until 3 May 2013, referred to as "the alleged gap,"  was
      also set out in some detail.


  25. The grounds from paragraph 25 onwards complained that  the  respondent
      erred in asserting that the appellant could not meet the  requirements
      under paragraph 276B(i)(a) and (v) of the Rules. It  was  asserted  at
      paragraph 28 that the respondent's error was 'a  cause  of  action  to
      trigger the alleged gap'. Had the respondent handled  the  application
      made on 2  February  2013  with  care  and  accepted  it  as  a  valid
      application, the subsequent events would not have taken place.


  26. It was also contended that the respondent erred in asserting  that  it
      was not appropriate to exercise discretion. Such discretionary  powers
      were enshrined in the long residence policy  guidance  which  was  set
      out. Accordingly, a procedurally fair decision making process had  not
      taken place.


  27. Finally,  it  was  contended  that  the  respondent  erred  and  acted
      unlawfully so as to frustrate a substantive, legitimate expectation of
      the appellant.


  28. In her witness statement before the Tribunal, the appellant in  effect
      repeated the contentions in the grounds of appeal.


  29. Unlike the appellant in Mostafa, supra, she did not rely on or produce
      any evidence of any family life in the UK  which  would  be  adversely
      affected as a result of the  decision.  Nor  was  there  any  evidence
      produced of her private life established in  the  UK.  In  particular,
      there was no evidence of any relationships she  had  with  persons  by
      living and engaging in society whilst  residing  here.  There  was  no
      evidence relating to any social ties, nor whether she had  established
      any unique relationship/s which could not be  replicated  in  Vietnam.
      There was in fact no  reference  to  the  development  of  any  close,
      personal or social ties which developed over time.


  30. The respondent informed the appellant of her right of appeal which was
      limited to human rights grounds.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  thus
      bound to consider the grounds  of  appeal  which  contended  that  the
      respondent's decision was incompatible with her human rights under the
      Convention.


  31. The Judge considered the matters she raised with regard to the  murder
      case in which she claimed she  became  innocently  involved,  and  the
      illness and the death of her father. She had been able  to  return  to
      Vietnam to visit.  She also stated that  her  family  had  monies  for
      study [11].  The finding that these matters did not provide compelling
      circumstances outside the Rules was available  to  the  Judge  on  the
      evidence before him.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.


      Signed                             Date: 29 April 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer








