
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04670/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13 November 2017                   |On 14 December 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     K U
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fisher, Counsel instructed by JCWI
For the Respondent:    A Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 6th February 2017 of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Walker which found that the appellant had not  made
    out an  asylum  or  human  rights  claim  such  that  he  could  defeat
    deportation.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I continue the anonymity order made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
    no report of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.  I  do
    so in order to avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the
    appellant from the contents of the protection claim and  to  his  minor
    children.

 3. This matter has a somewhat complicated history of which I set  out  the
    salient points now.  The appellant was born in 1962 in Sri  Lanka.   He
    came to the UK on 7 June 1981 as a visitor with leave  for  one  month.
    His application to extend his leave as a  student  was  refused  on  29
    March 1982.  An appeal against that refusal was dismissed on  14  March
    1983.

 4. On 21 August 1987 the appellant married a British citizen.  However, on
    21 January 1997 his wife reported him  for  assault  and  the  marriage
    broke down, ending in divorce.

 5.  He  then  claimed  asylum  in  1989,  the  respondent  refusing   that
    application on 18 September 1992.  However, due to  country  conditions
    then pertaining in Sri Lanka he was granted exceptional leave to remain
    until 8 September 1999.

 6. On 24 July 1991 the appellant married a British citizen.   He  has  two
    daughters from that marriage, one born on 10  September  1998  and  one
    born on 5 August 2003. The appellant and his second wife separated and,
    very sadly, she died on 13  June  2012  whilst  the  appellant  was  in
    prison.

 7. On 21 May 2008 the appellant was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment
    for theft from a vehicle and handling stolen goods.  On 13  April  2012
    he was convicted of two counts of failing to surrender to  custody  and
    handling stolen goods and sentenced to nine months' imprisonment.  That
    led to  deportation  proceedings  being  taken  out  against  him.  The
    appellant appealed and First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Walker  allowed  the
    appeal in a decision dated 4 December 2012.

 8. The respondent sent the appellant a warning letter  dated  11  December
    2012 informing him that deportation would be  considered  again  if  he
    came to adverse notice in the future. The appellant went on  to  offend
    again. On 21 April 2015 he was convicted of handling stolen  goods  and
    was sentenced to thirty months' imprisonment.  Inevitably,  deportation
    proceedings were recommenced. On 5 February 2016 his asylum  and  human
    rights claim was refused and he was served with  a  deportation  order.
    The appeal happened to come before the same judge, First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Walker, on 26 January 2017.  Nothing  turns  on  the  same  judge
    hearing the two deportation appeals.

 9. The written grounds run to 44 paragraphs and  set  out  argument  under
    eleven heads of challenge. The permission decision dated  13  September
    identifies  that  Ground  1,  challenging  the  decision  refusing  the
    protection claim, was arguable. This ground is set out in paragraphs 6-
    10 and maintains that the judge failed to take  into  account  material
    from the appellant's 1989 asylum claim. That material stated  that  the
    appellant had been a supporter of the LTTE who was compelled  to  carry
    out tasks for them such  as  carrying  messages,  helping  to  organise
    meetings and taking food to  LTTE  members  who  were  in  hiding.  The
    decision on the protection claim was also stated to be in error  as  it
    ignored a Freedom from Torture report which post-dated GJ.  The  report
    identified a risk to Tamils with an  actual  or  perceived  association
    with the LTTE.

10. I do not find this ground is made  out.  Even  taking  the  appellant's
    profile at its highest and  together  with  the  Freedom  from  Torture
    report, the judge's conclusion at [37.4]  is  entirely  sound.  Nothing
    shows that the appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal here was
    argued on the basis of the material in his 1989 asylum  claim.  In  his
    witness statement dated 13 January 2017 the appellant stated only  that
    prior to coming to the UK in 1981 he attended some LTTE meetings whilst
    he was at college. He makes no reference there to  the  activities  set
    out in the earlier, unsuccessful claim. Nothing explains the difference
    in his accounts of his alleged activities prior to coming to the UK.

11. Also, the appellant's statements from his 1989 claim were not  referred
    to in the skeleton argument before Judge Walker. The skeleton  argument
    did not even seek to rely on the profile set out in the 13 January 2017
    witness statement but stated at paragraph 15 the basis  of  the  asylum
    claim was that the appellant "would be  perceived  as  opposed  to  the
    current regime due to his length of absence from Sri Lanka".

12. The skeleton argument also  made  no  reference  to  the  Freedom  from
    Torture report at all and nothing indicates that there was any argument
    to the effect that it raised serious new evidence  capable  of  leading
    the judge to distinguish GJ. On the  contrary,  the  skeleton  argument
    referred specifically to GJ in paragraph 14 as the  source  of  country
    evidence against which to assess the claim.

13.  It is also not "irrelevant" as the grounds suggest that the  appellant
    did not raise a protection claim at all in the 2012 deportation  appeal
    and the judge was entitled to  place  weight  on  that  being  so;  see
    [37.2].

14. The grant of permission dated 13 September 2017 also identifies that:

         "the judge was unarguably entitled to take into  account  the  fact
         that  the  appellant  had  learned  nothing   from   the   previous
         deportation proceedings and continued to offend at a  more  serious
         level. Although the merit of some of the other grounds of appeal is
         questionable, I grant permission  on  all  grounds  given  that  an
         assessment of  risk  on  return  also  impacts  on  the  Article  8
         assessment."

15. I have concluded above the First-tier Tribunal was correct to  find  no
    risk on return and, following the grant of permission, there can be  no
    "impact on the Article 8 assessment". The remaining grounds  of  appeal
    are, in my view, unarguable even viewed independently of  arguments  on
    the protection claim.

16. There is no merit in the suggestion that Judge Walker failed to  follow
    the guidance in Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR  -  Extra-Territorial
    Effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702. It is now well-understood that an
    earlier  asylum  decision  is  only  a  starting  point.  Judge  Walker
    acknowledged   the   finding   from   2012   that    deportation    was
    disproportionate on the basis of the appellant's relationship with  his
    daughters; see [37.10]. The background set  out  above,  as  the  judge
    pointed out at [37.32], makes it manifest that "the situation  is  very
    much different now to it was in 2012".  The appellant had reoffended in
    the  face  of  previous  deportation  proceedings.  His   offence   was
    significantly more serious. The children were older. They had lived for
    a longer period of time with their grandmother  as  primary  carer  and
    legal guardian, the appellant being in prison for  a  further  extended
    period. The grounds are wholly wrong in stating at  paragraph  14  that
    "the facts had not changed by the time of the 2017 determination".  The
    First-tier  Tribunal  took  a   correct   approach   to   the   earlier
    determination in line with Devaseelan *.

17. Ground three is merely a disagreement with the findings of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the appellant's relationship with his children and the
    impact on them if he is deported. The question of how  much  weight  to
    place on the independent social work  report  was  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The  judge  takes  the  social  work  report  into  account,
    accepting that the appellant's  deportation  would  be  a  "potentially
    severe loss"  for  the  children;  see  [37.9],  [37.15]  and  [37.16].
    Notwithstanding the conclusions  of  the  social  work  report  at  its
    highest, the "unduly harsh" assessment under paragraph  399(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules also  required  the  appellant's  conduct  and  other
    factors to be taken into account. The facts here were such that it  was
    open to the judge to find that that deportation  would  not  be  unduly
    harsh; see for example [37.12] and [37.13] on his secondary role in the
    children's lives and his criminal profile.

18. Having reached that conclusion, the objection in the grounds to further
    comments in [37.16] to the children possibly visiting the appellant  in
    Sri Lanka and being in contact with him indirectly cannot be  material.
    At the time of the hearing, the evidence was  that  the  children  were
    cared for by their grandmother and the judge was not required  to  look
    ahead in order  to  assess  the  situation  were  she  to  become  more
    seriously unwell. The judge's comments at [37.32] and  [37.14]  on  the
    appellant's shortcomings as a partner and parent are uncontentious, his
    own evidence being that he suffers from guilt in these regards.

19. Ground 5 argues that the judge erred in his assessment  that  it  would
    not be unduly harsh for the appellant's current partner  to  remain  in
    the UK without him.  This submission has no merit at all. As the  judge
    indicated at [37.17]-[37.19]  the  relationship  was  formed  when  the
    appellant was here without leave  and  had  already  faced  deportation
    proceedings. He had been in prison for part of the time that the couple
    had been together and the evidence was that the  partner  had  a  large
    extended family including seven children  who  she  saw  on  a  regular
    basis. It was entirely open to the judge to conclude  that  they  could
    provide some support to the partner and  that  all  of  these  factors,
    together with  the  appellant's  serious  reoffending,  indicated  that
    paragraph 399(b) could not be met.

20. It is also unarguable that the judge took a lawful approach in  finding
    that the appellant was not socially and culturally integrated into  the
    UK, demonstrated by his offending behaviour; see  [37.21].   The  judge
    was equally entitled to find that there would not be  very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration in Sri Lanka where he spent all  of  his
    formative years there.

21. The ground at paragraphs 34-39 really only seek to reargue the  Article
    8 proportionality assessment which the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  set
    out at [37.31]-[37.32]. The judge makes  proper  reference  to  earlier
    assessments under paragraphs 399 and 399A. The weight to be  placed  on
    the appellant's reoffending in a significantly more serious manner  was
    a matter for the judge and the approach taken was eminently rational.

22. The grounds at paragraphs 40 - 43 argue that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not apply correctly the legal tests of J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629
    to the appellant's medical evidence  and  his  risk  of  self  harm  or
    suicide. The First-tier Tribunal  addressed  this  matter  at  [37.24]-
    [37.30].

23. The first of the criteria from J is for:

         "an assessment to be made of the severity of the treatment which it
         is said that the applicant would  suffer  if  removed.   This  must
         attain a minimum level of severity.  The court has said on a number
         of occasions that the assessment of its severity depends on all the
         circumstances of the case."

    The judge here considered carefully the medical evidence concerning the
    records of the appellant's expression of ideas of self harm or  suicide
    and his treatment across those paragraphs.  The grounds do not  suggest
    that the judge omitted to consider material parts of any of the medical
    evidence.  The conclusion at [37.29] is that:

         "... his declared intentions of self harm  and  suicide  have  been
         intermittent and varied.  There is no reference of any incidents of
         self harm or attempted suicide in recent years.   Nevertheless,  as
         and when the appellant is removed then proper provision  should  be
         made to facilitate his removal in a secure and safe fashion."

    That conclusion was open to the judge and it is a lawful  finding  that
    the first  criteria in J was not met.

24. In addition, the second criteria in J states that a :

         "... causal link  must  be  shown  to  exist  between  the  act  or
         threatened act of removal or expulsion and  the  inhuman  treatment
         relied on as violating the applicant's Article 3 rights."

    As the  judge  noted  at  [37.28],  the  evidence  here  was  that  the
    appellant's risk of self harm and suicide did not arise  from  fear  of
    return to Sri Lanka but from his family circumstances in the UK and his
    distress at having not  looked  after  his  former  wife  and  children
    sufficiently well. In addition, the judge  properly  finds  at  [37.30]
    that the appellant can obtain in Sri Lanka the medication that has used
    in the UK.

25. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal Judge here was  entitled  to  reach
    the decision he did on the Article 3 suicide claim.  He considered  the
    material evidence within the correct legal matrix and no error arises.

26. For all of these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    does not disclose a material error on a point of law.

Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.



Signed   [pic]                               Date: 27 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
