
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04265/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision promulgated         |
|on 28 February 2019                           |On 05 March 2019             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss D Revill instructed by D J Webb & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. By a decision promulgated on 3 January 2019 the Upper Tribunal  found
       an error of law in the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal Judge  who
       dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.  That
       decision was set aside, it being recorded at [17] of the Error of Law
       finding:

           "17.   The Judge appears to have accepted the  primary  question
                is whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the
                United Kingdom. As such the requirements of  EX.1  (i)  must
                have been accepted as having been satisfied making the issue
                that pursuant EX.1 (ii) - whether it be reasonable to expect
                the child to leave the UK  -  although  there  is  no  clear
                finding to this effect. The Judge also does  not  appear  to
                make suitable clear  findings  concerning  the  question  of
                reasonableness  in  the  decision.  I  find  on  this  basis
                arguable legal error made out."

Background

    2. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on 5 November  1992  who
       entered the UK as a visitor on 12 September  2007,  when  he  was  14
       years old, and subsequently overstayed.

    3. The appellant seeks to remain in the UK based on his family life with
       his daughter [H] who was born on 13 January  2014  and  is  currently
       five years of age. The child is a British citizen through her mother,
       [B], with whom she lives in Rochdale. [B] and the appellant underwent
       an Islamic marriage ceremony in  2012  but  separated  in  2017.  The
       appellant lives in Wednesbury and claims to visit  [H]  as  often  as
       possible.

    4. The appellant maintains that his  removal  would  be  unlawful  under
       section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. In particular, he  relies  on
       the Parent route in Appendix FM  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
       section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The law

    5. It was accepted that the relevant legal provisions are:

       Paragraph R-LTRPT.1.1 of Appendix FM which states as follows:

           'The requirements to be met for limited leave  to  remain  as  a
           parent are-

           (a)    the applicant and the child must be in the UK;

           (b)    the applicant must have  made  a  valid  application  for
           limited or indefinite leave to remain as a  parent  or  partner;
           and either

           (c)    ...' or

           (d)

                (i)    the applicant must not fall for refusal under  S-LTR:
                Suitability leave to remain; and

                (ii)   the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-
                LTRPT.2.2-2.4. and E-LTRPT.3.1-3.2.; and

                (iii)  paragraph EX.1. applies.'

       The relevant eligibility requirements are as follows:

           'E-LTRPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-

           (a)    under the age of 18 years at the date of application,  or
           where the child has turned 18 years of age since  the  applicant
           was first granted entry clearance or leave to remain as a parent
           under this Appendix, must not have formed an independent  family
           unit or be leading an independent life;

           (b)    living in the UK; and

           (c)    a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or

           (d)    has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years
           immediately preceding the  date  of  application  and  paragraph
           EX.1. applies.

           E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-

           (a)    the applicant must have sole parental responsibility  for
           the child or the child normally lives with the applicant and not
           their other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled  in  the
           UK), and the applicant must not be eligible to apply  for  leave
           to remain as a partner under this Appendix; or

           (b)    the parent or carer with whom the  child  normally  lives
           must be-

                (i)    a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

                (ii)   not the partner of the applicant (which here includes
                a person who has been in a relationship with  the  applicant
                for less than two years prior to the date  of  application);
                and

                (iii)  the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave
                to remain as a partner under this Appendix.

           E-LTRPT.2.4.

           (a)    The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-



                (i)    sole parental responsibility for the child,  or  that
                the child normally lives with them; or

                (ii)   direct access (in person) to  the  child,  as  agreed
                with the parent or carer with whom the child normally  lives
                or as ordered by a court in the UK; and

           (b)    The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,
           and intend to continue to take, an active role  in  the  child's
           upbringing.

           E-LTRPT.3.1. The applicant must not be in the UK-

           (a)    as a visitor; or

           (b)    with valid leave granted for a  period  of  6  months  or
           less, unless that leave  was  granted  pending  the  outcome  of
           family court or divorce proceedings;

           E-LTRPT.3.2. The applicant must not be in the UK -

           (a)    on immigration bail, unless:

                (i)     the  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that   the
                applicant arrived in the UK more than 6 months prior to  the
                date of application; and

                (ii)   paragraph EX.1. applies; or

           (b)     in  breach  of  immigration  laws  (except  that,  where
           paragraph 39E of these Rules  applies,  any  current  period  of
           overstaying  will  be  disregarded),  unless   paragraph   EX.1.
           applies.'

       Paragraph EX.1 states, so far as it is relevant:

           'This paragraph applies if

           (a)

                (i)    the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a child who-

                    (aa)   is under the age of 18 years, or  was  under  the
                    age of 18 years when the  applicant  was  first  granted
                    leave on the basis that this paragraph applied;

                    (bb)   is in the UK;

                    (cc)   is a British Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                    continuously  for  at  least  the  7  years  immediately
                    preceding the date of application; and

                (ii)   taking into account their best interests as a primary
                consideration, it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
                child to leave the UK[.]'

       Section 117B of the 2002 Act, to  which  the  Respondent  must  'have
       regard' when assessing proportionality under  Article  8,  states  as
       follows:

           '(1)   The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
           the public interest.

           (2)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)    It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)    Little weight should be given to-

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

           that is established by a person at a time when the person is  in
           the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)     Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
           established by a person at a time when the person's  immigration
           status is precarious.

           (6)    In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                leave the United Kingdom.'

       A 'qualifying child' is one who is British or has lived  continuously
       in the UK for seven years or more (section 117D(1)).

    6. Case  law  considered  includes  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department v VC (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 1967, in which Macfarlane
       LJ stated that a 'genuine and subsisting relationship' requires  that
       the parent 'must have a "subsisting" role in personally providing  at
       least some element of direct personal care to the child'.

    7. SR (subsisting parental relationship - s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT
       334  (IAC),  in  which  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  accepted  at
       paragraph 40 that such a relationship was established in the case  of
       a father who saw his child for only three hours every two weeks. Such
       a parent may be unable to show that s/he is taking an active role  in
       the child's  upbringing  so  as  to  satisfy  Appendix  FM,  but  may
       nevertheless succeed under 117B(6), which does  not  require  such  a
       role (paragraph 35).

    8. In relation  to  'reasonableness':  in  KO  (Nigeria)  and  others  v
       Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53,  Lord
       Carnwath (with whom the rest of the Court agreed) held as follows:

           section 117B 'is intended to  be  consistent  with  the  general
           principles  relating  to  the  "best  interests"  of   children,
           including the principle that "a child must  not  be  blamed  for
           matters for which he or she is  not  responsible,  such  as  the
           conduct of a parent"' (paragraph 15);

           the assessment of what is 'reasonable' for a  child  in  section
           117B(6) does not involve consideration of the conduct of his  or
           her parents (paragraph 17);

           the conduct of the  parents  may,  however,  'become  indirectly
           material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a right to remain
           here, and having to leave' (paragraph 18); and

           the question of 'reasonableness' must be considered 'in the real
           world in which the children find themselves' - that is,  against
           the background of the  parents'  own  entitlement  (or  lack  of
           entitlement) to live in the UK (paragraph 19).

    9. The Respondent's guidance document  'Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM
       Section 1.0b: Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private  Life:
       10-Year Routes (version 3.0, 23 January 2019) states at page 68:

           'A child is a qualifying child if they are a British  child  who
           has an automatic right of abode in the UK, to live here  without
           any immigration restrictions as a result of  their  citizenship,
           or a non-British citizen child, who has lived in the  UK  for  a
           continuous period of at least the 7 years immediately  preceding
           the  date  of  application,  which  recognises  that  over  time
           children start to put down roots and to integrate into  life  in
           the UK. The starting point is that we would not normally  expect
           a qualifying child to leave the UK. It is normally in a  child's
           best interest for the whole family  to  remain  together,  which
           means if the child is not expected to leave, then the parent  or
           parents or primary carer of the child will also not be  expected
           to leave the UK.'

   10. In SR, Judge Plimmer emphasised that section 117B(6) must be  applied
       whenever there is a qualifying  child,  even  if  the  child  is  not
       required or likely to leave the UK. The Tribunal must still allow the
       appeal if it would not be reasonable for him or her to do so. Insofar
       as the Respondent's guidance suggests  otherwise,  it  misstates  the
       law. She explained this as follows:

           "[51]  First, it is difficult to see how section 117B(6)(b)  can
                be said to  be  of  no  application  or  to  pose  a  merely
                hypothetical question.  Section 117B(6) dictates whether  or
                not the public interest requires removal where a person  not
                liable to deportation has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                relationship with a qualifying  child.   The  question  that
                must be answered is whether it would not  be  reasonable  to
                expect  the  child  to  leave  the  UK.   That  question  as
                contained in statute, cannot be  ignored  or  glossed  over.
                Self-evidently, section 117B(6) is engaged whether the child
                will or will not in  fact  or  practice  leave  the  UK.  It
                addresses  the  normative  and  straightforward  question  -
                should the child be "expected to leave" the UK?

           [52    Secondly, the approach in the 2018 IDI appears to reflect
                the  line  of  authorities  following  Case   C-34/09   Ruiz
                Zambrano, [2011] EUECJ  C-34/09.   Section  117B(6)  is  not
                confined to such (EU) cases.  It extends  to  those  persons
                "not liable to deportation".  In addition, it self-evidently
                applies to those who are not EU citizens and can apply to  a
                child who is not a British citizen, but has lived in the  UK
                at least 7 years, to which EU law provides no assistance.

           [53]   Thirdly, although  the  straightforward  construction  of
                section  117B(6)(b)  might  appear  to  provide  an   overly
                generous approach  to  those  parents  with  a  genuine  and
                subsisting relationship with a British citizen child  living
                with another parent in the  UK,  but  who  cannot  meet  the
                requirements of the Immigration Rules, it  is  important  to
                acknowledge  the  position  is  markedly  different  in  the
                deportation context.  If a  deportation  decision  had  been
                made  against  [the  appellant],  an  altogether   different
                approach would apply."

   11. In R (on the application of RK) (s.117B(6); "parental  relationship")
       IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 in the context of section 117B it was held that
       (i)  It  is  not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  "parental
       responsibility" in law for there to exist a parental relationship;

   12. Also in Secretary of State for the Home Department v VC  (Sri  Lanka)
       [2017] EWCA Civ 1967 it  was  said  (in  the  context  of  the  older
       immigration rules relating to deportation i.e.  where  there  was  an
       exception where there was no family member  other  than  the  foreign
       criminal available to care for the child in the UK) that  to  have  a
       "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" the parent must have a
       "subsisting" role in personally providing at least  some  element  of
       direct parental care to the child.  The Court  of  Appeal  also  held
       that  each  of  the  words  "genuine",  "subsisting"  and  "parental"
       referred to a separate and essential quality of the relationship.

Discussion

   13. Mr Bates was asked to confirm his  position  at  the  outset  of  the
       hearing.  He indicated the primary question he required answering was
       whether there was a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
       between the appellant and his daughter H. It  was  accepted  that  if
       such was established it will be unlikely that it could be found  that
       it was reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom and
       that,  in  accordance  with  the  current  state  of  the   law   and
       respondent's published policy, this would lead to  the  appeal  being
       allowed.

   14. It is accepted that the  appellant  does  not  fall  for  refusal  on
       suitability grounds. Regarding  eligibility,  the  appellant  is  the
       father of [H], who is under 18 and resident in the UK. [H] is British
       by birth because she was born in the UK  to  a  British  mother.  [H]
       lives with her mother,  and  the  appellant  claims  to  have  direct
       contact with  [H]  in  person  through  a  private  arrangement.  The
       appellant  also  submits  that  he  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
       relationship with [H] and is taking an active role in her upbringing.



   15. The appellant's current situation is set out in  his  latest  witness
       statement, relevant paragraphs of which are in the following terms:

           "12.   I wish to confirm that since separating from [B] we  have
                not reconciled and I do not expect this to happen as she  is
                in a new relationship.

           13.    However, I continue to see  my  daughter  [H]  regularly,
                perhaps 2 or 3 times a month but I am largely at  the  mercy
                of her mother as to when and how often I am permitted to see
                her. I am aware that I could have the arrangement formalised
                by applying to the Family Courts but  this  would  cost  yet
                more money which I do not have.

           14.    Unfortunately as [H's] mother  lives  in  Rochdale  (near
                Manchester), whereas I live in Darlaston in Wednesbury (near
                Wolverhampton), it  does  make  visiting  [H]  a  bit  of  a
                challenge.

           15.    As I am not working I do not have access to my own  funds
                and so and reliant on friends and family to give me money so
                that I can take a train to Manchester and then onto Rochdale
                or otherwise to give me a lift  to  Manchester  or  Rochdale
                (depending on what is easier for them).

           16.    When I do visit I will spend a couple of hours  with  her
                if a friend/family member has given me a lift (it is  unfair
                to make them wait around for me much  longer),  but  several
                hours longer if I have taken  the  train,  before  I  return
                home.

           17.    Unfortunately, her mother will not let her stay  with  me
                overnight (she says because of her schooling, [H]  has  only
                recently started formal schooling) and  I  do  not  want  to
                antagonise her by  insisting  that  she  does  in  case  she
                decides to stop letting me see [H] altogether  -  as  things
                stand we have not had to resort to lawyers to agree  contact
                arrangements and I do not want it to go that way because, as
                I say, it will be difficult for  me  to  pay  for  a  family
                lawyer. As it is, I have probably imposed on my friends  and
                family more than they would like to fund this case  as  well
                as to provide funds for my upkeep and to  see  my  daughter,
                they are also the  ones  giving  me  money  so  that  I  can
                continue to my daughter's upkeep.

           ...

           25.    [B] has made it plain to me that she does  not  feel  any
                obligation to me beyond giving me  access  to  my  daughter.
                When I mentioned that I will be returning to  Court  at  the
                end of the month she was very clear that I should not expect
                her to come to court. It may be unkind to say  this,  but  I
                suspect that if I was unsuccessful in my appeal that will be
                something of a  blessing  to  her.  I  have  to  tread  very
                carefully with [B] because the reality is that she holds all
                the cards.

           26.    I would of course like to see [H] more than I do but I am
                grateful for the time I have with her. Perhaps in time,  her
                mother's attitude to me will soften and,  if  I  am  to  get
                status in the UK, I can find work and accommodation that  is
                more conducive to [H] staying round. I have thought that  if
                that is the case, I would like to move to Rochdale  so  that
                much closer to [H] and so that her  mother  cannot  sensibly
                object to [H] staying with me. I think if she felt  that  it
                would not be too disruptive for [H] she might just agree  to
                that."

   16. The appellant was cross-examined by  Mr  Bates  regarding  copy  rail
       tickets provided and other issues. Whilst it was put to the appellant
       that no name appeared on the rail tickets, which is arguably  correct
       as they appear to be those obtained at a station which would not have
       a person's name endorsed on them, they do provide evidence of tickets
       being purchased to enable a person to travel  from  Wolverhampton  to
       Manchester and to return on various dates including some in 2018  and
       2019. An issue identified by Mr Bates regarding  when  he  asked  the
       appellant when he last visited his daughter  and  the  difference  in
       that date as compared to a date on rail tickets of 29 January 2019 is
       noted, but as identified by Ms Revill the appellant stated he thought
       the date provided of 24 January was  the  date  of  the  most  recent
       visit, although it was 5 days earlier than the date appearing on  the
       rail ticket. It is also correct as identified  by  Mr  Bates  at  the
       photographs  provided  showing  the  appellant's  contact  with   his
       daughter, in some including with the appellant's aunt  with  whom  he
       lives, are undated. I accept there is merit in Ms  Revill's  argument
       however that if one looks at [H] in those photographs  the  child  is
       clearly older in the later ones than the earlier ones. There is  also
       a photograph of [H] receiving a bicycle given to her by the appellant
       for her a recent birthday which provides a good  reference  point  in
       terms of relative timelines.

   17. Notwithstanding the evidential limitations identified by Mr  Bates  I
       find having weighed up the competing arguments that  the  appellant's
       account of the issues surrounding the circumstances  of  his  contact
       with  [H]  is  plausible.  Although  many  couples   resolve   future
       arrangements concerning children on separation, not all do,  and  the
       appellant's  account  of  having  to  "tread  carefully"   to   avoid
       antagonising [H's] mother is not unheard  of  in  many  relationships
       where couples  have  separated.  The  'no  order'  principle  of  the
       Childrens Act is as set out by the appellant in that the Family Court
       will not get involved or make orders relating to children  unless  it
       is necessary to do so. Although the appellant could bring proceedings
       without legal advice, as many do, it is clear that the foundation  of
       agreement has been reached which may allow  for  further  contact  at
       some future point. This is clearly  the  appellant's  wish  which  is
       entirely plausible in all the circumstances.

   18.  The  geographical  distance  between  the  appellant's   home   near
       Wolverhampton and [H's] home in  Rochdale  is  not  challenged  which
       presents logistical issues as identified by the appellant. It is also
       not disputed that the appellant has no access to income of his own as
       he is not able to work, and it is  plausible  that  he  is  therefore
       dependent upon others to provide resources to purchase train  tickets
       or to drive him to Rochdale when contact is permitted.

   19. When asked what active role he  plays  in  [H's]  life  in  terms  of
       decision-making the appellant was frank and honest in stating that he
       did not. This is not because he does not wish to do  so  but  because
       [H's] mother will not allow him. The  appellant  confirmed  that  she
       will inform him of matters that have occurred with regard to [H]  but
       no more. This account fits in with the  general  description  by  the
       appellant of his relationship with [H's] mother.

   20. I accept the appellant's account of his contact with [H] is  credible
       and proceed on that basis.

   21. In SR (subsisting parental relationship - s 117B (6) Pakistan) [2018]
       UKUT 0034  the  tribunal  held  that  a  parent  who  was  unable  to
       demonstrate for the purposes of the immigration rules that  they  had
       been taking an active role in a child's upbringing might still have a
       genuine and subsisting parental relationship with them as long as the
       relationship involved an element of direct parental  care  (referring
       to VC (Sri Lanka) above).

   22. I find the appellant has made  out  that  the  necessary  element  of
       direct parental care has been established during the time that he  is
       able to enjoy contact with [H]. This has to be assessed  in  relation
       to contact the appellant is permitted rather than just a  calculation
       of the number of hours or days within a particular calendar month. If
       the appellant is only allowed contact a couple of times a  month  but
       takes advantage of the same it cannot be said that during  that  time
       the  necessary  element  of  direct  parental  care  has   not   been
       demonstrated.

   23. In terms of whether the appellant is taking an active role  in  [H's]
       upbringing that role is clearly being carried out by [H's] mother and
       I accept the appellant does  not  make  decisions  in  terms  of  the
       child's life or have an active input into the same at this  point  in
       time. This is an important element for without the same the appellant
       does not meet  the  eligibility  requirements  of  the  parent  route
       pursuant to Appendix FM and I make a finding of fact to this effect.

   24. Any ability to satisfy the parent route  is,  however,  not  arguably
       material for in light of my finding the appellant has a  genuine  and
       subsisting  parental  relationship  with  [H]  section   117B(6)   is
       applicable. The question that then  arises  is  whether  it  will  be
       reasonable to expect [H] to leave the UK.

   25. Both [H] and her mother [B] are British citizens living  in  the  UK.
       [B] would not relocate to Bangladesh since she  is  no  longer  in  a
       relationship with  the  appellant.  If  [H]  were  to  accompany  the
       appellant she would have to leave behind both her primary  carer  and
       her country of nationality. I find on  the  evidence  this  would  be
       contrary to her best interests.

   26. Whilst the appellant is an overstaying, this is not relevant  to  the
       reasonableness assessment following KO (Nigeria).  Given  that  [H's]
       best interests favour her continuing to have direct contact with both
       her parents, and that the only country in which this  can  happen  is
       the UK, I find that as a qualifying child she should not be  expected
       to leave. Having taken all aspects into account I find that it  would
       not be reasonable for [H] to leave the UK.

   27. I allow the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds with reference
       to  section   117B(6),   since   that   is   determinative   of   the
       proportionality of the proposed  interference  with  the  appellant's
       family life with [H].



Decision

   28. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.







  Anonymity.

   29. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 1 March 2019

