
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04143/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 6 February 2018                 |On 27 February 2018                      |
|                                   |                                         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     mo
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 24 November 1976.  She
    entered the UK on 24 November 2012 with a visitor visa valid until 17
    March 2013.  She remained in the UK thereafter without lawful leave.

 2. On 7 October 2015 the appellant made a human rights application for
    leave to remain in the UK on the basis that her removal would be
    contrary to Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  On 21 February 2017 her
    application was refused by the respondent.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where her appeal was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Walters.  In a decision
    promulgated on 12 October 2017 the appeal was dismissed.  The appellant
    is now appealing against that decision.

Background

 4. The uncontested evidence is that the appellant had multiple traumatic
    experiences in Nigeria, which include:

      a) being subjected to FGM;

      b) having her child taken from her;

      c) physical abuse from her mother;

      d) sexual abuse;

      e) alcohol and drug addiction;

      f) contracting HIV and being disowned by her family and husband when
         they found out she was HIV positive.

 5. It is also uncontested that notwithstanding her very difficult
    circumstances the appellant graduated from university in 2002 and
    worked until shortly before she came to the UK (including for several
    years in a bank).

 6. The appellant was diagnosed with HIV in 2009 but did not disclose this
    to her husband at the time. She took antiretroviral drugs which she
    paid for privately (one of the reasons she gave for paying privately
    was to avoid people seeing her queuing to obtain free medication at a
    government centre).  When she eventually revealed the diagnosis to her
    husband with whom she had been undertaking IVF treatment the
    relationship broke down and he told her to leave.  She took all their
    money from a joint bank account before travelling to the UK on a
    visitor's visa.

 7. In the UK the appellant initially lived with a friend but did not
    mention she was HIV positive.  When the friend discovered this she was
    forced to leave.  She is now homeless.  She volunteers at two
    charities: Body and Soul and Thames Valley Positive Support (TVPS).

 8. At paragraphs 3 and 4 of her statement dated 24 August 2017 the
    appellant summarised her role at the charities in the following terms:

         "Notwithstanding all the problems I have I feel happy when I am  at
         either Body and Soul or TVPS especially when I  am  helping  others
         through the volunteering I do for them.  I volunteer  as  a  mentor
         for Body and Soul doing peer support.  I make calls  and  check  on
         other people in difficult situations who have HIV and live too  far
         away to come to the drop-in sessions.  They draw  support  from  me
         and I am happy that I have given a helping  hand  to  someone  else
         irrespective of my own problems.

         At TVPS I do whatever they need help with, such as cooking for  the
         people at the drop-in on Tuesdays  and  Thursdays  and  helping  to
         clean up afterwards.  There are other volunteers that help too.  On
         Thursdays I do the preparation in the  morning  and  then  I  leave
         early to go  to  Body  and  Soul.  ...I  worked  in  Nigeria  after
         finishing my education until shortly before I left for the  UK.   I
         have not been allowed to work since but I would love to work and to
         be able to support myself and make a contribution  to  UK  society.
         Even if I were granted leave to remain in the  UK  I  would  always
         volunteer in these charities."

 9. The appellant is receiving treatment from the NHS for HIV.  She is
    regularly monitored and receives antiretroviral therapy ("ART" or
    "ARV")). She receives support from the aforementioned charitable
    organisations TVPS and Body and Soul including from Body and Soul
    counselling for her depression.

10. Since arriving in the UK, the appellant has been befriended by a man
    and his ex-wife Mr. and Mrs. [M] who give her some (modest) financial
    support and who she visits from time to time.  They both wrote letters
    of support that were before the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr [M] stated:

         "I have known [the appellant] for about  3  years.   We  met  first
         online.  She has visited me  several  times  and  met  my  ex-wife,
         children and grandchildren.  When she visits we explore  places  of
         interest in the area.  We have been to The Lake District  and  many
         times to the Yorkshire Dales.  We walk the woods near my home  with
         my dog.  We go shopping and share cooking and housework.  She is  a
         nice person and a good friend.  I pay her fare when she  comes  and
         give her a little financial support when needed.  We keep in  touch
         by phone regularly."

Decision of the Respondent

11. The respondent considered the appellant's application for leave under
    Articles 8 and 3 of the ECHR.  The respondent concluded in the refusal
    letter that the appellant did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules as she has spent the vast
    majority of her life in Nigeria and has a full understanding of
    Nigeria's language and culture such that there would not be very
    significant obstacles to her integration.  It was also found that there
    were not exceptional circumstances that would warrant allowing her
    application under Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

12. In respect of Article 3 ECHR, the respondent stated that the high
    threshold of severity was not met, given that ART and specialist HIV
    care is available free in Nigeria.

Expert Evidence of Dr Patrick

13. The appellant submitted to the First-tier Tribunal a report by a
    Nigerian medical doctor with experience treating people with HIV and
    AIDS, Dr Okolie Patrick.  Dr Patrick prepared two reports dated 25
    March 2015 and 5 September 2017.  The reports set out in detail his
    opinion on the circumstances faced by people with HIV in Nigeria.  He
    notes at paragraphs 4, 9 and 11 of the second report that the drugs the
    appellant is currently taking are on the approved list in Nigeria and
    should be available at designated hospitals for free but they sometimes
    are not, particularly in rural centres.  In the report he notes that
    there have been a shortage of drugs and instances where patients are
    asked to pay for them.  He cites a report which found that only 38% of
    people eligible for ART medication had access in 2012.  He also
    commented that the appellant is on her third regimen and has had at
    least one change due to drug resistance.  He further commented that the
    cost of drugs privately would be between $200 and $250 a month.

14. At paragraph 13 of his second report Dr Patrick stated that at his
    centre which is located in the capital city patients are not asked to
    pay and there are not shortages of drugs.  However he describes having
    encountered patients from rural centres who have had to pay or make do
    without medication they need.  He stated at paragraph 13 the following:

         "I have also encountered patients who had to make do with  whatever
         medications  were  available  at  their   centres   because   their
         recommended and prescribed ARTs were out of stock  when  they  were
         due for a refill.  These occurrences are usually experienced in the
         rural centres which are ill-equipped, poorly staffed and are hardly
         monitored or properly supervised."

  15. Dr Patrick also commented on the long waits for laboratory tests and
      insufficient frequency of monitoring that is commonplace in Nigeria.
      He further described the stigma faced by HIV sufferers and the limited
      support available from charities.  He also commented on the lack of
      appropriate facilities for people with mental health problems.  He
      concluded his report by stating as follows:

         "I believe the appellant if returned to Nigeria  with  her  present
         circumstances (lone female returnee  from  Europe  with  no  family
         support, positive HIV status, no social welfare  options  and  weak
         chances of employment) runs the risks of  destitution  and  stigma.
         If she is unable to continue her ARTS  she  stands  the  chance  of
         developing resistance to her medications and  subsequent  treatment
         failure and associated complications."

Expert Report of Dr Wilson

16. The appellant also submitted a report from Dr Wilson, a chartered
    clinic psychologist. The report, which is dated 28 August 2017,
    recounts in detail the appellant's circumstances in Nigeria and the UK.
     It is noted that the appellant has been homeless for four years and
    that she volunteers for a charity where she talks with attendees as
    well as cleans. The report describes the physical, sexual and emotional
    abuse the appellant has suffered and concludes that she has complex
    PTSD with severe disassociation and associated psychotic symptoms as
    well as severe depression.  Dr Wilson advises that the appellant needs
    specialist multidisciplinary support.  The report concludes that the
    appellant is at very high risk of suicide should she be forcibly
    removed to Nigeria and, in the event of her being returned safely, her
    mental health would likely deteriorate further.

17. At paragraph 157 of the report Dr Wilson states:

         "In my opinion, the likelihood of the appellant being able to  care
         for herself, work, financially support herself  or  access  support
         services in Nigeria would be very compromised.  She  is  manifestly
         not able to do so within the UK currently even  if  she  had  legal
         status to do so; in  my  opinion  she  is  not  able  fit  to  work
         currently due to her serious mental health problems."

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

18. At paragraphs 39 to 43 of the decision the judge considered whether the
    appellant would have access to ART in Nigeria.  At paragraph 42 the
    judge summarised Dr. Patrick's evidence in the following terms:

         "The gist of Dr. Patrick's report is that the availability of  free
         ARVs is more problematic in rural centres.  There  are  also  cases
         where drugs run out and cases of persons having to  pay  bribes  to
         get drugs."

    At paragraph 43 the judge concluded:

         "I concluded from this evidence that ARVs would be available to the
         appellant free of charge and that it was likely she would  be  able
         to obtain these and the necessary tests and follow-up treatment  in
         any of the large cities in the south of Nigeria."

19. The judge considered the appellant's mental health at paragraphs 44 to
    60.  The key findings are at paragraphs 55 to 60.  Given their
    relevance to the grounds of appeal it is necessary to quote them in
    full as follows:

         "55. Dr. Wilson gives the opinion that if returned to  Nigeria  the
             Appellant would  not  be  able  to  care  for  herself,  work,
             financially support herself or access support  services.   She
             writes, 'She is manifestly not able to do  so  within  the  UK
             currently even if she had legal status to do so; in my opinion
             she is not able fit to  work  currently  due  to  her  serious
             mental health problems'.

              Dr Wilson also states that in her opinion the Appellant  would
             be at very high risk of suicide should  attempts  be  made  to
             forcibly return her to Nigeria.

         56.  I found considerable contrast in this view  of  the  Appellant
             between that of Dr. Wilson and Mr. and Mrs. [M].  Mr.  [M]  in
             describing the visits the Appellant has made to him says  that
             they '...explore places of interest in the area.  We have been
             to the Lake District and many times to  the  Yorkshire  Dales.
             We walk in the woods near my home with my dog.  We go shopping
             and share cooking and housework.  She is a nice person  and  a
             good friend'.

         57.  Mrs. [M]'s view of the  Appellant  is  that  'she  is  a  very
             caring, strong, intelligent person'.  She states that she  and
             the Appellant have spent many happy hours together,  chatting,
             shopping and entertaining the grandchildren.

         58.  A TVPS letter speaks of the Appellant's willingness  to  speak
             to the media about HIV.  She volunteers for  TVPS  by  cooking
             and helping in the distribution of food.  She provides support
             to those  who  are  newly  diagnosed  with  HIV.   The  letter
             continues, 'Her commitment to our organisation  is  very  much
             appreciated, without her support our group simply wouldn't  be
             able to operate  as  effectively  as  it  does'.   The  letter
             describes the appellant  as  being  a  role  model  for  other
             service users.  It states,  'What  inspires  them  (the  other
             service users) the most is that she manages to do so without a
             roof over  her  head  and  despite  suffering  from  bouts  of
             depression that often leave her feeling exhausted.  Throughout
             all of this she still manages to  put  others  first,  knowing
             that many at our group rely on her for support'.

         59.  I did not believe that the Appellant could be  accepted  as  a
             role model for other persons suffering from  HIV  and  do  the
             voluntary work that she does if Dr. Wilson's  conclusion  that
             she is simply unfit for work is right.

         60.  I accept, of course, that the Appellant has expressed suicidal
             ideation to Dr. Wilson.  In this connection I have  considered
             the case of J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629.   Arrangements  will
             therefore have to be made by the  Appellant's  representatives
             to serve the Decision on her in the presence of the doctor  so
             that suitable precautions can be taken.   The  case  of  J  is
             authority for the  proposition  that  the  Respondent  can  be
             expected to take suitable precautions concerning  all  persons
             who are removed and who threaten suicide."

20. At paragraphs 61 to 65 the judge considered the likelihood of the
    appellant being destitute in Nigeria.  It is also necessary to quote
    these passages:

         "61. The Appellant states that she has been rejected by her  family
             and would be alone and destitute if returned to Nigeria.   The
             Appellant was aged 37 when she came to the UK  on  the  second
             occasion in 2013.  I did not accept that a person of that  age
             would not have formed  friendships  in  Nigeria.   Indeed  she
             mentions two friends who accompanied her to the UK on the  two
             occasions she entered on Visit visas.  The Appellant possesses
             a university degree and in Nigeria worked in a bank.  She also
             had a job as a TV continuity person.  I did not believe that a
             person who worked in such fields would be entirely  friendless
             or without contacts.  Additionally, the Appellant  mentions  a
             godfather in Lagos who encouraged her to take  her  degree  in
             English at university.

         62.  Nor did I accept that the Appellant is incapable of work.  She
             is unable to work in the UK  because  of  legal  restrictions.
             However, on return to Nigeria she would be able to  enter  the
             labour market without any form of restriction.

         63.  Mr. Talacchi submitted, in his closing  speech,  that  if  the
             Appellant is incapable of work on return to Nigeria she  would
             be in exactly the same position there as  she  is  here.   She
             would be able to obtain her ARVs free of charge  as  she  does
             presently through the NHS, and she would be reliant on charity
             to support her.

         64.  The Appellant has been brought up as an Anglican and says that
             there is a church in Slough that accommodates her some of  the
             time.  However, no enquiries appear to have been made  by  the
             Appellant's representatives as to what charities the  Anglican
             church operates in the large cities in Nigeria which might  be
             able to assist the Appellant.

         65.  It may well be that if the Appellant  is  removed  to  Nigeria
             TVPS might be able to give her some initial financial support.
              That question does not appear to have  been  asked  of  them,
             however, I found Mr. and Mrs. [M]'s contention that they would
             be unable to  send  financial  support  to  the  Appellant  in
             Nigeria whereas they seem  perfectly  willing  to  financially
             support her here, to be incomprehensible."

21. The judge then proceeded to consider the appellant's case under Article
    3 and Article 8.  In respect of Article 3 the judge found that the high
    threshold was not met given that free ARVs are available in Nigeria.

22. In respect of Article 8 the judge found that there were not significant
    obstacles to her integration into Nigeria such that paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) would apply.  The judge found that the appellant would be
    able to gain some employment despite her PTSD and would receive some
    initial financial support from friends in the UK and/or under the
    assistance voluntary return scheme.

23. The judge also considered the proportionality of removing the appellant
    under Article 8.  In considering the mandatory considerations under
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act the judge made findings to the effect that
    the appellant is not financially independent and her private life was
    established whilst in the UK unlawfully.  The judge also found that the
    appellant's mental health condition was not sufficiently severe for
    removal to be "a breach of her moral integrity".

Grounds of Appeal

24. The appellant put forward the following five grounds of appeal:

      1) The judge failed to provide any/any adequate reasons for rejecting
         the expert evidence of Dr Wilson.

      2) The judge failed to make findings on material aspects of the
         appellant's account.

      3) The judge failed to take material aspects of the report of Dr
         Patrick into account or provide any or any adequate reasons for
         rejecting his evidence.

      4) The judge made findings on the availability to the appellant of
         support in Nigeria which are inconsistent with the evidence.

      5) The judge made findings that were not based on any evidence and/or
         were entirely speculative.

Analysis

25. I will consider each of the five grounds in turn.

Failure to provide any/any adequate reasons for rejecting Dr Wilson's
evidence:

  26. Ms Smith, elaborating on the written grounds of appeal, argued that
      the judge had not given adequate or indeed any reasons for rejecting
      Dr Wilson's conclusion that the appellant would not be able to work
      either in the UK or in Nigeria because of her mental health problems.
      She argued that the judge appeared to have preferred the evidence of
      Mr and Mrs [M] who are merely friends who see the appellant from time
      to time over the expert opinion of Dr Wilson who had prepared a
      detailed and thorough report.  She also argued that the judge had
      failed to consider Dr Wilson's conclusions (at paragraphs 156-158 of
      the report) about the deterioration the appellant would face because
      of her mental health in Nigeria that go beyond the risk of suicide.

27. Mr Tarlow's response was that the judge properly considered the expert
    evidence and was entitled to compare it to the other evidence that was
    before him and reach a conclusion as to which he preferred.

28. I agree with Mr Tarlow. The judge has given clear reasons why the
    conclusions of Dr Wilson about the appellant's ability to work were not
    accepted.  At paragraph 58 of the decision the judge commented on a
    letter from TVPS that was submitted by the appellant. The letter states
    that the appellant:

         "cooks at our drop-in  centre  every  week,  she  helps  clean  our
         centre, she provides support  to  those  who  are  newly  diagnosed
         through  peer  support  and  she  continues  to  share  her   story
         anonymously to help others who may be isolated or  afraid  to  seek
         support."

29. This evidence suggests, or at least can be interpreted as indicating,
    that the appellant regularly engages in activities which, were her
    immigration status different, she could be paid for i.e. cooking and
    cleaning.

30. The judge also noted, at paragraphs 56-57 of the decision, the letters
    from Mr and Mrs [M] which indicate the appellant is able to engage in
    various activities with them.

31. The judge also, earlier in the decision, referred to the appellant's
    evidence that she had graduated from University and worked in Nigeria
    until shortly before relocating to the UK (see the extract from her
    Statement quoted above at paragraph 8).

32. It was for the judge to take into consideration, and weigh against each
    other, the evidence relevant to the question of whether the appellant
    would be capable of working in Nigeria. This included:

      a)  the appellant's own evidence about what she did in Nigeria before
         coming to the UK (she continued working despite difficult health
         and family circumstances);

      b) the evidence from TVPS about her current activities  as a volunteer
         (cooking, cleaning and provision of support);

      c) the evidence from Mr and Mrs [M] about what the appellant does with
         them (cooking, housework, walks, entertaining children); and

      d) the expert opinion of Dr Wilson (that the appellant is incapable of
         work because of her mental health problems).

33. The relative weight to give to the evidence was a matter for the judge
    and it was not an error of law for the judge to prefer the evidence of
    the appellant, her friends and TVPS about what the appellant actually
    does (or has done) to the expert opinion of Dr Wilson when reaching a
    view on whether the appellant would be capable of undertaking paid
    work.

34. I also do not accept Ms Smith's argument that the judge failed to
    consider the risk of deterioration in Nigeria as set out in paragraphs
    156-158 of Dr Wilson's report. Dr Wilson believes the appellant will
    deteriorate for a combination of reasons, including isolation, lack of
    proper medical care and inability to support herself. However, reading
    the decision as a whole, it is readily apparent that these factors have
    been considered by the judge, for example the judge found that the
    appellant would be able to gain employment in Nigeria (paragraph 71),
    would have some contacts (paragraph 71), that she would have some
    initial financial support (paragraph 72), and that she would have
    access to ARVs (paragraph 67).

Failure to make findings on material aspects of the appellant's account

35. Ms Smith argued that the judge failed to make findings on the
    appellant's account of her background of abuse and ill-treatment in
    Nigeria and did not made it clear whether the appellant's account was
    accepted or rejected.

36. Ms Smith also submitted that it is unclear why the judge at paragraph
    61 has not accepted the appellant's claim to not have friends who can
    assist her in Nigeria.

37. It is clear from the decision that the judge has accepted the
    appellant's account of her background of abuse and ill-treatment in
    Nigeria. It does not appear that this was in question before the First-
    tier Tribunal and the judge's summary of the evidence concerning the
    appellant's history is set out under a sub-heading "My Findings of
    Fact".

38. The only aspect of the appellant's account about her life in Nigeria
    that was rejected is her contention that she has no connections or
    friends. The judge at paragraph 61 stated that this was not accepted
    because he would expect a person who left Nigeria at the age of 37, who
    had attended university, had worked in a bank, and who had been
    accompanied by a friend when she travelled to the UK, to have formed
    friendships in Nigeria.  The judge stated that he did not accept that a
    person with the appellant's history would be entirely friendless or
    without contacts. It was a matter for the judge to assess the evidence
    and reach a finding on whether the appellant has connections in Nigeria
    and this is what the judge has done.

39. Contrary to the assertion in this ground of appeal, the judge has made
    findings on all material aspects of the account and it is clear that
    the appellant's account has been accepted almost entirely. In
    particular, the appellant's background of abuse and ill-treatment in
    Nigeria which forms the basis of her PTSD diagnosis has been accepted
    in full. The area of contention is not the events that caused the PTSD
    (which were not disputed) but whether the PTSD should prevent her
    removal to Nigeria. This ground of appeal therefore has no merit.

Failure to take material aspects of Dr Patrick's evidence into account

40. The third ground of appeal maintains that the judge failed to take into
    consideration relevant aspects of Dr Patrick's report which highlighted
    that, inter alia, the appellant would face stigma, lack support,  and
    face difficulty (and possibly substantial expense) accessing
    appropriate HIV treatment.

41. Dr Patrick is a Nigerian medical doctor who works as a clinician for
    people with HIV. He wrote a detailed report which primarily dealt with
    the availability of HIV medication in Nigeria. However, the report also
    touched on other areas, such as the stigma faced by, and lack of
    support for, those with HIV in Nigeria.

42. The judge's assessment of Dr Patrick's report, at paragraphs 40-43 of
    the decision, addresses in clear terms Dr Patrick's conclusions about
    the availability of HIV medication. The judge found that the "gist" of
    Dr Patrick's evidence was that treatment and medication would be
    available in large cities. Having carefully reviewed Dr Patrick's
    report, I am satisfied that this is an accurate summary of his
    conclusion about the availability of HIV medication.

43. Whilst I agree with Ms Smith that the judge has not addressed the
    comments by Dr Patrick about HIV sufferers facing stigma and
    discrimination, I do not consider this an error of law. It was not
    necessary for the judge to summarise all aspects of Dr Patrick's
    report. The key issue dealt with by Dr Patrick was the availability of
    HIV medication and for reasons explained above I am satisfied that the
    judge accurately interpreted Dr Patrick's conclusions.

Making findings on the availability to the appellant of support in Nigeria
which were inconsistent with the evidence

44. In assessing whether the appellant would be destitute upon return to
    Nigeria, the judge stated that he did not accept that she would be
    entirely friendless or without contacts. The judge also commented that
    the Secretary of State's submission (which appears to have been adopted
    by the judge) was that the appellant would be in the same position in
    Nigeria as she is in the UK.

45. The grounds of appeal argue that these conclusions are inconsistent
    with the evidence, as the evidence shows that the appellant would have
    less support in Nigeria then she has in the UK and that she was
    rejected by family and friends.

46. There is not an inconsistency between the judge accepting the
    appellant's account of being rejected by family and friends and his
    finding that she is likely to have some contacts in Nigeria. The
    appellant attended university and worked in at least two different
    jobs. The appellant could have contacts from her time as a student or
    employee even though her family and friends rejected her. This is not
    an inconsistency and the judge was entitled to conclude, for the
    reasons given in paragraph 61 of the decision, that the appellant is
    unlikely to be entirely without friends or contacts in Nigeria.

47. Contrary to the assertion in the grounds of appeal, the judge did not
    state that the appellant would have the same level of support in
    Nigeria as she does in the UK. Rather, the judge, in the context of
    assessing whether the appellant would be destitute in Nigeria, observed
    that aspects of the appellant's circumstances would be the same in
    Nigeria if she were unable to obtain work, in that (amongst other
    things) she would be reliant on charity to assist her. The judge did
    not say that the level of support from charity would be identical to
    that which she receives in the UK and I am satisfied that the judge
    reached conclusions about whether the appellant would be destitute that
    were consistent with the evidence before him.

Findings that were not based on any evidence and/or were entirely
speculative

48. The fifth ground of appeal argues that the judge speculated when
    finding that the appellant could seek assistance from the Anglican
    Church in Nigeria and that the charities in the UK that support her
    might give her some initial financial support. Ms Smith noted that
    there was no evidence to suggest the charities in the UK, which have as
    their purpose to support people in the UK, could or would support her
    in Nigeria.

49. Having reviewed the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, I
    am in agreement with Ms Smith that there is no evidence to suggest that
    the appellant will obtain support, following her return to Nigeria,
    from the Anglican Church or from a UK based charity, and that it was an
    error of law to so find. However, I do not consider this error to be
    material. These findings were made in the context of considering
    whether the appellant would be destitute on return to Nigeria. The
    judge made several findings that were open to him, including that the
    appellant has contacts in Nigeria, that she would be able to enter the
    labour market, that she would be able to obtain HIV medication free of
    charge, and that she would benefit from the assistant voluntary return
    scheme funding (should she so wish). Having made these findings, it was
    open to the judge to conclude that the appellant would not be
    destitute, or face very significant obstacles to reintegration,
    irrespective of any support from the Anglican Church or a UK charity.
    It is clear from the decision that the judge's conclusion did not
    depend on his finding about possible support from Anglican Church or a
    UK charity.

Conclusion

50. For the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that the judge has taken
    into consideration all of the evidence before him that was material to
    the issue of whether returning the appellant to Nigeria would breach
    Articles 3 and/or 8 ECHR and has reached a decision, for which adequate
    reasons have been given, that was open to him based on the evidence.

Decision

  51. The appeal is dismissed.


  52. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material
      error of law and stands.








Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


    |                                        |  |   |                             |
|Signed                                  |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|                                        |  |   |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan    |  |   |Dated:  25 February 2018     |

