
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/04159/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 April 2018                          |On 11 May 2018                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 Dinesh Rai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant/Secretary of State:   Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Dieu, Counsel instructed by N C Brothers & Co
                               Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer  throughout  this  decision  to  the  Respondent  as  the
    "Appellant" as he was before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal and his date of birth  is  22  July
    1988.  He applied for entry clearance to join his father  Harkapal  Rai
    who is an ex-Ghurkha soldier in the British Army.  His application  was
    refused by the Entry Clearance Officer ("the ECO") in a decision  dated
    18 January 2016.  The decision was maintained  by  an  Entry  Clearance
    Manager on review on 25 April 2016.

3.   The Appellant appealed against the decision of  the  ECO.   His  appeal
    was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Heatherington   in   a
    determination dated 8 August 2017 following a hearing on 7 August 2017.
     Permission was  granted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Keith on 30 January 2018.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The judge heard evidence from the  Appellant's  father.   There  was  a
    witness statement from the Appellant's father which he adopted  as  his
    evidence-in-chief.  The judge heard submissions from those representing
    the respective parties and made findings of fact as follows:

         "12. This appeal turns on its  own  unhappy  facts.   A  family  is
             divided.  This case is about a  single  stranded  child.   The
             appellant  lives  alone  outside  the  United  Kingdom.    The
             appellant's case has its genesis in historic injustices.   The
             appellant's father and his family,  including  the  appellant,
             have been victims of an 'Historic injustice'.


         13.  The appellant's parents have leave to  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom, leaving the appellant  alone  in  his  home  country,
             except for the visits of one or both parents.   The  appellant
             has asked to come to the United Kingdom to be with his parents
             and has been refused.


         14.  The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, whose date of birth is 22
             July 1988.  Since last year he has lived alone in rented rooms
             (page 27 in the appellant's bundle).


         15.  The sponsor, the appellant's father is a former Gurkha solder.
              He served for seven years in the British Army.   He  enlisted
             in January 1979 and served until he was discharged on  medical
             grounds in 1986.  Gurkhas who had served in the  British  Army
             were not given the same rights to apply for settlement in  the
             United Kingdom as other  foreign  and  Commonwealth  nationals
             serving in the British Armed Forces.   Had  the  sponsor  been
             able to choose to settle here  in  1986  -  as  other  British
             solders could do when  they  completed  their  service  -  the
             appellant may have been  born  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
             sponsor was not given that opportunity to  settle  in  the  UK
             when he completed his military service.  He was not  permitted
             to do so, because of the policy that  applied  then.   If  the
             appellant's father had been permitted to settle in the  United
             Kingdom in 1993, he would have been accompanied by his wife.


         16.  From 2004 onwards, the British Government began to revise  its
             stance towards Gurkha veterans.  The sponsor and his wife were
             allowed to settle in the  United  Kingdom.   They  arrived  in
             January 2010.  The appellant would have accompanied them,  but
             for advice that he could not, because  he  was  more  than  18
             years of age.


         17.  The appellant has no siblings.  The appellant has no resources
             of his own.  He is entirely dependent on his parents.  He  has
             always been financially and emotionally dependent  upon  them.
             His father supports him by  paying  for  his  maintenance  and
             accommodation.


         18.  The appellant's parents have visited Nepal since  their  entry
             into the United Kingdom.   They  visited  in  May  2017.   The
             sponsor alone visited the appellant in 2015.  There have  only
             been two visits because the sponsor and his wife did not  have
             the means of paying for travel.  After coming to the UK,  they
             were unemployed for about three years (see paragraph 12 of the
             sponsor's statement, page 3 of the appellant's bundle).


         19.  I am satisfied on the evidence that the appellant has a close-
             knit family relationship with his parents.   They  communicate
             regularly.  They value and enjoy each  other's  company.   The
             appellant cannot find employment.  The sponsor regularly sends
             money.  The appellant depends upon his parents for  financial,
             practical and emotional support and  guidance.   They  support
             him as their only child still living in Nepal.


         20.  I considered  the  claim  under  Article  8  of  the  European
             Convention on Human Rights.


         21.  Section 117 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
             2002  is  a   factor   to   be   considered   in   determining
             proportionality.  Section 117A (2) requires me to have  regard
             to the  considerations  listed  in  Sections  117B  and  117C.
             Section 117A (3) imposes upon us the duty of  carrying  out  a
             balancing exercise.


         22.  The appellant is  in  his  20s.   He  is  not  a  minor.   The
             authorities  recognize  that  family  life   may   potentially
             continue between parent and child after a child  has  attained
             his majority.  The  appellant's  lack  of  education  and  the
             appellant's  separation  from  his  parents  results  in   the
             appellant being dependent on his  parents  far  more  than  is
             usual for an adult child.  Here the appellant's family life is
             significantly more than the ordinary emotional ties between an
             adult child and parents.  The appellant  is  economically  and
             emotionally dependent on his parents.  Thus,  the  refusal  of
             entry clearance interferes with family life and thus Article 8
             is engaged.


         ...


         24.  To conclude:


             i.   There  are  good  grounds  for  considering  this  appeal
                  outside the Immigration Rules.


             ii.  Since the appellant's parents entered the United Kingdom:


                  a.   They have kept in very regular close contact with the
                      appellant by telephone.


                  b.    When  finances  allowed,  one  or  both  appellant's
                      parents have visited the appellant.


                  c.   There is clear evidence of  financial  dependency  in
                      the  appellant's  bundle.   The  appellant  has  been
                      financially  supported,  out  of  necessity  by   his
                      father, who has sent money regularly from the  United
                      Kingdom.


             iii. The  appellant  has  always  been  and  continues  to  be
                  financially and emotionally dependent upon his father, his
                  sponsor, a former Gurkha solider and  his  mother.   Thus,
                  there is family life between the appellant and his  father
                  and mother.


             iv.  The appellant has never been an over stayer,  breached  a
                  condition attached to his leave, or an illegal entrant, or
                  committed a crime."


    At the hearing before me I heard submissions from both parties  and  Mr
    Rai relied on a skeleton argument which I have taken into account.   Mr
    Dieu relied on the case of Rai v Entry  Clearance  Officer,  New  Delhi
    [2017] EWCA Civ  320.   He  submitted  that  because  there  was  total
    financial dependence there must by implication be emotional dependency.



The Grounds of Appeal

5.   The grounds are essentially a challenge to the decision  on  the  basis
    that it is inadequately reasoned with reference to the judge's decision
    that there is family life between the Appellant and his parents.  It is
    further argued that the judge did not give proper  account  to  Section
    117B and failed to appreciate that an historic injustice was  addressed
    within Annex K of the Immigration Rules, was introduced in 2015.



The Law

6.   In Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 the Appellant resisted  removal  to  Sri
    Lanka on the basis of his continuing family life with his  mother,  his
    brother and his married sister who all lived in Germany.  He had  lived
    with them for many years in Germany before coming to this country about
    three years prior to the decision under appeal.  The  leading  judgment
    was given by Sedley LJ.  At paragraph 14 of his judgment he quoted  the
    statement of the commission in S v United Kingdom that:

         "Generally the protection of family life under Article  8  involves
         cohabiting dependants, such as parents and their  dependent,  minor
         children.  Whether it extends to other relationships depends on the
         circumstances  of  the  particular  case.   Relationships   between
         adults, a mother and her 33 year old son in the present case, would
         not necessarily require protection of Article 8 of  the  Convention
         without evidence of further elements of dependency, involving  more
         than the usual emotional ties."

7.   Sedley LJ described that  as  setting  out  "a  proper  approach".   As
    regards the meaning of dependency in that passage, paragraph 17 of  his
    judgment he said:

         "Mr Gill  QC  says  that  none  of  this  amounts  to  an  absolute
         requirement of dependency.  That is clearly right in  the  economic
         sense but if dependency is read down as meaning 'support',  in  the
         personal  sense,  and  if  one   adds,   echoing   the   Strasbourg
         jurisprudence, real or committed or effective to the word  support,
         then it represents in my  view  the  irreducible  minimum  of  what
         family life implies."

8.   It was held that the Appellant's relationship with his family  did  not
    at the time of the decision constitute family life for the  purpose  of
    Article 8 whatever might have been the  position  while  they  were  in
    Germany.  Sedley LJ said at paragraph 19:

         "Returning to the present case, neither blood ties nor the  concern
         and affection that ordinarily go with them are,  by  themselves  or
         together, in my judgment enough to constitute family life.  Most of
         us have close relatives of whom we are extremely fond and  whom  we
         visit, or who visit us from time to time; but none of us would  say
         on those grounds alone that we share a family life with them in any
         sense capable of coming within the meaning and purpose  of  Article
         8."

9.   In Ghising v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]  UKUT
    00160 the Upper Tribunal (Lang L and Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan)  was
    critical of the manner in which Kugathas had been  interpreted  by  the
    courts.  It observed at paragraph 56 of its determination that:

         "The judgment in Kugathas has been interpreted too restrictively in
         the past and ought to be  read  in  the  light  of  the  subsequent
         decisions of the domestic and Strasbourg courts."

10.  It continued at paragraph 57 to point out that several authorities  had
    recognised that family life may continue between parent and child  even
    after the  child  has  reached  the  age  of  majority.   The  Tribunal
    concluded at paragraph 62:

        "The  different  outcomes  in  cases  with  superficially   similar
        features emphasises to us that the  issue  under  Article  8(1)  is
        highly fact-sensitive.  In our judgment, rather than  applying  the
        blanket rule with regard to adult children,  each  case  should  be
        analysed on its own facts, to decide whether  or  not  family  life
        exists, within the meaning of Article 8(1).  As Wall LJ  explained,
        in the context of family life between adult siblings;


             'We do not think that Advic is authority for  the  proposition
             that Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention  can  never  be
             engaged when the family life that is sought to establish it is
             that between adult siblings living together.  In our  judgment
             the recognition in Advic that, whilst some generalisations are
             possible, each case is fact-sensitive and places an obligation
             on both Adjudicators and the AIT to identify the nature of the
             family life  asserted,  and  to  explain,  quite  shortly  and
             succinctly, why it is that Article 8 is or is not engaged in a
             given case.' Senthuran v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2004] EWCA Civ 950."

11.  The approach of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Ghising  was  approved  in  R
    (Gurung) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    8.  In Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 630 Sir Stanley Burnton with whom Richards and  Christopher  Clarke
    LJJ agreed concluded at paragraph 24:

         "I do not think that the judgments to which I have referred lead to
         any difficulty in determining the correct approach to Article 8  in
         cases involving adult children.  In the  case  of  adults,  in  the
         context of immigration  control,  there  is  no  legal  or  factual
         presumption as to the existence or absence of family life  for  the
         purposes of Article 8.  I  point  out  that  the  approach  of  the
         European Commission for Human Rights cited approvingly in  Kugathas
         did not include any requirement of exceptionality.  It all  depends
         on the facts.  The love and affection  between  an  adult  and  his
         parents or siblings will not of itself justify a finding of  family
         life.  There has to be something more.  A young adult  living  with
         his parents or siblings will normally have  a  family  life  to  be
         respected under Article 8.  A child enjoying a family life with his
         parents does not suddenly cease to have a family life  at  midnight
         as he turns 18 years of age.  On the  other  hand,  a  young  adult
         living independently of his parents may well not have a family life
         for the purposes of Article 8."

12.  Sedley LJ's statement of the applicable principles in Kugathas has  not
    been in any sense disapproved.  In ECO v Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ 1511  at
    paragraph 19  Sales  LJ  said  that  Kugathas  remains  good  law  (see
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Onuroah  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1757).

Error of Law

13.  The date of the decision of the ECO is 18  January  2016.   The  appeal
    was heard on 7 August 2016.  At the date of the decision the  Appellant
    was aged 27.  His father  was  discharged  from  the  British  Army  on
    medical grounds in 1986,  before  his  birth.   The  Appellant  has  no
    siblings.  The Appellant's parents arrived in the UK in January 2010.

14.  The judge concluded that the  Appellant  depends  on  his  parents  for
    financial, practical and emotional guidance.  His lack of education and
    separation from his parents resulted, according to the judge, more than
    usual dependency.  The judge concluded that the Appellant's family life
    with his parents is significantly more than ordinary and emotional ties
    between adult child and  parents  and  that  he  was  economically  and
    emotionally dependent on his parents.  The judge attached weight to the
    family having kept in very regular close contact with the Appellant  by
    phone, clear financial dependency and where finances have  allowed  one
    or both parents have visited the Appellant  in  Nepal.   The  Appellant
    always has  been  and  continued  to  be  financially  and  emotionally
    dependent on his parents as found by the judge.

15.  There was ample evidence that the Appellant was  financially  dependent
    on his parents. I accept that a degree of emotional dependency  can  be
    implied from financial dependence  and  the  Appellant's  circumstances
    generally. However, the judge does not properly identify the  emotional
    dependency (which goes beyond that which is normal between adult  child
    and parent) and the decision that it exists is  inadequately  reasoned.
    Whilst the Appellant and  his  parents  are  close  and  have  frequent
    telephone contact and he is single and was at the date of the  decision
    living in the family home in Nepal, this is not  sufficient  to  engage
    Article 8.  Further elements of  dependency  involving  more  than  the
    usual emotional ties are not identified.

16.    The love and affection between parents and adult  children  does  not
    in itself justify a finding of family life.  The judge attached  weight
    to  historic  injustice  in  this  case.   Whilst  it   explained   the
    circumstances leading to the separation of the family in 2010  and  the
    position that this family now finds itself in, it does not in a  vacuum
    support the existence of family life.  It is  a  factor  that  properly
    weighed in the proportionality balancing exercise when family  life  is
    found.

17.      The judge attached weight to the  Appellant's  lack  of  education.
    However, the Appellant had been educated to secondary school level  and
    it is difficult to see how his level of education  increased  emotional
    dependency as distinct from financial.   Whilst  the  judge  cannot  be
    criticised for having sympathy with the family in recognising that  the
    Appellant's parents had not visited often because of their  constrained
    financial circumstances, the reality of the situation;  notwithstanding
    that they are not to blame, is that the Appellant at the  date  of  the
    decision had been living apart from his parents since 2010. He had seen
    his father once since 2010 by the time of the decision when he  visited
    in 2015 for about twenty days. Both parents visited him after the  date
    of the decision in May 2017 again for about twenty days.  I  also  note
    from the decision letter that the Appellant stated that his father  had
    not visited him for five years because of his (his father's) health.

18.  The Appellant is not  financially  dependent  because  he  is  pursuing
    studies.  He is unemployed. His father in his witness statement  refers
    to him having worked as a labourer, but that it was poorly paid.

17.   The judge did not explain the substance of  the  emotional  dependency
    between the Appellant and his parents.  There was no evidence from  the
    Appellant (other than the letter that he submitted with his application
    for entry clearance).  There  was  no  evidence  from  the  Appellant's
    mother.  There was a relatively brief statement  from  the  Appellant's
    father who gave oral evidence at the hearing.  There  was  no  evidence
    identifying the emotional support that the Appellant received from  his
    parents or the nature  of  the  dependency  generally  over  and  above
    financial.  There was no evidence before  the  judge  relating  to  the
    Appellant's health or vulnerability. The decision is unreasoned. I  set
    aside the decision to allow the Appellant's appeal.

18.  Both parties agreed that the Upper Tribunal could go on and remake  the
    decision on the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.   The
    Appellant has not submitted any further evidence.

Conclusions

19.  I accept that at the date  that  the  Appellant's  parents  left  Nepal
    there was family life between the  parties;  notwithstanding  that  the
    Appellant was an adult. The circumstances of  the  case  are  that  the
    Appellant is unemployed. He has worked, albeit it in  low  paid  manual
    work. He is not studying. He is wholly  financially  dependent  on  his
    parents. There is no doubt love and affection between the Appellant and
    his parents as evidenced by visits and frequent  phone  calls  and  the
    evidence generally.  However, there is no evidence  of  more  than  the
    usual emotional bonds between adult child and parent at the date of the
    decision.  As a matter of fact, albeit not choice,  the  Appellant  had
    not seen his mother since she left Nepal in 2010 (at the  date  of  the
    decision) and had seen his father once for 20 or so days. There was  no
    evidence from the Appellant or his parents that would support emotional
    bonds beyond those that are normal between an adult child and  parents.
    There  is  no  evidence  explaining  the  substance  of  the   asserted
    dependency and what it amounts to.  The Sponsor's evidence is  that  he
    gives guidance to the Appellant, but this is not explained.

20.    There is insufficient evidence before me that there  is  family  life
    that would engage the ECHR. I have considered  Rai.   The  case  is  of
    assistance and a reminder to me  to  take  into  account  all  material
    circumstances.  This Appellant's family life is in no way undermined by
    the decision of his parents to come here in 2010 leaving him in  Nepal.
    This came  about  following  a  historic  injustice.  However,  I  must
    consider the family life as it as at the date of the decision in  2016.



21.  It is not necessary for me to go on to consider proportionality.  I  do
    not find that there is family life that would engage the Convention  in
    the light of my findings.

22.  The judge made a material error of law and the decision  to  allow  the
    appeal is set aside.  I remake the  decision  and  dismiss  the  appeal
    under Article 8.


The Decision


23.    The appeal is dismissed on Article 8 grounds.


Signed                 Joanna McWilliam               Date 3 May 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
