
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04546/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision  &  Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 November 2017                    |On 9 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     AB
                         [Anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr C Bloomer, instructed by Knights Law Solicitors
Ltd
For the respondent:    Mr J Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Herwald  promulgated  16.1.17,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  31.1.16,  to
    refuse his human rights application.  The Judge  heard  the  appeal  on
    16.12.16.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Martins  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    10.8.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 8.11.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons set out below, I found such error of law in the  making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require  the  decision
    to be set aside and remade by allowing the appeal.

 5. The grounds of application for permission to appeal assert that  having
    directed himself to s117B(6) and having been referred to  Treebhawon  &
    Others (Section 117B(6)) [2105] UKUT 00674, the judge appears  to  have
    determined the case without reference to and assessment of the position
    under s117B(6). It is also submitted that the judge failed to make  any
    proper assessment  of  the  effect  and  presence  in  the  UK  of  the
    qualifying child and the reasonableness of expectation  of  that  child
    leaving the UK. Thus, it is argued, article  8  was  not  afforded  any
    proper consideration.

 6. In  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge  Martins  found  that  the
    assertions in the grounds are evident on the face of the  decision  and
    thus an arguable error of law has been shown.

Background

 7. The appellant underwent an arranged marriage to the sponsor,  [NP],  in
    2013. In January 2014 he was issued with entry clearance  as  a  spouse
    and arrived in the UK in February 2014, with  leave  valid  to  October
    2016. That leave was subsequently  curtailed  to  expire  in  September
    2015. In November 2016 the appellant applied for LTR as a  partner,  on
    the basis of private and family life, applying on form  FLR  (FP),  and
    indicating that his partner was pregnant with their child.

 8.  Although  they  had  argued  and  separated,  they  had   subsequently
    reconciled and recommenced living  together.  The  Secretary  of  State
    conceded that the relationship was  by  the  date  of  application  and
    decision genuine and subsisting.  However, it was contended that  there
    are no insurmountable obstacles to continuing family life in India, and
    no very significant obstacles to integration,  so  that  the  appellant
    does not qualify under the Immigration Rules. Neither did the Secretary
    of State accept that there were exceptional or compelling circumstances
    to justify granting LTR outside the Rules.

 9. At the time of application and decision the child had  not  been  born,
    and was not due until May 2016. Further, at that time, the sponsor  had
    ILR.

10. There was no representation on behalf of the Secretary of State at  the
    appeal hearing.

11. By the date of hearing of the appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the   sponsoring   spouse   had   obtained   British   citizenship   by
    naturalisation and thus the child  born  in  2016  is  also  a  British
    citizen.

12. For the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Bloomer conceded  that
    the appellant could not have met the requirements of the  Rules  as  at
    the date of decision. He made the  same  concession  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

13. The case turned on article 8 ECHR and on the  circumstances  prevailing
    at the date of hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. At that time the
    appellant was genuinely married  in  a  subsisting  relationship  to  a
    British citizen wife, and with a British citizen child.

14. Whilst the decision made reference at [24] to s117B of the 2002 it  did
    so in only the briefest of terms and  before  considering  whether  the
    circumstances justified consideration outside the Rules  on  article  8
    ECHR private and family life. Whilst the judge  referred  to  s117B(6),
    there was no adequate assessment as to whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect a British citizen child to leave the UK, nor of the child's best
    interests under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
    Act 2009.

15. The appellant was admitted to the UK lawfully as a spouse.  Whilst  his
    status must by definition have been precarious, this was not  the  case
    of a person who entered unlawfully or whose leave on a different  basis
    had expired. The  appellant  had  a  reasonable  expectation  that  his
    probationary leave would have in due course led to ILR. It seems likely
    that had a 'friend' not advised the Home Office  that  the  appellant's
    wife had returned to India, his leave would not have been curtailed.

16. It follows that the appellant became, with the consent of the Secretary
    of State the spouse of a person with ILR in the UK and who subsequently
    acquired British citizenship and gave birth to a British citizen child.



17. Whilst the judge referenced the Secretary of State's policy set out  in
    the the IDI section 11.2.3, the judge failed to take  adequate  account
    of  it.  This  policy  provides  guidance  when  considering  the  best
    interests of a child and how to assess whether it would  be  reasonable
    to expect a child to leave the UK. Whilst the appellant could not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules at the date of application  or  decision,
    the situation as presented to the First-tier Tribunal meant that either
    under EX1(a) s117B(6), the Tribunal had to assess  the  reasonableness.
    Under section 11.2.3 it would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  British
    citizen child to leave the EU with the parent or primary carer. In this
    case, the child could have remained with the other parent. However, the
    policy also provides that it will unusually  be  appropriate  to  grant
    leave to the parent or primary carer to enable them to remain in the UK
    with the child, provided there is satisfactory evidence  of  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship, as there was in  this  case.  "In
    considering whether refusal may be appropriate the decision maker  must
    consider the impact on the child of any separation." Reference is  made
    to the best interests and welfare of the child. It is  only  where  the
    conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations  of
    such weight as to justify separation, such as  criminality  or  a  very
    poor immigration history, that it may be appropriate to refuse to grant
    leave, if the  child  could  otherwise  stay  with  another  parent  or
    alternative primary carer in the UK.

18. Whilst MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, held that  the  wider  public
    interest requirements should be taken into account when assessing  this
    reasonableness,  there  does  not,  in  this  case  appear  to  be  any
    compelling public interest factors against the appellant.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was  devoid  of  any  adequate
    consideration of the best interests of the child of the  appellant  and
    that it must be in the best interests of the child to be raised by both
    parents. It cannot be said that it would be in the best interests of  a
    child to leave the UK with the benefits citizenship of the  UK  affords
    to that child. In the circumstances I am satisfied  that  the  decision
    cannot stand and must be set aside. Mr  Harrison  did  not  resist  the
    appeal.

20. On the facts of this case, there seems to be no  purpose  in  remitting
    for a rehearing, or delaying the remaking of the decision. No  evidence
    was required and the appeal  turns  on  the  prevailing  circumstances,
    which are beyond dispute.

21. In all of those circumstances, it is clear, and I am so satisfied, that
    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK,  even
    taking full account of the public  interest.  The  public  interest  in
    requiring the appellant to leave the UK in this case is slight, when it
    is  clear  that  all  things  being  equal  he  would  have  had  every
    expectation of being able to settle in the UK with his wife  and  child
    and had entered the UK with leave for that very purpose. I am satisfied
    that in the circumstances prevailing at  the  date  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing, and still present, it would  be  unjustifiably
    harsh and disproportionate to the article 8 rights of the appellant and
    particularly his family  members  to  require  him  to  leave  the  UK,
    applying the Razgar stepped approach. In the circumstances, the  appeal
    should be allowed.

Conclusion & Decision

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. However, given the case involves a  child  I  make  an
anonymity direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.
.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award

Reasons: The circumstances now prevailing and on which the appeal  has  been
allowed are different to those at the date of decision.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

