
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal ref: HU/04771/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 14 February 2019                           |On 19 February 2019          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              MOHIT SONNY GOGNA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  FtT
    Judge Lea, promulgated on 25 July 2018, dismissing his  appeal  against
    deportation ("the 2018 decision").  He insists  only  on  paragraphs  3
    (ii), (iv) and (v) of his grounds.

 2. Ground (ii) contends thus:

         "... the FtT erred as there was  no,  or  inadequate,  evidence  in
         order for it to depart from the previous FtT's findings  [in  2014]
         that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant to be  deported  to
         India or for the FtT to depart from the previous finding that there
         were exceptional circumstances notwithstanding his further criminal
         offending - Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1.  Further and in  any  event
         the findings at [20] ... are inconsistent  with  the  previous  FtT
         decision."

 3. Mr Winter referred to the decision of the FtT promulgated  on  6  March
    2014, reference DA/00138/2014 ("the 2014 decision"), upheld by  the  UT
    in a determination promulgated on 11 February 2015.  He submitted  that
    the only additional factor was the further  offending,  which  did  not
    bear upon whether there were exceptional circumstances  or  very  harsh
    consequences.  The 2014 decision, in particular at [41] and  [45],  was
    based on the same facts, and had regard to the same  factors,  such  as
    the appellant's visits to India.  All relevant matters having  been  in
    existence, and having been taken into account, it was an error  of  law
    to come to another conclusion.

 4. Mr Govan submitted on ground (ii) that the judgement of what was unduly
    harsh was fluid, not fixed for all  time  by  the  2014  decision,  but
    dependent upon  the  circumstances  at  a  further  date  of  decision,
    including serious continued offending after  clear  warnings  from  the
    respondent and from tribunals.   There  was  no  error  in  reaching  a
    different  view  of   whether   there   were   exceptional   compelling
    circumstances.

 5. There was no dispute about the test in this case, which is the  highest
    to resist deportation - in terms of paragraph 398 of the rules, whether
    "there are very compelling circumstances over and above those described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A".  In 2014 the appellant succeeded (just) on
    the view that he met the requirements as the rules as they then stood -
    "no ties".  The 2018 decision might have been more precisely framed  in
    the language of the rules, but it is clear enough from [20-21] that the
    appellant failed to show that he met paragraph 399A(c) as it is  now  -
    "very  significant  obstacles  to   his   integration".    There   were
    difficulties  in  the  way  of  integration  in  India  but  not   very
    significant obstacles, and nothing which took the case above  the  next
    test, the one it had to meet.

 6. The FtT took the 2014  decision  as  a  starting  point  at  [16],  and
    carefully noted its terms.  Ground (ii) does not show that there is any
    principle in Devaseelan which should have governed the FtT's  decision-
    making in 2018 any further than it did.

 7. Ground (iv) is as follows:

         "... [the judge  erred]  by  misunderstanding  or  operating  on  a
         misapprehension as to what the expert report said. The  FtT  states
         in the last  sentence  of  [20]  that  it  is  suggested  that  the
         appellant's conviction would cause him  additional  difficulty  but
         the FtT notes that this would only be a difficulty if he was  found
         indulging in any criminal activity in India. However, this  is  not
         what the expert report says. The expert report... states at page 36
         (page 43 appellant's 3rd FtT bundle) ... that there is  a  risk  of
         double  jeopardy  (regardless  of  whether  the  appellant  commits
         further offences in India). The expert report also states ...  that
         if the appellant  is  categorised  as  a  "habitual  offender"  the
         appellant is at risk of preventive detention (regardless of whether
         the appellant commits further offences in India). As such  the  FtT
         erred in law and it is not inevitable that  had  the  FtT  properly
         understood the terms of the expert report it would have reached the
         same decision, particularly when the FtT has,  itself,  categorised
         the appellant as a persistent offender at [19]."

 8. The expert report does say at page 36 that the Indian courts may punish
    the appellant for offences he has committed in the  UK  "regardless  of
    whether or not he has already [been] tried in the foreign court".  That
    statement is not justified by the legal materials cited in  the  report
    on extra-territorial jurisdiction.  Those are to the effect  of  taking
    cognisance of convictions abroad, and of jurisdiction to  try  offences
    committed outside India.  There is nothing which shows double jeopardy,
    or which would not be mirrored in the law of the  UK,  or  which  might
    contribute to a finding of "very compelling circumstances".

 9. The second  point  in  ground  (iv)  is  the  existence  of  preventive
    detention.

10. The ground is incorrect in suggesting that the report shows there to be
    such a possibility irrespective of offending in India.

11. The report does substantiate that preventive detention might  arise  if
    there were to be  further  offending  in  India.   However,  the  judge
    accurately noted that matter at the end of [20], and obviously  it  did
    not lead her to allow the appeal.  There is no error in that.

12. This is ground (v):

         "[the judge erred] by failing to assess the psychological report...
         in particular section 7(iv) when read in light of the expert report
         and information demonstrating there is limited access  to  adequate
         facilities to deal with mental health issues."

13. There is, as  Mr  Govan  pointed  out,  a  glancing  reference  to  the
    psychological report at [16].  However, that is the only reference  and
    the decision does not deal with what the report says about  the  impact
    on the appellant of deportation.

14. The  assessment  at  [6]  of  the  report  is  that  the  appellant  is
    experiencing stress and agitation over the possibility of return, which
    would  be  "likely  to  increase  [his]  vulnerability  to   developing
    psychological difficulties if faced with significant sources of sources
    of stress ... for example, with regards to being  deported  ...".   The
    author does not profess to be an expert on  facilities  in  India,  but
    suggests at [7 (iv)] that they are unlikely to be at the level  of  the
    UK.

15. Comparative lack of facilities may broadly be accepted; no doubt  there
    are some excellent resources, but they will not be free to the  general
    public.

16. Judge do not have to mention every item  of  evidence.   Even  if  this
    might  be  considered  an  oversight,  there   was   nothing   in   the
    psychological report which might have led to another outcome.

17. The grounds, separately  and  together,  do  not  show  that  the  2018
    decision should be set aside for having  involved  the  making  of  any
    error on a point of law.  That decision shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]
      14 February 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
