
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04079/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2019                            |On 20 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SIBGHATULLAH [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Crown & Mehria
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
    Afghanistan born on 1 January 1994.  He made an application  for  entry
    clearance in order to join his family members in  the  United  Kingdom.
    That application was refused by an Entry Clearance Officer on  14  July
    2015, on the basis that the evidence  provided  regarding  his  medical
    condition was insufficient and the Entry Clearance Officer could see no
    reason why the existing arrangements for his care could not continue.

 2. The Claimant appealed against that decision.  His  appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson for hearing on 12 March 2018.  In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 29 March 2018,  the  Judge  allowed
    the appeal, finding as follows:

         "22. I find that the Appellant requires care  to  perform  everyday
             tasks.  Based on the evidence of the Sponsor, the Appellant is
             not  coping  with  normal  everyday  functions  and  has  been
             diagnosed with a mental incapacity which affects  his  ability
             to look after himself.

         23.  I find that the Appellant is only able to access treatment  in
             Pakistan because it is not available in his  home  country  of
             Afghanistan.  There was  an  arrangement  in  place  when  the
             neighbour, Rafi, looked after him but since Rafi  moved  away,
             no satisfactory alternative has been found.

         24.  I find that, in any event, the level of care required  by  the
             Appellant is best provided by his family and his absence  from
             the rest of the family unit is contributing to his ill-health.

         25.  I find  that  the  Appellant  has  shown  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities that he falls within paragraphs 2.4 and 2.5 of E-
             ECDR of Appendix FM.

         26.  I accept that Article 8 is engaged and it is  an  interference
             with his human rights to deny the Appellant entry clearance to
             join his family.  I accept the arguments advanced on behalf of
             the Appellant that the other members of  his  family  who  are
             settled in the UK cannot easily relocate to Afghanistan to  be
             with him.

         27.  I find that it is a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
             Appellant's Article 8 rights, having taken  into  account  the
             Respondent's  legitimate  purpose  in  enforcing   immigration
             controls".

 3. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, in time, on the basis that the judge had erred materially  in
    law in allowing the appeal: firstly, on the basis  that  the  reasoning
    provided for so doing was inadequate, that  the  medical  evidence  was
    very thin, there was no analysis by the judge of the  severity  of  the
    Claimant's condition or how it directly affects his ability to  perform
    everyday tasks, nor any analysis as to why it is not possible  to  find
    local care to assist  the  Claimant  with  those  things  that  he  has
    difficulty with; and  secondly,  a  failure  to  properly  address  the
    evidence. This was based on the assertion  by  the  Presenting  Officer
    that the Sponsor's evidence in cross-examination confirmed the Claimant
    did not require assistance to perform everyday tasks.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  in  a
    decision dated 31 July 2018, on the basis that it was arguable that the
    medical evidence was insufficient to support the  judge's  finding  and
    the grounds make out an arguable prima facie  case  that  the  decision
    that the Rules were satisfied was perverse as  being  contrary  to  the
    Sponsor's evidence.

 5. The appeal was subsequently listed for hearing but adjourned  in  order
    for the Respondent to obtain and provide evidence  in  the  form  of  a
    witness statement or Record of Proceedings from the Presenting  Officer
    at the hearing, Ms Sharma.  However, that evidence was not forthcoming.
     Thus, in a letter dated 21 November 2018, Mr Avery fairly set this out
    in writing and decided, in the absence of any evidence to  substantiate
    the second ground of appeal that the best course of action was  not  to
    pursue that ground, but only the first ground of appeal.

     Hearing

 6. When the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal for hearing, Mr Tufan on
    behalf of the Secretary of State,  confirmed  that  he  was  no  longer
    relying on the second ground of appeal and the challenge to the judge's
    decision was based  on  the  issue  of  the  adequacy  of  the  Judge's
    reasoning.  He submitted that whilst there was  medical  evidence  from
    Moonas Hospital, this was not adequate, it contained spelling  mistakes
    and was very  vague  as  to  what  the  Claimant's  diagnosis  is.   He
    submitted that the Rules set a very high test, cf. the Court of  Appeal
    judgment in Britcits [2017] EWCA Civ 368, the Rules had been  found  to
    be compliant with Article  8.  He  submitted  the  grounds  were  self-
    explanatory and the judge had clearly erred in law.

 7. Mr Jaisri in his submissions stated that the reasons  provided  by  the
    judge were sufficient to deal with the issue before him.

     Findings and Reasons

 8. I found a material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal.  It is
    apparent from the judge's findings that the reasons provided,  set  out
    in their entirety at [2] above, are not adequate to deal with the issue
    that  was  before  him,  given  that  the  threshold  for  meeting  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules is a high  one.   In  particular,
    there was an insufficient evidential basis upon which the  Judge  could
    properly find that the  Claimant  requires  care  to  perform  everyday
    tasks.

 9. I then heard submissions from the  parties  in  order  to  re-make  the
    decision.

10. Mr Tufan submitted firstly that it remains unclear what is  wrong  with
    the Claimant, there are spelling errors in the letter from  the  Moonas
    Hospital which was vague, and the relevant Rules do set a high  hurdle.
    Mr Tufan acknowledged that what does go in  the  Claimant's  favour  is
    that he is the only family member who is left in  Afghanistan,  however
    this  was  not  sufficient  in   itself   to   constitute   exceptional
    circumstances so as to justify allowing the  appeal  on  the  basis  of
    Article 8.  He further submitted that in light of the test in  Kugathas
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31, there was no evidence of dependency with his family
    that went over and above normal emotional ties.

11. In  his  submissions,  Mr  Jaisri  accepted  that  perhaps  there  were
    deficiencies in respect of the specified evidence, however the  context
    of the case was important and that is that it was brought on the  basis
    that the Claimant was an individual who  is  the  sole  member  of  the
    family left behind in Afghanistan when his  mother  and  siblings  were
    given entry clearance to join his father.  As  a  consequence,  he  has
    suffered depression and these were facts accepted by the  judge,  which
    have not been challenged by the Secretary of State.  Whilst  there  are
    spelling errors in relation to  the  letter  from  Moonas  Hospital  in
    Peshawar, that letter and the diagnosis had been accepted by the  Judge
    and his findings of fact had not been  challenged  and  were  therefore
    preserved.

12. Mr Jaisri submitted that the Sponsor's evidence is that the two  visits
    he made to visit his son in Afghanistan found him to be living in  very
    desperate  and  poor  circumstances,  the  judge  accepted   that   the
    Claimant's neighbour who had  previously  assisted  in  taking  him  to
    hospital had left Afghanistan, see the statement of Rafi Jalaly at page
    32 of the Claimant's bundle.  In relation to the test of dependency, Mr
    Jaisri submitted that it was highlighted in the case of Rai [2017] EWCA
    Civ 320 that it is necessary to look  at  whether  there  is  real  and
    effective support in order to show there is dependency.   He  submitted
    that the  medical  situation  and  the  Claimant's  circumstances  were
    accepted by the judge and  these  clearly  demonstrate  an  exceptional
    level of dependency.  The Claimant has always lived in the family  home
    and was living with his family unit until they  left  Afghanistan.   He
    now remains in the family home on his own.

13. He submitted that given the Claimant's reliance on  medical  assistance
    is tortuous, that he has to travel to  Peshawar,  the  continuation  of
    medical treatment must also fall  for  consideration  as  part  of  the
    Article 8 assessment.  He submitted that the continued exclusion of the
    Claimant from the United Kingdom  was  disproportionate  and  that  his
    appeal should be  allowed.   He  also  asked  that  the  fee  order  be
    maintained if the appeal is allowed.

     Findings and reasons

14. The relevant Immigration Rules provide as follows:

         "E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or disability require long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.


         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help of the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country where
         they are living, because-


             (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that
             country who can reasonably provide it; or


             (b)  it is not affordable."


15. Whilst the Claimant has been diagnosed with  depression,  there  is  no
    medical evidence before the First tier Tribunal to this effect and  the
    Sponsor's oral evidence was that the Claimant  does  not  know  how  to
    cook, lives on takeaways and often  skips  meals;  he  does  not  bathe
    regularly but he does so himself when he does it: [5](f)  refers.  This
    is, however, not consistent with the Sponsor's statement at [11]  where
    he states 'Whilst my son can cook it is  often  something  very  simple
    like an omelette or sandwich."

16. I find that the requirements of E-ECDR  2.4.  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules are not met on the basis of the evidence  before  me.
    It is clear  that  the  intention  of  that  Rule  is  to  address  the
    requirements of applicants who require "long term personal care"  which
    clearly constitutes something more than the ability to  prepare  meals.
    The Claimant does not have a  carer  but  lives  on  his  own  and  was
    previously relying on assistance from a neighbour, Rafi Jalali, who has
    now moved to  Iran.  In  his  undated  statement  at  page  32  of  the
    Claimant's bundle, Mr Jalali states only: "I have  been  looking  after
    him for quite a long I give food to him  sometime  and  help  him  with
    daily but it's been  long  enough  that  his  family  lives  in  United
    Kingdom". The quality of the English in this letter is poor and I  find
    the content to be undermined by the fact that, whilst the writer  gives
    his name as Rafi Jalali, the letter is signed Rafi Jalaly.

17. As Mr Tufan identified, the medical evidence also suffers from spelling
    errors: the letter from Moonas at page 14 of the Appellant's bundle  is
    headed "Medical Center and Psychitric (sic) Hospital" and  is  entitled
    "Madical certificate" albeit the word psychiatric is spelt correctly in
    the body of the every  short  letter,  which  simply  states  that  the
    Claimant "who was born in the year 1994 is psychiatric patient  and  he
    is under treatment from 06/09/2014 till now with Prof, Dr Wahid Ali  in
    Moonas Hospital." There is no diagnosis, nor explanation as to what the
    Claimant is being treated for. There are copies of three  prescriptions
    on Moonas headed paper but there is no medical report or letter stating
    what the tablets are  being  prescribed  for.  The  Sponsor's  evidence
    before  the  First  tier  Tribunal  was  that  the  tablets  are  anti-
    depressants and sleeping pills. I do not find the medical  evidence  to
    be helpful or reliable for these reasons.

18. Whilst  I  am  prepared  to  accept  that  the  Claimant  suffers  from
    depression, having been left in Afghanistan whilst the remainder of his
    family have relocated to the United Kingdom, I find that  there  is  no
    evidence that the requirements  of  E-ECDR  2.5  are  met.  Whilst  the
    evidence is that the Claimant  travels  to  Peshawar  in  Pakistan  for
    treatment, I find that it would be possible  for  him  to  obtain  some
    treatment in Afghanistan, particularly as the evidence before me  would
    indicate that this  treatment  only  constitutes  the  prescription  of
    tablets for depression. It is well documented that there  is  a  public
    psychiatric hospital in Kabul where it would be  reasonable  to  expect
    the  Claimant  to  attend  as  an  outpatient:  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118  (IAC)  at  [142]-[143].  Undoubtedly,
    this is far from ideal, however, that is not the test set out in E-ECDR
    2.5 which requires that the applicant must  be  unable  to  obtain  the
    required level of care in Afghanistan because it is  not  available  or
    affordable and I find that the test is not met.

19. Clearly, the Claimant and his family would prefer to be  able  to  live
    together as a family unit. I  accept  that  the  Sponsor  provides  the
    Claimant with financial support in the form of remittances and  payment
    of the rent on the house where he lives alone and emotional support  in
    the form of telephone calls and visits in 2016 and 2017.  I  find  that
    the evidence shows that family life as defined by the Court  of  Appeal
    as "real, effective or effective support" in Rai [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320
    has been established.

20. However, given that the requirements of the Rules have not been met, it
    is necessary for the  Claimant  to  show  that  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances in order for his appeal to succeed. I find that the  fact
    that the family are separated and the Claimant is living alone in Kabul
    is not sufficient in itself to amount to an  exceptional  circumstance,
    given that he is an adult now aged 25 and  in  the  absence  of  clear,
    reliable evidence as to his medical condition(s).

21. I have also had regard to the public interest considerations set out in
    section 117B of the NIAA 2002 and find that there is no  evidence  that
    the Claimant speaks English. The evidence is  that  he  is  financially
    dependent on his father. Section 117B(1) provides that the  maintenance
    of effective immigration controls is in the public interest.

22. In light of the considerations and my findings set out  above,  I  find
    that the decision refusing to grant the Claimant entry  clearance  does
    not constitute a disproportionate interference with his right to family
    life with his parents and siblings in the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

The First tier Tribunal Judge made material errors of law. I set aside  that
decision and substitute a decision dismissing the Claimant's appeal  against
the refusal of entry clearance.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 20 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman





I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 20 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
