

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04636/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2017                              |On 7 June 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            taybur rahman chokder
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Basith, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Taybur Rahman Chokder, was born on 1 January 1988 and is
    a male citizen of Bangladesh.  He  is  married  to  Sabina  Elloy  (the
    sponsor) who is an Indian citizen who has indefinite leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom.  The appellant and sponsor have a child (T) who  is
    a British citizen.  The appellant had entered the United Kingdom  as  a
    General Student Migrant in 2010 and had applied for  further  leave  to
    remain when his previous leave expired in October 2012.  The respondent
    considered that the appellant  had  fraudulently  obtained  an  English
    language certificate the appellant was served with a notice IS151A on 6
    October 2014.  The appellant made a further application  for  leave  to
    remain as the spouse of a person present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom but, by a  decision  dated  11  August  2015,  the  appellant's
    application was refused.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Aujla)  which,  in  their  decision  promulgated  on  6
    October 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal are prolix and very poorly drafted.   However,  I
    shall seek to deal with the grounds as  they  were  articulated  by  Mr
    Basith, who appeared for the appellant, at the Upper Tribunal  hearing.
    First, the appellant relies upon SM and Qadir (ETS - evidence -  burden
    of proof) [2016]  UKUT  229  (IAC).   The  appellant  asserts  that  he
    provided an innocent explanation for the fact that  his  name  appeared
    upon a list of invalid test results carried out  by  ETS.   Thereafter,
    the appellant submits that it was for the Secretary of State to  adduce
    evidence sufficient to prove  that  the  appellant  had  undertaken  an
    invalid or fraudulent test.

 3. I do not find that the ground has merits.  I agree with the  submission
    of Miss Ahmad, who appeared for the respondent, to the effect that  the
    appellant had not given an innocent or any  explanation  for  the  test
    result.  In his written evidence, he does not  more  than  simply  deny
    that he had provided a fraudulent result.  Such  a  denial  is  not  an
    explanation for the invalid test result.  At [35], Judge  Aujla  wrote,
    "Having considered the evidence referred to above, I am  satisfied  the
    appellant did obtain an English language certificate fraudulently."  In
    the light of the evidence which the judge had before  him  including  a
    bare denial by the appellant, I consider that such a  finding  (clearly
    based upon all the evidence) is sufficient.  There was no need for  the
    judge to deal with the transference of the burden of proof (as  in  SM)
    in a case where the evidence was so straightforward on both sides.

 4. The second ground of appeal concerns EX.1 of Appendix FM of HC 395  (as
    amended).  The appellant asserts that the  judge  should  have  applied
    paragraph EX.1 in his case and  that  the  judge's  failure  to  do  so
    amounted to an error of law.   It  is  true  that  the  judge  has  not
    referred to paragraph EX.1 in terms, but at [45], he wrote as follows:

         "I have finally considered whether or not the interference  of  the
         appellant's family life would be  proportionate.   Considering  the
         issue I  have  taken  into  account  the  circumstances  that  were
         favourable to the appellant and his family and have  balanced  them
         against the need to remove him because he no longer  had  leave  to
         remain.  In considering proportionality I have taken  into  account
         whatever I have stated above in respect of the  best  interests  of
         the couple's child and my conclusions that it would  be  reasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK with her parents."

 5. The judge had found [42], and gave reasons for  the  finding,  that  it
    would  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  accompany  its  parents  to
    Bangladesh.  In the light of that finding, there was no  need  for  the
    judge to make a separate finding in respect  of  paragraph  EX.1  given
    that he had already found that it would be "reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK" (paragraph EX.1(a)(ii)).

 6. In the end, although he does not refer to  it  in  terms,  the  judge's
    finding as to the child returning to Bangladesh is sufficient to  cover
    the application of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act (as amended).

 7. Finally, Mr Basith submitted that the  judge  had  not  carried  out  a
    proper assessment of the best interests of the child under  Section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  That  submission
    does not have merits.   The  judge  has  indeed  carried  out  a  "best
    interests" assessment in respect of the child at [37-38]. The judge did
    not err in law for the reasons given in the grounds of appeal or at all



 8. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 2 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 2 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

