
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04291/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 May 2019                        |On 9 May 2019                        |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                 PANASHE [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. E. Norman, Counsel instructed by Tann Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge E. M. M. Smith, promulgated on  11  September  2018,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse entry clearance on human rights grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:-

         "It is arguable that the FtTJ erred by failing to  recognise,  when
         "factoring in" to his proportionality balancing exercise  the  fact
         the appellant had shown that he met the rules for  entry  clearance
         as a child, that there was  little  remaining  public  interest  in
         refusal."

 3. The Sponsor attended the hearing.

 4. In her submissions,  Ms.  Aboni  accepted  that,  when  conducting  the
    proportionality assessment, the Judge had given no weight to  the  fact
    that the Appellant met the requirements of the immigration rules.   She
    also accepted that it appeared that the author of the Rule 24  response
    had not considered the contents of the bundle, or the decision of Judge
    Grimes.

 5. At the hearing, with reference to the case of TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA
    Civ 1109, I set the decision aside, and remade the appeal, allowing the
    Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

Error of Law

 6. The Judge finds at [25] that the Appellant "would  have  satisfied  the
    burden of proof and established his father had sole responsibility  for
    him".  At [34] he states:

         "I am, therefore, satisfied that having  factored  in  my  findings
         that the appellant would have satisfied the Immigration  Rules  and
         carrying out a balancing exercise of the facts that to refuse leave
         to the appellant to enter the UK for the purposes of family life is
         not disproportionate."

 7. Although the Judge has stated that he has "factored  in"  his  findings
    that the Appellant met the requirements of the  immigration  rules,  he
    has given no weight to it.  His proportionality assessment is  set  out
    from [26] to [33].  He states at [26]  that  it  was  not  argued  that
    "paragraph 276ADE or  appendix  FM  can  be  satisfied",  but  this  is
    irrelevant.  Paragraph 276ADE applies to individuals who are already in
    the United Kingdom.  Appendix FM is not relevant,  as  the  appropriate
    immigration rule in the Appellant's case was paragraph 297.  The  Judge
    then accepts that the case justifies consideration "outside The Rules".

 8. He then sets out some caselaw.  His consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    circumstances is from [31] to [33].   There is no reference to  section
    117B of the 2002 Act, and the factors  set  out  there.   There  is  no
    reference to the public interest.  There is no reference  to  the  fact
    that the immigration rules were satisfied, and therefore that there was
    little public interest in refusing the appeal.

 9. TZ (Pakistan) states at [34]:-

         "That has the benefit that where  a  person  satisfies  the  Rules,
         whether or not by reference to an article 8  informed  requirement,
         then this will be positively determinative of that person's article
         8 appeal, provided their case engages article 8(1),  for  the  very
         reason that it would then be disproportionate for that person to be
         removed."

10. TZ makes clear that, where a  person  meets  the  requirements  of  the
    rules, that is positively determinative of the Article 8  appeal  where
    Article 8(1) is engaged.  There was no dispute that  there  was  family
    life between the Appellant and Sponsor (see [34]).  The Judge failed to
    take into account that the Appellant satisfied the requirements of  the
    immigration rules when carrying out the proportionality assessment.   I
    find that this is a material error of law.  Following TZ,  I  find  the
    fact that the Appellant satisfied the requirements of  the  immigration
    rules is determinative of his appeal.  I  find  that  the  decision  is
    disproportionate, and that there is no public interest in refusing  the
    Appellant's appeal.

11. Further, although it is not material, I find that  there  was  evidence
    before the Judge of the  Appellant's  wishes  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom to be with the Sponsor and his family in the  copious  WhatsApp
    communication between the Appellant and Sponsor (B73  to  B205  of  the
    Appellant's bundle).

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.

13. I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on  human  rights
    grounds.

14. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 6 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award.  I have decided to make a  fee  award.
It appears from [19] of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
findings of Judge Grimes were not taken into account by the Respondent  when
the decision was made.  It was Judge Grimes' decision that led to the  Judge
finding that the requirements of the immigration rules  were  met.   In  the
circumstances I make a fee award for the entire fee paid.


Signed   Date 6 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
