
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04307/2019
                                                               HU/04309/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Parties appeared remotely by Microsoft     |On 26th July 2021               |
|Teams                                      |                                |
|On 6th July 2021                           |                                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                   MM (1)
                                   MKD (2)
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Smith, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

Anonymity

An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").  As the
appellants are minors it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless
and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the appellants are granted
anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
identify them or any member of their family.  This direction applies
amongst others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could
lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   1. The hearing before me on 6th July 2021 took the form of a remote
      hearing using Microsoft Teams. Neither party objected. I sat at the
      Birmingham Civil Justice Centre.  The sponsor, who I shall refer to as
      SK, joined the hearing remotely.  In proceeding with a remote hearing
      I was satisfied: no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as
      there has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is justified
      as necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the
      interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding objective
      to proceed with a remote hearing because of the present need to take
      precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was
      satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with
      fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of
      the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated
      costs and resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was
      satisfied the parties have been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


   2. The appellants are both nationals of Eritrea.  The first appellant was
      born on 1st January 2012 and is now nine years old.  The second
      appellant was born on 1st October 2002 and is now eighteen years old.
      They are sisters.  On 7th November 2018, they applied for entry
      clearance for settlement under the 'Family Reunion' provisions set out
      in Part 11 of the Immigration Rules.  The seek to join their brother,
      SK, in the United Kingdom.  SK arrived in the UK on or about 15th
      March 2017.  Their applications were refused for reasons set out in
      two separate decisions dated 18th January 2019.  The respondent noted
      there is no evidence contained within the application to demonstrate
      the appellants formed part of the 'pre-flight family' of SK, or that
      they have ever met SK in person. The respondent noted SK fled Eritrea
      in November 2014 due to military roundups. The respondent was unable
      to ascertain who had looked after the appellants after SK left in
      2014.


   3. The appellants appealed the respondent's decisions, and the decisions
      were reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager ("ECM") on 6th June 2019.
      The ECM noted no supporting documents were submitted with the appeal.
      The ECM was satisfied that the original decisions were correct and
      lawful.


   4. The appellants appeals were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Lodge for reasons set out in his decision promulgated on 22nd November
      2019.  The appellants grounds of appeal are set out in a Grounds of
      Appeal settled by Dr Chelvan and dated 18th December 2019.  There is
      one ground of appeal.  The appellants claim Judge Lodge erred in
      making findings of fact in respect of matters that had not been raised
      by the respondent and were not put to SK when he gave evidence.  The
      appellants refer to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Maheshwaran
      [2002] EWCA Civ 173 to support the claim that a failure to put to a
      litigant a point which will count against them, results in material
      unfairness.  The appellants claim SK was not given any opportunity to
      address concerns regarding his evidence and the decision of Judge
      Lodge is vitiated by procedural unfairness.  Permission to appeal was
      granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaney on 10th April 2020.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge


   5. SK was called to give evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  As set
      out at paragraph [7] of the decision, SK adopted his witness
      statements dated 31st October 2019 (at page 1 to 7 of the appellants
      bundle), 26th October 2018 (at page 145 to 149 of the appellants
      bundle) and 22nd June 2019  (at pages 158 to 168 of the appellants
      bundle).  His oral evidence is summarised at paragraphs [8] to [12].
      The Judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [13] to
      [40] of the decision.


   6. Judge Lodge found, at [13], that the appellants cannot meet the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Ms Smith, quite properly in my
      judgment, accepts that the appellants cannot meet the requirements for
      Family Reunion set out in Part 11 of the Immigration Rules.  They gain
      no assistance from paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules because
      they are not seeking leave to enter to join a parent who currently has
      refugee status.  At paragraph [16], Judge Lodge summarised the
      appellants case in the following way:


         "... The appellants case is that the sponsor left Eritrea in 2014.
         His father died when he was one and a half years of age. His mother
         left Eritrea in 2013 to go and work in Saudi Arabia. The appellants
         were kidnapped in March 2018 "while travelling to a nearby
         village".  They were released in South Sudan and sent to a woman
         named Byenesh (who used to live in their village) who had relocated
         to Kampala in Uganda. Fellow Eritreans in Juba sent them by bus to
         meet Byenesh and at the present time, they are in Kampala."


   7. Having summarised the claim, Judge Lodge went on to consider the claim
      made.  At paragraph [18] of his decision Judge Lodge refers to a lack
      of evidence to support the claim that the appellant's father passed
      away.  However, he states; "I am prepared to accept that this is the
      case and I will consider the appellant's case on the basis that their
      father is not on the scene".


   8. He then turned to consider the claims made regarding the appellants'
      mother.  The appellants claim that she left them in 2013.  At
      paragraph [19], Judge Lodge refers to the evidence before the Tribunal
      as to when SK last had contact with his mother, and the respective
      ages of the appellants and SK at that time.  Judge Lodge said, at
      [19]:


         "... On the face of it, it is extraordinary that a mother would
         leave such young children. She did not leave them in the care of
         relatives but left them to look after themselves; there was some
         input once a week from an aunt (presumably a sister of the mother)"


   9. At paragraph [20], Judge Lodge referred to the claim that the
      appellant's mother went to Saudi Arabia to work.  He noted there was
      no evidence or even a suggestion that she ever sent any money back for
      the care of her children.  He also referred to the claim that the
      appellants mother had to leave Eritrea because she had been raped.  He
      found, at [21], that it is hard to believe that her own family would,
      in the circumstances, ostracise her.  He noted the appellants mother
      appears to have had the fortitude and courage to take the matter to
      court, although it was not clear what the outcome of any proceedings
      was. At paragraph [22], Judge Lodge said it is odd that the first
      appellant's father is named on her birth certificate, noting also that
      SK describes in his evidence, how the first appellant's father had
      visited her on two or three occasions after her mother left for Saudi
      Arabia. That is plainly a reference to the evidence set out in
      paragraph [10] of the witness statement of SK dated 31st October 2019.
       At paragraph [24] of his decision, Judge Lodge refers to the evidence
      set out at paragraph [4] of the witness statement of SK dated 26th
      October 2018, noting the claim that once a week, a maternal aunt would
      come from Mendefera, to help SK look after his sisters.  At paragraph
      [25], Judge Lodge said that none of the clams made by the appellants
      has a ring of truth about it.  He rejected the claim that the
      appellants mother would have left the children by themselves with the
      minimal input of an adult who lived some distance away.


  10. At paragraph [26], Judge Lodge considers the claim made by SK that he
      did not have a good relationship with his paternal uncles.  He
      contrasted that claim made in the witness statement, against the claim
      made by SK in his own asylum interview that his paternal uncle had
      paid $7000 to help him escape Eritrea, and his claim in his witness
      statement, of the $100 per month sent by his uncle when SK was in
      Khartoum.


  11. At paragraphs [27] to [35], Judge Lodge considered the account relied
      upon regarding the last time the appellants and SK spoke to their
      mother, and SK's decision to leave Eritrea himself. He also considered
      the appellants account of their kidnap and how they were subsequently
      released in South Sudan and found their way to Kampala, Uganda.  Judge
      Lodge accepted the appellants are in Uganda, but said, at [36], that
      he was satisfied that the whole story of how they got there, is
      concocted.  He was not satisfied the appellants have established, on
      balance, that they do not have the support of their mother and indeed
      their wider family. He said; "their account is implausible from
      beginning to end".  At paragraph [37], Judge Lodge refers to the
      effort and resources that have been put into assisting the appellants
      with their applications for entry clearance.  At paragraphs [38] an
      [39] he concluded:


         "38. I am satisfied the appellants have not established that they
         are not in contact with their mother and with other family members.
         They are safe in Uganda. I have no reliable evidence that that is
         not the case. I am not satisfied it is not in their best interests
         to remain in Uganda. I have no evidence that they are not fit and
         healthy. I have not been provided with any medical evidence to
         contradict that.


         39.  I cannot see that it is in their best interests to come to the
         UK, even if their brother is in the UK, to be placed into care. The
         sponsor is not in a position to look after them. He is in care
         himself. There is a letter from a social worker, Miss Shepherd
         which advances the sponsor's case that he be reunited with his
         sisters. On my findings however he did not have a key role in
         caring for his siblings, his sisters were not kidnapped, and it has
         not been established his mother is not playing a role in their
         lives. I am not prepared to find that it is his best interests to
         have them with him.


The appeal before me


  12. Before me, Ms Smith submits that at paragraphs [19] to [37] of his
      decision, Judge Lodge makes adverse findings based upon matters that
      were not raised by the respondent in the decisions refusing the
      applications for entry clearance or raised by the Presenting Officer
      or the Judge at the hearing of the appeals.  She submits the sponsor
      was given no opportunity to address any concerns the Judge had, and
      that had those concerns been raised, they could have been addressed.


  13. Ms Smith submits that at paragraph [19], Judge Lodge considered it to
      be extraordinary that the appellant's mother would leave such young
      children to look after themselves, with some limited input, once a
      week from an aunt.  She submits the respondent had not claimed that it
      was extraordinary that the appellant's mother would leave such young
      children.  She refers to the statement of SK dated 24th June 2021, who
      states, at paragraphs [6] and [7], that he cannot recall whether he
      was asked about that during the hearing, but if he had been asked, he
      would have provided the explanation set out regarding the
      circumstances that the family found itself in, and the fact that
      children are often left alone in African countries.


  14. Similarly, Ms Smith submits that at paragraph [22], the Judge
      concluded that it seems that MM's father accepted some responsibility
      for her.  She submits this too, was an issue that had not been raised
      by the respondent.  She refers to the statement of SK dated 24th June
      2021.  He states, at paragraph [8] that he cannot recall whether he
      was asked to explain what role MM's father had in her day-to-day life
      , although he recalls telling his representative after the hearing
      that MM's father accepted MM as his daughter , but he wasn't looking
      after her or being responsible for her.


  15. Ms Smith submits that at paragraph [26], Judge Lodge considered the
      evidence of SK set out in his witness statement that he did not have a
      good relationship with his parental uncles.  In his statement dated
      24th June 2021, SK explains, at paragraph [10], that he was not asked
      about his uncles, and so he did not elaborate. He states the paternal
      uncle who helped him escape Eritrea used to live in Juba and had lost
      his job so that he had to leave Juba and go to Ethiopia. That is why
      the appellants could not be supported by him and MKD had to beg on the
      streets.


  16. Ms Smith also referred to paragraph [27] of the decision of Judge
      Lodge, in which he considered the evidence regarding a field owned by
      the appellant's mother.  In his statement dated 24th June 2021, SK
      explains, at paragraph [11], that he was not asked about what had
      happened to the land, but if he had been asked he would have explained
      that there was no one there to grow crops, once their mother left, and
      once she had left, the land was given to someone they knew.  Although
      they initially received � share of the money made from crops grown,
      after SK fled Eritrea the government took the land, and it was given
      to other people who could plough the land and work on it properly.


  17. Ms Smith submits that the majority of the reasons given by Judge Lodge
      concern aspects of the appellant's account that were not thought to be
      in issue or matters that SK was not given any opportunity to clarify
      during the course of the hearing. She referred me to the statement
      made by SK dated 24th June 2021 in which he identifies the matters
      that were not put to him and the explanations that he would have been
      able to provide.  Ms Smith submits the entire premise of the
      application for entry clearance was 'family reunion' and Judge Lodge
      was required to consider whether the appellants have established a
      family life with SK.  She submits there was much that could be said by
      the sponsor to address the concerns the Judge had, but he was not
      given an opportunity to address those concerns giving rise to
      procedural unfairness.


  18. In reply, Mrs Aboni submits Judge Lodge properly directed himself and
      there was no procedural unfairness. It is common ground between the
      parties that the appellants cannot meet the immigration rules.  Mrs
      Aboni submits Judge Lodge properly engaged with the evidence given by
      SK in the various witness statements that he adopted, and Judge Lodge
      provides perfectly proper and adequate reasons for concluding that
      much of the account lacks credibility. She submits Judge Lodge gave
      adequate reasons for the conclusion that the appellants have failed to
      establish that they are not in contact with their mother and other
      family members. She submits it was open to Judge Lodge to find that
      the appellants are safe in Uganda and that it is in their best
      interests to remain in Uganda.


Discussion


  19. The focus of the respondent's decisions was whether the appellants met
      the requirements for leave to enter under paragraph 352D of the
      Immigration Rules.  The respondent noted at the outset that the
      appellants have applied to join their brother, SK, and so it was
      obvious from the outset that the applications could not succeed under
      paragraph 352D because the applicants are not the children of a parent
      who has been granted refugee status in the United Kingdom.
      Nevertheless, the respondent concluded that she was not satisfied that
      the appellants "were part of the family unit of the person granted
      asylum at the time that the person granted asylum left the country of
      her (sic) habitual residence in order to seek leave as required by
      paragraph 352D(iv)".  The respondent went on to conclude that there is
      no breach of Article 8 because in this case, any interference is
      justified for the purpose of maintaining an effective immigration
      control and is proportionate.


  20. I have been provided with a witness statement from counsel that
      represented the appellants at the hearing before the First-tier
      Tribunal.  She confirms that her contemporaneous record of the
      proceedings has been exhibited in redacted form, to a statement
      provided by Ms Melanie Vasselin dated 18th December 2019.  I have also
      been provided with a statement made by Ms Melanie Vasselin, a Senior
      Caseworker at Paragon Law exhibiting a copy of the notes she received
      from counsel following the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.
      She also exhibits a redacted copy of notes that she took during a
      telephone conversation with SK on 18th December 2019 with the
      assistance of an interpreter.  Finally, I have in the papers before me
      a statement dated 24th June 2021 signed by SK in which he addresses
      the adverse conclusions reached by Judge Lodge.


  21. For the sake of completeness, I also record that I have carefully read
      the three witness statements of SK that he adopted before the First-
      tier Tribunal.  The first is dated 22nd June 2017 and pre-dates the
      applications for entry clearance made by the appellants.  That
      statement sets out the background to the claim for international
      protection made by SK, his journey to the UK and the reasons he claims
      he is unable to return to Eritrea.  The second statement is dated 26th
      October 2018 and was made in support of the appellant's application
      for entry clearance.  The third is dated 31st October 2019 and is a
      response to the respondent's decisions to refuse the applications for
      entry clearance.  At paragraphs [3] to [6] of that statement SK
      addresses the respondent's claim that there is no evidence that the
      appellants formed part of the same 'pre-flight family' as him, and
      that they had never met him in person.  At paragraphs [7] to [11], SK
      addresses the respondent's concern that there is no evidence as to
      where his biological father is, and how the name of her father came to
      be on the birth certificate of MM.  At paragraph [10] of his
      statement, SK refers to MM's father and recalls that he came to see MM
      two or three times after their mother left. He states, MM's father
      would only come to see MM briefly and he did not really spend time
      with her or take responsibility for her.  At paragraph [14], SK
      explains the lack of evidence to establish that they lived together as
      a family.  He also explains the role that he played in the appellants
      lives after their mother left.  At paragraphs [16] to [37], SK
      describes the background to the claim that the appellants were
      kidnapped and abandoned in South Sudan, their journey to Kampala, the
      contact they maintain, and the appellants' current circumstances in
      Uganda.


  22. I acknowledge that fairness is an essential component of the judicial
      process and that procedural fairness is an essential attribute of the
      judicial function.  It is now well established that an individual has
      the right to prior notice of the case against them and an effective
      opportunity to make representations before a decision is made. The
      respondent's decisions are incoherent, but it is clear the respondent
      had concerns about the appellants claims regarding their care since
      2013, and the role played by their parents and their extended family.




  23. The assessment of an Article 8 claim such as this is always  a  highly
      fact sensitive task. Judge Lodge was required to consider a number  of
      factors.  They include, whether the account is  internally  consistent
      and consistent with any other relevant information,  and  whether  the
      account is plausible.  The ingredients of the story, and the story  as
      a whole, have to be considered by reference to the evidence  available
      to the Tribunal.   Judge  Lodge  was  required  to  resolve  what  had
      happened in the  past,  and  whether  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
      clearance would be in breach of Article 8. A Judge of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal must act on all the relevant evidence before the Tribunal.


  24. The appellants are not assisted by the decision of the Court of Appeal
      in Maheshwaran v SSHD.  The Court of Appeal held that where an
      individual asserts a fact before the Tribunal which the SSHD did not
      challenge and the Judge did not raise with the individual any doubts
      as to the truthfulness of his assertion, the Judge  was not obliged to
      accept the assertion as proved. Lord Justice Schiemann said:


         "3. Those who make a claim for asylum must show that they are
         refugees. The burden of proof is on them. Whether or not a claimant
         is to be believed is frequently very important. He will assert very
         many facts in relation to events far away most of which no one
         before the adjudicator is in a position to corroborate or refute.
         Material is often adduced at the last minute without warning. From
         time to time the claimant or the Home Secretary are neither there
         nor represented and yet the adjudicator carries on with his task.
         He frequently has several cases listed in front of him on the same
         day. For one reason or another not every hearing will be effective.
         Adjudicators can not be expected to be alive to every possible
         nuance of a case before the oral hearing, if there is one, starts.
         Adjudicators in general will reserve their determinations for later
         delivery. They will ponder what has been said and what has not been
         said, both before the hearing and at the hearing. They will look
         carefully at the documents which have been produced. Points will
         sometimes assume a greater importance than they appeared to have
         before the hearing began or in its earlier stages. Adjudicators
         will in general rightly be cautious about intervening lest it be
         said that they have leaped into the forensic arena and lest an
         appearance of bias is given.


         4. Undoubtedly a failure to put to a party to litigation a point
         which is decided against him can be grossly unfair and lead to
         injustice. He must have a proper opportunity to deal with the
         point. Adjudicators must bear this in mind. Where a point is
         expressly conceded by one party it will usually be unfair to decide
         the case against the other party on the basis that the concession
         was wrongly made, unless the tribunal indicates that it is minded
         to take that course. Cases can occur when fairness will require the
         reopening of an appeal because some point of significance - perhaps
         arising out of a post hearing decision of the higher courts -
         requires it. However, such cases will be rare.


         5.. Where much depends on the credibility of a party and when that
         party makes several inconsistent statements which are before the
         decision maker, that party manifestly has a forensic problem. Some
         will choose to confront the inconsistencies straight on and make
         evidential or forensic submissions on them. Others will hope that
         'least said, soonest mended' and consider that forensic
         concentration on the point will only make matters worse and that it
         would be better to try and switch the tribunal's attention to some
         other aspect of the case. Undoubtedly it is open to the tribunal
         expressly to put a particular inconsistency to a witness because it
         considers that the witness may not be alerted to the point or
         because it fears that it may have perceived something as
         inconsistent with an earlier answer which in truth is not
         inconsistent. Fairness may in some circumstances require this to be
         done but this will not be the usual case. Usually the tribunal,
         particularly if the party is represented, will remain silent and
         see how the case unfolds.


         6.  The requirements of fairness are very much conditioned by the
         facts of each case. This has been stressed in innumerable decisions
         ..."


  25. I have carefully considered the evidence set out in the witness
      statements that I have before me, and in my judgment the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge is not vitiated by procedural
      unfairness.  I do not accept the criticisms made by Ms Smith, or set
      out in the statement of SK.  Upon a careful reading of the decision,
      it is in my judgment clear that at paragraphs [16] to [37] of his
      decision, Judge Lodge was engaging with, and addressing the account of
      events set out by SK in his witness statements.  There is no duty on a
      Judge to consider the evidence piece by piece or line by line, and as
      Ms Smith acknowledges, it was not incumbent upon the Judge to raise
      all the concerns that he had about the appellants account of events.
      Ms Smith submits that had Judge Lodge raised concerns, counsel would
      have had the opportunity of drawing the Judge's attention to
      particular parts of the evidence that was before the FtT.  It is clear
      in my judgement that in reaching his decision, Judge Lodge carefully
      considered the evidence that was before the Tribunal.  It is in my
      judgment clear that Judge Lodge considered the evidence and reached
      his conclusions on the probable actuality of the alleged events, by
      evaluating all the evidence as a whole.  A Tribunal Judge is not under
      any duty to inform the parties of his/her provisional view or
      conclusions.  A party must be taken to know that the Tribunal is
      concerned with the issues raised in the appeal and a judge is not
      required to explain to the parties whether or not they are inclined to
      decide an issue one way or another.  Here, the issue was whether the
      decision to refuse the applications for entry clearance were in breach
      of the Article 8 rights of the appellants and SK.  It was, in the end,
      for the appellants to establish their claim.


  26. Judge Lodge properly engaged with the evidence set out in the witness
      statements of SK and he was not bound to accept the explanations given
      in the statements.  In Y -v- SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223, Keene LJ
      referred to the authorities and confirmed that a Judge should be
      cautious before finding an account to be inherently incredible,
      because there is a considerable risk that they will be over influenced
      by their own views on what is or is not plausible, and those views
      will have inevitably been influenced by their own background in this
      country and by the customs and ways of our own society.  However, he
      went on to say, at [26];


         "None of this, however, means that an adjudicator is required to
         take at face value an account of facts proffered by an appellant,
         no matter how contrary to common sense and experience of human
         behaviour the account may be..."


  27. I have had regard to the witness statement made by Melanie Vasselin.
      She has exhibited her note of a telephone conversation she had with SK
      on 18th December 2019 some five weeks after the hearing of the appeal.
       I accept she seeks the appellant's views regarding the adverse
      findings made and during that conversation, she sought to obtain
      instructions upon the adverse findings made.  In the end, the Judge
      was required to determine the appeal upon the evidence before him.


  28. The appellants representatives were plainly aware of the issues in the
      appeal and of the information the Tribunal was likely to expect,
      bearing in mind the respondent had expressed some concern regarding
      the care of the appellants following the departure of SK in 2014. The
      appellants bore the burden of proof.  I am not satisfied that anything
      that is now said in the statement of SK dated 24th June 2021 would
      have made a material difference to the outcome of this appeal. The
      grounds of appeal and the statements now relied upon, ignore the
      internal discrepancies identified by Judge Lodge.


  29. As to the Tribunal's assessment of the evidence, the Court of Appeal
      in Fage UK Ltd v Chobani UK Ltd [2014] EWCA Civ 5, at [114] to [115]
      (per Lewison LJ), provided the following guidance;


           i) The expertise of a trial judge is in determining what facts
              are relevant to the legal issues to be decided, and what
              those facts are if they are disputed;


          ii) The trial is not a dress rehearsal. It is the first and last
              night of the show;


         iii) Duplication of the trial judge's role on appeal is a
              disproportionate use of the limited resources of an appellate
              court, and will seldom lead to a different outcome in an
              individual case;


          iv) In making his decisions the trial judge will have regard to
              the whole of the sea of evidence presented to him, whereas an
              appellate court will only be island hopping;


           v) The atmosphere of the courtroom cannot, in any event, be
              recreated by reference to documents (including transcripts of
              evidence);


          vi) Thus even it were possible to duplicate the role of the trial
              judge, it cannot in practice be done.


  30. I am quite satisfied that Judge Lodge properly considered the evidence
      before the Tribunal without any procedural unfairness.  In my judgment
      it was open to him to conclude that the appellants have failed to
      establish that they are not in contact with their mother and with
      other family members for the reasons he gave. It was equally open to
      him to conclude that their best interests are to remain in Uganda for
      the reasons given in the decision.


  31. At the hearing before me, Ms Smith submits Judge Lodge was required to
      consider whether the appellants have established a family life with SK
      but failed to do so.  She acknowledges however that that was not a
      ground of appeal advanced by the appellants.


  32. It follows, that I dismiss the appeal.





DECISION


  33. The appeals are dismissed


Signed   V. Mandalia                Date: 8th July 2021


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
