
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04230/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Leeds Combined Court Centre          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 January 2020                            |On 24 February 2020           |
|Decision given orally at hearing              |                              |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                                 Leandro [S]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mutebuka, Mutebuka & Co Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the appellant to challenge the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Monaghan who, following a hearing on 24  July
    2019,  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the   respondent's
    decision to refuse the appellant's human rights claim.   Permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge E  M  Simpson  on  19
    November 2019.  Although the decision of Judge Monaghan is both lengthy
    and detailed, it is  nevertheless  the  subject  of  criticism  by  the
    appellant through his representative, Mr Mutebuka.

 2. The judge's decision records that the appellant had previously  entered
    the United Kingdom as a visitor on various occasions from 2009 to 2015.
     He had applied for leave on the basis of UK ancestry in 2015 but  that
    was refused in 2016.  He entered the United Kingdom most recently on  1
    November 2016.  On 13 October 2017 he made an application for leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  That was refused by the respondent  on
    20 February 2019.

 3. The judge at paragraph 7 of her decision set out the  reasons  why  the
    respondent took the view that the human rights claim should be refused.
     In particular, she noted that the respondent had not seen any evidence
    that there were insurmountable obstacles in accordance  with  paragraph
    EX.2. of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules, which  would  mean  very
    serious difficulties would be faced by the appellant or his partner  in
    continuing family life together in Barbados, that being the country  of
    the appellant's nationality.

 4. The respondent noted submissions that had been  made  relating  to  the
    health issues of the appellant's partner; in  particular,  following  a
    road traffic accident, which had resulted  in  her  sustaining  serious
    injuries.  There was, however, no evidence at the time to indicate that
    the partner was still receiving treatment.  Nevertheless,  the  partner
    was said to suffer from depression; but the respondent considered  that
    treatment, including counselling and  medication,  was,  if  necessary,
    available in Barbados.  The respondent noted the appellant's  partner's
    health issues overall but considered those were not  life  threatening.
    She noted that they had not prevented the partner from working  at  the
    relevant time and providing  assistance  to  her  father;  and  to  her
    brother, who was said to need her assistance.  Any assistance  for  the
    appellant's partner's father and brother could be provided, in the view
    of the respondent, by the NHS or Social Services.

 5. The respondent took the view that the appellant and  his  partner  were
    both of employable age and there was  nothing  to  indicate  that  they
    would be unable to support themselves in Barbados.  The fact  that  the
    appellant's partner had  employment  in  the  United  Kingdom  did  not
    constitute an insurmountable obstacle, in the view of  the  respondent.
    The respondent also noted that a wish, desire or preference to live  in
    the United Kingdom did not constitute an insurmountable obstacle.

 6.  For all those reasons, the respondent took the view that the appellant
    did not meet the requirements of paragraph EX.1. or paragraph 276ADE of
    the Rules nor in the  respondent's  view  were  there  any  exceptional
    circumstances which meant that, notwithstanding  a  failure  to  comply
    with the Rules  ,the  appellant  should  nevertheless  be  given  leave
    because not to do so would result in a breach of section 6 of the Human
    Rights Act 1998.

 7. The judge then turned to the relevant law. She noted that the issue for
    her in respect of whether the appellant satisfied the Rules was  to  be
    adjudged on the balance  of  probabilities.   If  the  matter  involved
    Article 8 outside the Rules, then the judge stated that the standard of
    proof was whether there were  substantial  grounds  for  believing  the
    evidence, which was the same  thing,  she  said,  as  the  question  of
    whether it was reasonably likely to be true.

 8. The judge then reminded herself of the case of Agyarko v  Secretary  of
    State [2017] UKSC 11 on the issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles.   The
    judge recorded the oral and written evidence.  In particular, she noted
    that the appellant's partner was at the date  of  the  hearing  heavily
    pregnant  and  treated  her  as  vulnerable  in  that  respect,  making
    appropriate provision for the partner when giving her evidence.

 9. At paragraph 22, the judge began her findings.  She noted the appellant
    accepted that he entered the United Kingdom on a visit visa and that he
    had married his partner in 2016 in Barbados.  She then recorded further
    matters relating to  his  immigration  history.   She  noted  that  the
    appellant did not return to Barbados after the expiry of his visa on  1
    May 2017 and therefore  became  an  overstayer.   The  judge  noted  at
    paragraph 24 that the appellant stated he had to stay beyond the  terms
    of his visa because the sponsor has suffered a bereavement of  a  close
    family relative.  The mother of the  sponsor  had  passed  away  on  25
    October 2016, and that prompted the appellant to arrange the  visit  to
    support the sponsor in her distress.  The judge noted that she  had  no
    reason to doubt that explanation.  It is, however, important,  in  view
    of the emphasis placed by Mr Mutebuka on  paragraph  24,  to  note  the
    ambit of that passage.  The judge was accepting that the appellant came
    as a visitor in 2016 at a time when  he  considered  that  his  partner
    needed his support as a result of her bereavement.

10. The judge then noted that the appellant said his intention was to offer
    the sponsor support within the terms of his visa, which of  course  was
    time limited; but when he arrived in the United Kingdom, he found  that
    the sponsor could barely function.  She needed support in a variety  of
    respects.  There was then some issue relating to a letter  from  Victim
    Support but that did not take matters further  and  has  certainly  not
    featured in submissions today.

11. The judge found that there  was  no  independent  medical  evidence  to
    support the appellant's account that, when he  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom the sponsor was suffering from either an exacerbation of mental
    health problems or some severe bereavement reaction.   In  so  finding,
    the judge noted that the appellant had  provided  the  respondent  with
    some of the sponsor's  GP  records,  which  dealt  with  the  sponsor's
    injuries in relation to the road traffic accident  in  May  2017.   The
    judge noted that the  appellant  was  therefore  aware  that  obtaining
    medical evidence which might support his case would be important.

12. Overall, the judge, on considering the evidence, did not find  that  it
    had been established that the sponsor had been so functionally impaired
    as had been described by the appellant as at November 2016.  If she had
    been, she would, in the judge's view, have visited  her  GP  and  there
    would have been a record of that.

13. The appellant said that the sponsor's paternal grandfather passed  away
    on 3 February 2017, which increased her grief and her reliance on  him.
    The judge noted that she had not been provided with a death certificate
    relating to the loss of the sponsor's grandfather.

14. The appellant's  case  was  that,  despite  the  bereavements  and  the
    sponsor's poor functioning, they both sought legal advice with  a  view
    to seeing whether they could apply for settlement.  The judge said that
    no evidence had been put forward to support a  finding  regarding  when
    such advice was sought and whether that  was  done  promptly  when  the
    visit visa had expired.  It was not even said in the witness statements
    when such evidence was taken; only that it was.

15. At this point, it is  perhaps  convenient  to  note  that  Mr  Mutebuka
    pointed to a document in the respondent's bundle, to be found  at  page
    B60.  This is a copy of an authority to act, signed  by  the  appellant
    and relating to Mutebuka & Co Immigration Lawyers, on 29 November 2016.
     Mr Mutebuka submits that  the  judge  overlooked  that  document  when
    making her finding.  I shall return to this in due course.

16. In any event, the judge found that further delay then  occurred  before
    the application was made because the appellant said he had to  save  up
    for the fees demanded by the respondent in respect of the  application.



17. The judge found that  she  had  been  given  insufficient  evidence  in
    relation to the extent of the mental health problems of the sponsor and
    the death of her paternal grandfather.  She found that the  main  cause
    of the sponsor being unable to work was the injuries  suffered  in  the
    road accident and she noted wage slip evidence  in  that  respect.   At
    paragraph  34,  the  judge  considered  there  were   some   mitigating
    circumstances in relation to the delay in  submitting  the  application
    for leave to remain.  Nevertheless, the judge found that the  appellant
    was a person who was present in the United Kingdom unlawfully after his
    visa expired and at all times  his  leave  had  been  precarious.   She
    further found  that  the  sponsor's  road  traffic  injuries  were  not
    sustained until 30 May  2017,  which  was  almost  a  month  after  the
    appellant's lawful leave as a visitor had expired.  Therefore, at  that
    time the judge found the appellant should have  returned  to  Barbados.
    Although she noted the factors that influenced the appellant's decision
    to remain unlawfully, these did  not  include  those  injuries  or  the
    resulting hospital treatment but were based on two family bereavements.
     As to that, the judge considered she had substantiating  evidence  for
    one but not for the other.  So far  as  the  sponsor's  claimed  mental
    health  problems  were  concerned,  there  was  little  contemporaneous
    independent evidence.  Such evidence as existed, the judge  considered,
    was not helpful to the appellant.

18. The judge then looked at evidence from a Carer's  Support  Worker  that
    had been put forward on behalf of the appellant.  The  judge  explained
    why she placed only limited weight on that material.  She  also  saw  a
    Community Neurological Rehabilitation Referral Form for the sponsor  of
    June 2017.  This was written shortly after the  road  traffic  accident
    and around five weeks after the appellant's  leave  as  a  visitor  had
    expired.  It was a core element  of  the  appellant's  claim  that,  in
    overstaying, the appellant had been  concerned  that  the  sponsor  was
    hardly able to function on  account  of  her  mental  health  problems.
    However, the rehabilitation referral  documentation  did  not,  in  the
    judge's view, bear that out.  The past medical history  at  that  point
    was recorded as asthma  and  mild  anxiety/depression.   The  sponsor's
    mental health problems were, the judge considered,  recorded  as  being
    mild at that time.  Reference was made in the  referral  to  supporting
    the sponsor's  graded  return  to  her  ballet  classes,  which  was  a
    meaningful hobby.  The judge considered it reasonable to find that  her
    return to them was important to her and that this had not been  in  the
    long distant past.  It  was  therefore  reasonable  to  find  that  the
    sponsor stopped them as the result of  her  physical  injuries  in  the
    accident.

19. The sponsor was a person who had  been  working  full-time  as  a  team
    leader for a national well-known mobile telecommunications company  and
    she had also been undertaking the important  hobby  to  her  of  ballet
    lessons.  That level of functioning did not suggest to the  judge  that
    the sponsor was an individual who  was  suffering  from  severe  mental
    health problems at the time that the appellant had decided to  overstay
    his visa.  The judge  did  accept  that  the  appellant's  partner  had
    suffered sad family bereavements, including the loss of her mother, and
    would have required support in  relation  to  that  bereavement,  which
    could have been given within the six month period of the visit visa.

20. Overall, at paragraph 39, the judge concluded that  the  appellant  had
    greatly exaggerated the  sponsor's  health  problems  at  the  time  he
    decided not to return to Barbados.  The judge at paragraph 40  reminded
    herself however that this was a human rights claim and that she had  to
    make findings of fact in relation to the circumstances appertaining  at
    the date of the hearing.  Mr Mutebuka rightly confirmed that  this  was
    the correct course for the judge to take.

21. The judge then went on  to  look  at  the  sponsor's  current  physical
    health.  She did this in a number of paragraphs, beginning at paragraph
    42.  She considered that the appellant's sponsor's mental  health  was,
    as she had said, not severe at the time the appellant's  visa  expired,
    and there was  little  evidence  to  suggest  that  her  mental  health
    problems were still exacerbated by the road traffic accident.  Although
    she had suffered close family bereavements and had been  subjected  the
    threats, the judge found overall that the position was nevertheless not
    such as to entitle the appellant to succeed.

22.  In so finding, the judge had regard to an expert report of  Dr  Rozmin
    Halari, a Chartered Consultant Clinical Psychologist.  She  noted  that
    the doctor had  described  the  sponsor  as  developing  long  standing
    depression which had been managed by anti-depressant  medication.   She
    was not currently taking this due to her pregnancy.  The  expert  noted
    that the sponsor was  suffering  from  moderate  anxiety  and  moderate
    levels of depression.  The opinion was given that if the appellant were
    to leave the United Kingdom it  would  cause  a  deterioration  in  the
    sponsor's emotional well-being and it would have a  detrimental  impact
    on her pregnancy and the unborn child.

23. At paragraph 56, the  judge  said  that  whilst  she  acknowledged  the
    opinions of the expert, she had decided to place very little weight  on
    them.  This was because whether deliberately, mistakenly or  otherwise,
    the expert had not been  provided  with  an  accurate  account  of  the
    sponsor's family background and, importantly, that she  has  family  in
    the United Kingdom who might be available to support her.   The  expert
    report noted that the sponsor had  told  the  expert  that  the  family
    consisted of a half brother and that she said this was the only  family
    she had left.  She said that the appellant was her  carer.   The  judge
    held at paragraph 57 that those statements were simply not  true.   The
    sponsor had a father in the United Kingdom to whom she  claimed  to  be
    close, but she had not told the expert  of  that.   She  had  therefore
    provided inaccurate detail for this  core  part  of  the  psychological
    assessment.

24. At paragraph 59 the judge said:-

         "I further find that there is little convincing evidence before  me
         that the Sponsor  could  not  access  the  relevant  medication  or
         treatment for her mental health problems in Barbados if she decided
         to continue her family life there with the Appellant."

    We shall come back to that paragraph in due course.

25. The judge did not consider  that  there  was  an  absence  of  relevant
    healthcare in Barbados, despite what the appellant had said.  She noted
    the objective  evidence  in  that  regard.   She  then  considered  the
    position of the sponsor's brother.  Again, this  was  in  some  detail.
    She found that the sponsor had  not  provided  a  credible  account  in
    relation to the relationship between her and  her  father.   The  judge
    gave her reasons for so finding.   Although  she  considered  that  the
    sponsor may have given some emotional practical support at  times  when
    she was not working, her father and brother were able to manage for the
    majority of the time and without her day to day care, when the  sponsor
    was at work.

26. Further adverse credibility findings followed, beginning  at  paragraph
    86 of the decision.  So far as the brother was concerned, although  the
    judge was aware that there was more evidence of the part played in  his
    life by the sponsor than there had been in the case of the father,  she
    noted that as a British citizen  he  would  be  entitled  to  care  and
    support by the NHS and Social Services.  She then made  findings  about
    the appellant's ability to work and  sustain  himself  if  returned  to
    Barbados.  She did not find that the appellant was credible insofar  as
    his evidence on that aspect was concerned.

27. Finally, the judge said that she had been asked to have regard  to  the
    respondent's own policy guidance, which was found at page  165  of  the
    bundle.  She was particularly referred to the part of the  guidance  on
    assessing insurmountable obstacles  concerned  with  the  impact  of  a
    mental or physical disability or of a serious illness,  which  requires
    ongoing  medical  treatment.   The  guidance  stated  that  independent
    medical evidence could establish that a physical or  mental  disability
    or a serious illness which requires  ongoing  medical  treatment  would
    lead to very serious hardship.  An example  was  given  of  a  lack  of
    adequate healthcare in the country where the family would  be  required
    to live.  At paragraph  102,  the  judge  found  that  the  independent
    evidence presented to her did not establish that there was  a  lack  of
    adequate healthcare in Barbados.

28. At page 201 of the bundle relating to  the  same  guidance,  the  judge
    observed at paragraph 103 of her decision that she was  also  asked  to
    consider compelling compassion circumstances.  An example might be when
    an applicant or family member had suffered a bereavement and requests a
    period of stay to deal with their loss or to make funeral arrangements.
     The judge said:-

         "Whilst the Sponsor has experienced loss and family bereavement,  I
         find that this Guidance deals more with the immediate period  after
         the loss, which has not passed by and is no longer relevant to  the
         decision I have to make."

    She therefore found that the appellant could not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules, including paragraph EX.1 and 276ADE and  that
    the Secretary of State was therefore correct to refuse the  application
    on that basis.

29. Then, at paragraph 105, the judge turned to the assessment of Article 8
    outside the Rules.  She  noted  the  appellant's  claim  that  work  in
    Barbados would be difficult for  him.   She  found,  however,  that  no
    background evidence had been put forward in that regard.  The appellant
    was said to be a qualified chef who had worked on cruise  ships.   This
    emerged from a letter written by  an  individual  and  put  forward  on
    behalf of the appellant.  She noted that appellant  had  not  mentioned
    this aspect of his employment in his own evidence.  She found that  the
    appellant was a highly skilled individual who had worked in  a  variety
    of settings in Barbados as a private chef.   The  sponsor  was  also  a
    highly qualified experienced and skilled individual with an  impressive
    work record.  This was despite the fact  that  she  had  suffered  from
    mental health problems.  Whilst the judge accepted that the sponsor had
    faced challenges in terms of family  bereavements,   the  loss  of  her
    first child, a road traffic accident and that in the past she had  been
    a carer for close family members, it was to her great credit  that  she
    had still managed to hold down employment  to  a  managerial  standard.
    She was currently vulnerable in  that  she  was  expecting  her  second
    child.  Overall, the  judge  found  the  sponsor  to  be  an  extremely
    resourceful and highly resilient person.

30. Looking at all matters in the round, the judge  found  that  there  had
    been some major inconsistencies in the appellant's claim and that there
    were credibility concerns about some key elements  of  it.   She  found
    that, whilst there would be a period of adjustment if the appellant and
    the sponsor were to live in Barbados and  continue  their  family  life
    there, and that there would be an element of hardship for  the  sponsor
    in having to leave her  brother  and  father  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    nevertheless  the  judge  considered  that  these  did  not  amount  to
    insurmountable obstacles.

31. Overall, the judge found that the  interference  with  the  family  and
    private life of the appellant and the sponsor which would be occasioned
    by the  appellant's  removal  was  not  such  as  to  give  rise  to  a
    disproportionate interference with their Article 8 rights.   The  judge
    then ended her decision by directing that it should be communicated  in
    a particular way, so as to avoid any undue concern to the appellant and
    the sponsor in the late stages of the sponsor's pregnancy.

32. The grounds of challenge to the decision asserted that there  had  been
    procedural unfairness on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   I
    do not consider that there is any merit in this ground.   It  is  plain
    that the judge addressed in detail the considerable  oral  and  written
    evidence before her.  That was what she was required to do.   I  cannot
    discern any place where the judge has made a finding that she  was  not
    entitled to reach in all the circumstances.

33.  It  is  contented  that  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   reached
    contradictory findings in paragraphs 27 and 34 of her decision.  Again,
    I do not consider that there is any merit in this.  If one  reads  both
    paragraphs, it is plain what the judge was finding.  The fact that  the
    judge made some positive findings both there and at paragraph 24 of her
    decision is not to be taken as an indication that the judge's  negative
    findings are thereby likely to be wrong.   Particularly  in  a  complex
    case such as this, a judge can  find  certain  matters  which  tend  to
    favour the appellant, and yet conclude that the  appellant  must  fail.
    That, I consider, is precisely what happened in the present case.

34. The issue is taken in the grounds relating  to  what  the  judge  found
    about Victim Support takes the appellant's case nowhere, given that the
    focus was properly on whether the family could live in Barbados  rather
    than in the United Kingdom.

35.   Reference is made to the authority to act given by the  appellant  to
    Mr Mutebuka in late 2016.  Mr Mutebuka developed  this  in  submissions
    before me.  The authority to act tells us little or nothing  about  the
    precise reason why the appellant went to Mr Mutebuka at that time.   It
    also occurred before certain of the events concerning the  sponsor,  to
    which I have made reference.  But, importantly, the appellant  did  not
    apply for leave to remain until 13 October 2017, almost a  year  later.
    The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  well  aware  of  the  submissions
    relating to financial difficulties in putting forward  the  application
    when she made her findings.

36. Mr Mutebuka's submissions, however, go somewhat further.   He  submits,
    if I understand him correctly, that the  bereavement  suffered  by  the
    sponsor meant that the appellant should have  been  treated  compatibly
    with the Secretary  of  State's  policy  in  the  following  way.   The
    respondent should have regarded the fact that the appellant  overstayed
    his visit visa as a matter which should be disregarded and that in some
    way he should be treated as if he still  had  leave  to  remain,  which
    meant that he would be able to satisfy the substantive requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Mr Mutebuka points to  the  following  passages
    from the respondent's guidance at page 160 of the appellant's bundle.

         "Where the applicant is in the UK as a visitor, it means that  they
         have undertaken to remain in the  UK  for  up  to  6-months  before
         leaving.  In all cases, visa or non-visa nationals  have  satisfied
         the entry clearance officer or immigration officer that  they  will
         do so.  Those wishing to come to the UK to settle here as a partner
         or parent  should  apply  for  entry  clearance  under  the  family
         Immigration Rules.  In view of that,  a  visitor  cannot  meet  the
         requirements of the family Immigration Rules to remain in the UK in
         another category in the Immigration Rules.

         Where an application is made by a visitor to  remain,  it  is  only
         where there are exceptional circumstances while the visitor  is  in
         the UK, that a person here as a visitor can remain on the basis  of
         their family life.  Further information on considering  exceptional
         circumstances is  contained  in  the  5-year  partner,  parent  and
         exceptional circumstances guidance ..."

37. Mr Mutebuka's submissions fall down for  the  following  reason.   This
    guidance is talking about what  a  person  should  do  if,  during  the
    currency of their visit  visa,  there  are  exceptional  circumstances,
    which can include bereavement, that mean they  need  to  prolong  their
    stay.  It is not dealing with somebody who overstayed and now seeks  to
    argue that this was because of bereavement or any other matter.   There
    is, accordingly,  no  basis  for  Mr  Mutebuka's  submission  that  the
    Secretary of State misapplied her policy or otherwise failed  correctly
    to  engage  with  the  issue  of  exceptional  circumstances   in   the
    application made to her by the appellant.

38. Indeed, it would be remarkable if a  person  in  the  position  of  the
    appellant could fall to be treated as  if  they  had  never  overstayed
    their leave.  The  respondent  therefore  correctly  engaged  with  the
    matter, as put to her by the appellant.  So too, I find, did the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  She  correctly  noted  towards  the  end  of  her
    decision that the issue of bereavement had fallen away and that she was
    required to address matters in relation to what the  current  situation
    was for the appellant and the sponsor.  As I  have  said,  Mr  Mutebuka
    does not dissent from that.

39. The grounds of challenge assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    assessment of proportionality was "glaringly inadequate".  It  is  said
    that she disproportionately assessed the mental health  aspect  of  the
    appeal strictly by reference to the presence/absence of adequate mental
    health facilities  in  Barbados,  rather  than  carrying  out  what  is
    described  as  a  "sensitive  wider  inner  circle  approach".   It  is
    difficult to understand what that is intended to mean.  Insofar  as  it
    is a challenge to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's overall assessment of
    the evidence, I find that it fails to disclose any error of law.

40. Mr Mutebuka submits that the  judge,  in  particular,  failed  to  have
    proper regard to the expert report.  With respect, that  is  manifestly
    unsustainable. As I have been at pains to indicate, the judge dealt  in
    detail with the report and made findings in respect  of  it  that  were
    clearly open to her in all the circumstances.  Here and elsewhere,  the
    grounds are upon proper analysis no more than a series of disagreements
    with the findings that the judge was entitled to reach.  Mr Mutebuka is
    of course permitted to disagree with those findings; but the issue  for
    me is whether there is an error of law in the judge's decision.  It  is
    plain to me that there is no such error.

41. The judge  who  granted  permission  said  that  "by  way  of  Robinson
    observation" the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  likely  to  have  made
    findings "premised on a standard of proof greater than the  balance  of
    probabilities".  In that regard she pointed  to  paragraph  59  of  the
    judge's decision.  It was there that the judge  found  that  there  was
    little convincing evidence that the sponsor could not  access  relevant
    medication or treatment for her mental health problems in Barbados.

42. It was, in my view, quite wrong of the judge  to  grant  permission  by
    reference to this so-called Robinson point.  Judicial fact finders  are
    not to be criticised merely because, in the course of a long  decision,
    they happen to use a word such as  "convincing".   As  I  have  already
    noted, the judge correctly directed herself at  the  beginning  of  her
    decision to the burden and standard of proof, both in relation  to  the
    Rules and in relation to Article 8.  It is, in my view,  apparent  that
    in saying what she did at paragraph 59 she was not  requiring  anything
    other than proof by reference to the relevant standard.

43. It is regrettable that Judge EM Simpson decided to grant permission  by
    reference to that mistaken observation.  Mr Mutebuka placed  weight  on
    Judge EM Simpson's grant of permission generally;  but  upon  analysis,
    paragraph 2(i) and (ii) of her grant is no more than  a  recitation  or
    summary of provisions in the grounds  of  application  for  permission.
    For the reasons I have given, those grounds do not disclose an error of
    law.  If the judge who granted permission had taken to time to consider
    the grounds  by  reference  to  this  detailed  and  immensely  careful
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, she would have seen,  as  is
    apparent, that there was nothing of substance in them.

44. I turn to an important and, from the point of  the  appellant  and  his
    partner, positive development.  As I have said,  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  the  appellant's  partner
    was pregnant.  Happily, she gave birth to a son on 9 September 2019  in
    Leeds.  I have seen both the birth certificate relating to  that  event
    and a copy of pages of the baby's British passport.  As I  pointed  out
    at the beginning of the hearing, this evidence  plays  no  part  in  my
    consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  law.
    The baby obviously was not born at the time of the hearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal. What  it  does  do,  of  course,  is  change  the  legal
    landscape, so far as the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  are  concerned.
    There is now a British child and I have no doubt, in the light of  this
    fact, that the appellant may well be pursuing a fresh  application  for
    leave.

45. But the present proceedings are concerned with whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in law.  For the reasons I  have  given,  she  did
    not.







    Notice of Decision



    The appeal is dismissed.


    No anonymity direction is made.




                      Signed                     Date: 21 February 2020




                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber

