



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/04331/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On : 27 September 2017                |            On : 22 November 2017    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                  ZAIN JOMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                    Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran of Alex Moran Immigration & Asylum
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

1.    This appeal comes before me  following  the  grant  of  permission  to
      appeal on 24 July 2017.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Syria,  born  on  5  January  1988.  She
      applied for entry clearance to  the  UK  as  a  spouse,  to  join  her
      husband, a Syrian citizen  (hereafter  "the  sponsor")  who  has  been
      granted leave to remain in the UK as a  refugee  from  11  March  2015
      until 10 March 2020.

3.    The appellant made her application for entry clearance on 23  December
      2016. Her application was refused on 5 February 2017.  The  respondent
      put in issue the Suitability, Eligibility and  Financial  requirements
      of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules"). The  respondent
      was satisfied that false information had been submitted with regard to
      the  sponsor's  income  and  employment.  The  respondent  noted   the
      sponsor's  payslips  stated  that  he  was  paid  in  cash  while  the
      employer's letter stated that he was paid by  cheque.  The  respondent
      further noted that the net pay shown on payslips dated  31  July  2016
      and 30 November 2016 was not reflected by corresponding deposits  into
      the sponsor's bank account. The respondent  thus  concluded  that  the
      payslips were non-genuine. In consequence, the respondent could not be
      satisfied that the relationship was genuine and  subsisting  and  that
      the couple intended to live together permanently in the  UK  and  that
      the sponsor's  income  was  as  claimed.  She  therefore  refused  the
      application under paragraph EC-P.1.1 (c) and (d) of  Appendix  FM.  As
      for Article 8 of the ECHR, the respondent concluded that there was  no
      basis to warrant a grant of leave outside of the Rules.

4.    The appellant appealed that decision and her appeal was heard  on  the
      papers in the First-tier Tribunal on 7 June 2017 and  dismissed  in  a
      decision promulgated on 16 June 2017.

5.    The  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A.J.  Parker
      (hereafter "the judge"). The judge considered  the  evidence  and  the
      detailed submissions made on the behalf of the appellant. The judge on
      consideration of letters from the sponsor's  accountant  and  employer
      accepted the payslips were marked "cash" in error, and  that  in  July
      and November 2016 the sponsor was overpaid by  20p.  The  judge  found
      therefore that false information had not been  provided  and  accepted
      that the suitability and eligibility requirements of  the  Rules  were
      met.  The  judge  however  was  not  satisfied  that   the   financial
      requirements were met. The judge noted the  appellant  had  failed  to
      provide all the documents submitted with the  application.  The  judge
      further noted that there was an absence of payslips for 6 months prior
      to the date of application and  original  bank  statements  and  "bank
      slips", and thus concluded that there had been a  non-compliance  with
      Appendix FM-SE of the Rules. The judge accepted there was family  life
      but taking all matters into consideration he concluded that the public
      interest was in the respondent's favour  and  that  the  decision  was
      proportionate. He dismissed the appeal under the Rules  and  on  human
      rights grounds contrary to Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.    Permission to appeal that decision was sought on the grounds that  the
      judge had erred in dismissing the appeal on a basis not raised in  the
      refusal which the appellant had no opportunity to address.
7.    Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

Appeal hearing

8.    At the hearing I heard submissions on  the  error  of  law.  Mr  Tufan
      conceded the judge materially erred in law for the  reasons  given  in
      the grounds. He also observed that there was a clear  misdirection  as
      to the law at [11] albeit this did not form part  of  the  appellant's
      grounds. I did not therefore need to call upon Mr Moran.

9.    Mr Tufan is correct in his submission that the judge made  an  obvious
      error at [11]  in  his  legal  self-direction.  The  judge  failed  to
      recognise that this appeal is governed by part 5 of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act")  as  amended  by  the
      Immigration Act 2014 introduced on 6 April 2015. The error  is  likely
      to have arose as a result of the judge's use of  a  template  decision
      and there was clearly no jurisdiction to dismiss the appeal under  the
      Rules. However, the appeal turns on substance rather than form  and  I
      am satisfied that Mr Tufan was correct to concede the appeal  for  the
      reasons given in the appellant's grounds. I accept the judge erred  in
      dismissing the appeal on an issue not raised by the respondent in  the
      refusal without giving the appellant an  opportunity  to  address  it,
      (see - RM (Kwok On Tong: HC395 para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039).  I
      am satisfied that this was procedurally unfair and that in consequence
      the decision must be set aside.

Re-making the Decision

10.   The advocates were content for the tribunal to proceed to  remake  the
      decision based on the judge's preserved findings of fact.


11.   Mr Moran submitted that the sole issue raised in the refusal had been
      resolved by the judge in the appellant's favour. He submitted that the
      relevant date for the tribunal's assessment was the date of hearing.
      Mr Moran submitted that save for a change of accommodation, the
      sponsor's circumstances had not changed since the date of application.

12.   Mr Tufan did not  rely  on  the  Rule  24  response  and  he  properly
      acknowledged that the requirements "appeared" to have been met  albeit
      he did not concede the appeal.

13.   I have decided this appeal considering all  the  documentary  evidence
      before me.

14.   The Grounds of Appeal are limited by statutory amendments to the  2002
      Act on 6 April 2015. In this case  the  appeal  is  pursued  on  human
      rights grounds contrary to Article 8 of the  ECHR.  In  an  Article  8
      appeal,  it  is  for  the  appellant  to  show  on  the   balance   of
      probabilities that Article 8 is engaged. It is for the  respondent  to
      justify the proportionality of  her  decision.  I  have  assessed  the
      appeal as at the date of hearing.

15.   While I recognise that this is a human rights appeal, it is  incumbent
      on the tribunal to make findings in relation to the  facts  in  issue.
      The factual dispute between the parties is  resolved  by  the  judge's
      findings of fact which are preserved at [20]-[21]. The judge  accepted
      the explanation for the anomalies in the documentation relating to the
      sponsor's employment and income. The judge was thus satisfied that the
      documentation  was  not  false  and  concluded  the  suitability   and
      eligibility requirements were met.  The  only  issue  is  whether  the
      financial requirements are met.

16.   Pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 there is produced to me a duplication of the  documentation
      submitted with the application to  prove  the  financial  requirements
      were met at that date as well as up-to-date evidence of the  sponsor's
      financial circumstances. The original documentation was made available
      at the hearing. The specified evidence required pursuant  to  Appendix
      FM-SE is produced in the form of  payslips,  bank  statements  and  an
      employment letter. That evidence relates to the period  prior  to  the
      date of application from May 2016 to September 2017.  I  am  satisfied
      that the documentation clearly shows the sponsor's income evidenced in
      compliance with the Rules exceeds the minimum  income  requirement  at
      the date  of  decision  and  at  the  date  of  hearing,  and  I  find
      accordingly.

17.   Mr Moran rightly draws  the  tribunal's  attention  to  the  sponsor's
      change  of  accommodation  since  the  date  of  decision.  There   is
      satisfactory and unchallenged evidence  in  the  form  of  a  property
      report demonstrating to the required standard that  the  accommodation
      is clearly adequate.

18.   On the totality of the evidence, I am satisfied that the  requirements
      of the Rules are met and I find accordingly.

19.   It is against these core findings that  I  proceed  to  determine  the
      appeal.

20.   I have applied the five-step approach outlined by Lord Bingham in  the
      House of Lords decision in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL  27.  I  have
      further borne in mind the judgements in,  Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11  and
      Beoku-Betts  [2008]  UKHL  39.  I  remind  myself  that  in  assessing
      proportionality there is no separate test of exceptionality and I must
      consider the Article 8 rights of all affected persons.

21.   There is clearly family life between the appellant and sponsor;  there
      is no dispute about the relationship. I find that the refusal of leave
      to enter will interfere with that family  life,  as  it  will  prevent
      further development by the appellant  of  her  family  life  with  her
      husband in the UK. The decision in relation to the  appellant  was  in
      accordance with the law and was made in pursuit of a legitimate aim of
      maintaining effective immigration control for the economic  well-being
      of the country.

22.   The final question is whether the  interference  is  proportionate  to
      the legitimate public aim. The fact that the appellant  satisfies  the
      requirements of the Rules is a weighty factor in  her  favour  in  the
      balancing exercise required to determine proportionality  and,  whilst
      it is not determinative, Appendix FM of the Rules reflects how,  under
      Article 8, the balance will be struck.

23.   In reaching my conclusions, I  have  regard  to  the  public  interest
      considerations set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act.  I  take  into
      account that the maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in
      the public interest. There is no dispute  that  the  appellant  speaks
      English as this requirement is not put in issue before me, but I treat
      this as a neutral factor in the balancing exercise. I also  take  note
      that the appellant has not proved that she is financially  independent
      within the meaning of that section (see  -  Rhuppiah  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803), but  her  lack  of
      financial independence must be balanced against the fact that she will
      be maintained and accommodated by the sponsor in the UK in  accordance
      with the Rules. I also factor into my assessment that the sponsor is a
      refugee and could not therefore be  reasonably  expected  to  continue
      family life in Syria with the appellant.

24.    In  the  circumstances,  I  find  the  factors  that  weigh  in   the
      appellant's  favour  demonstrate  why  the  public  interest  in   the
      maintenance of firm and fair immigration control should not prevail in
      this case.

25.   Accordingly, I find that the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  entry
      clearance to the appellant amounts to an unjustified interference with
      her family life with the sponsor, and that is it not proportionate  in
      terms of Article 8. I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision and  re-make  it  by
allowing the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral                       Dated: 30 October
2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I make a full fee award. I see no reason why the fee should not  follow  the
event in this case.

Signed:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral                       Dated: 30 October
2017


