
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04873/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2019                |On 18 January 2019            |
|                                  |                              |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                Mr SUNNAT [R]
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Maholtra, Counsel (instructed by Visas 24/7)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy
         on 29 November 2018 against the decision to dismiss the Appellant's
         Article 8 ECHR appeal made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson in a
         decision and reasons promulgated on 23 July 2018.


      2. The Appellant is a national of  Uzbekistan,  who  had  entered  the
         United Kingdom as a student/student nurse  in  2007.   Subsequently
         his leave to remain was extended as a Tier 4 (General) Student  but
         then his leave was curtailed on 23  October  2014  because  it  was
         considered by the Secretary of State that the  Appellant  had  used
         deception in his ETS language test.  The Appellant has  since  been
         an overstayer.  On 29 January 2016 the Appellant made a fresh human
         rights claim, based on his relationship with  his  British  Citizen
         child. The application  was  refused  on  1  February  2016.    The
         Appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was allowed  but  the
         Upper Tribunal found an error of law and the appeal was directed to
         be reheard.  Hence it came before the First-tier Tribunal a  second
         time.


    3.     Judge Monson found  as  a  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  used
         deception in his ETS language test, and had  concealed  that  in  a
         subsequent application to the Home Office.  The Appellant was  thus
         unable to meet the Suitability  provisions  of  Appendix  FM.   The
         removal of the Appellant did not require the  Appellant's  daughter
         ("[S]") to leave  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  consequence.   [S]'s
         parents were separated.  [S] lived with her mother and had  contact
         with her father. EX.1(a) could not apply because [S] did  not  have
         to leave the United  Kingdom.   Nor  did  section  117B(6)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended)  apply,
         for the same reason that [S] did  not  have  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom.  On the other hand, there was very strong public  interest
         in the Appellant's removal because of his two fold  deception,  the
         initial fraud in the test taking and  its  subsequent  concealment.
         The Appellant could return to Uzbekistan and seek  entry  clearance
         from there if he wished. There were  no  exceptional  circumstances
         and there was no  Article  8  ECHR  disproportionality.  Hence  the
         appeal was dismissed.


    4.     Permission  to  appeal  permission  was  refused  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Mark Davies on 30 August 2018  but  was  granted  by
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  McGeachy  because  it  was  considered
         arguable that the judge had not correctly applied the provisions of
         section 117(B)(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002 (as amended).


    5.     A rule 24 notice in the form of a letter to the  Upper  Tribunal
         dated 10 December 2018 from the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department opposed the appeal.


    6.     Miss Maholtra for the Appellant relied on the grounds  submitted
         and the grant of permission to appeal.  The judge had accepted that
         [S]'s best interests were for her father to remain yet it  was  far
         from clear that the father would be able to obtain entry  clearance
         if he left and applied to re-enter as the judge proposed.  Jagdeep,
         an unreported  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  (copy
         provided to the tribunal), showed that the child's  best  interests
         could outweigh the deception of  a  parent.    The  uncertainty  of
         gaining entry clearance made the judge's conclusions unsustainable.
          The Secretary of State for the Home Department's  own  policy  did
         not sanction the Appellant's removal.  The appeal should be allowed
         and the decision remade in the Appellant's favour.


    7.     Mr Bramble for the Respondent relied  on  the  rule  24  notice.
         There was no material error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         determination.  There was no  challenge  to  the  judge's  findings
         about the Appellant's  deception.   The  judge's  conclusions  were
         logical.  The child did not have to leave the United Kingdom.   The
         appeal should be dismissed.


    8.      In  reply,  Miss  Maholtra  emphasised  the  problem   of   the
         Appellant's ability to re-enter the United Kingdom which the  judge
         had not addressed.  Home Office policy (19 December 2018)  had  not
         been applied.


    9.     The grant of permission to appeal was in the tribunal's view  an
         over generous one which had paid insufficient attention to the text
         of the careful determination.  The key finding was that [S] did not
         have to leave the  United  Kingdom  when  her  father  left,  which
         distinguishes the present appeal from the situations  described  in
         the latest Home Office policy guidance.  [S] lives with her mother,
         who is separated from the Appellant, i.e., the  family  is  already
         living apart. [S] is  supported  by  her  mother.   The  unreported
         decision  of  Jagdeep's  only  factual  connection  was  that   the
         appellant  in  that  appeal  was  also  found  to  have   committed
         deception.  The children concerned would have had to have left  the
         United Kingdom if the appellant  left,  unlike  the  facts  of  the
         present appeal.


    10.    Judge Monson had to perform a balancing  exercise  to  determine
         proportionality.  There was  a  strong  case  for  the  Appellant's
         removal in furtherance of the  legitimate  objectives  set  out  in
         Article 8.2 ECHR, impossible to ignore.  It could not be said,  and
         cannot be said, that the Appellant would  not  be  able  to  obtain
         entry clearance under the Immigration Rules if a future application
         were  made,  although  the  Secretary  of  State   for   the   Home
         Department's discretion will fall to be exercised  in  that  event.
         The Appellant is an overstayer with no leave to remain,  caused  by
         his own actions.  It would have been  wholly  illogical  for  those
         actions to have no consequences.  It would have been  proleptic  of
         the judge to have formed any views about  the  prospects  of  entry
         clearance, particularly as it will be a matter of  personal  choice
         for the Appellant how  and  when  to  apply,  and  what  supporting
         evidence to produce.


    11.    In the  tribunal's  judgment  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
         decision was open to him.  There was no challenge  to  the  judge's
         finding that the Appellant had used deception,  twice.   The  judge
         found that it was in the Appellant's child's  best  interests  that
         the Appellant should remain in close  proximity  to  her  where  he
         could continue to take an active role in her care  and  upbringing.
         Nevertheless,  wider  proportionality  considerations  existed,  as
         statute directs.   The reasonableness of [S]'s leaving  the  United
         Kingdom did not arise for consideration because the judge found [S]
         did not have to  leave.   Requiring  the  Appellant  to  return  to
         Uzbekistan to seek entry clearance would not produce  unjustifiably
         harsh consequences, let alone harm to [S].  Nothing in the evidence
         before the judge indicated a different outcome.


    12.    The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  produced  a  thorough,  balanced
         determination, which securely resolved  the  issues.  The  tribunal
         finds that there was no error of law and the onwards appeal must be
         dismissed.




    DECISION


    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


    There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




    Signed                             Dated 10 January 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


