
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04329/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th May 2021                     |On 22nd June 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                            Mohammad abdul Bachir
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, instructed by Hubers Law
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 21 October 1985. He
appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler,
promulgated on 12 October 2020, dismissing his appeal against the refusal
of indefinite leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on limited
grounds, namely the judge's failure to consider Article 8. Permission to
appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on the remaining two grounds on
the basis that these grounds were put before the First-tier Tribunal and
arguably required resolution.

3.   The respondent conceded, in the Rule 24 response, that the appellant
would be granted six months' leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules
in accordance with Khan [2018] EWCA Civ 1684 and Home Office Policy. The
judge having found that the Appellant did not obtain his English language
certificate by deception. It was also conceded that the judge erred in law
in failing to consider Article 8.

4.   The issue before me is whether the judge erred in law in finding the
appellant's application on 30 May 2015 was invalid and therefore, he did
not have ten years' continuous lawful residence.

5.   The judge made the following relevant findings:

             "27. On the evidence, I am satisfied that the respondent has
             discharged the burden on her. The documentary evidence
             includes a letter from the respondent dated 2 September 2015
             in which the appellant was informed of the reasons for
             rejection; and in his written statement the appellant accepted
             that he had submitted a photocopy of his passport and not the
             original when he made his application on 30 May 2015. I find
             the application was invalid.

             28.  The effect of these findings is that the appellant has
             not had lawful leave in the UK since 30 May 2015. Mr Malik
             conceded in the hearing that the appellant was unable to
             demonstrate ten years' continuous lawful residence if his
             application of 30 May 2015 was invalid."



Submissions

6.   Mr Malik relied on his grounds of appeal and submitted there was no
basis in law for the judge's finding that the application of 30 May 2015
was invalid. This finding was wrong and inconsistent with paragraph 34BB of
the Immigration Rules. The appellant had given a good reason for not
submitting his original passport which was not challenged by the respondent
and which the judge failed to take into account. The failure to engage with
unchallenged evidence was an error of law.

7.   Further, the appellant was given no notice and opportunity to submit
his original passport. The appellant had received no correspondence from
the respondent between 30 May 2015 and 2 September 2015 and there was no
evidence from the respondent to show that the letters of 26 June 2015 and
31 July 2015 had been served. These letters were not in the bundle before
the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   Mr Malik submitted the burden was on the respondent to show that the
application was invalid. Although the appellant accepted he had not
produced his original passport, he had given a good reason which had not
been rejected by the respondent. The appellant's failure to challenge the
invalidity of his application dated 30 May 2015 on judicial review was not
relevant because the appellant was challenging the substance of the
decision of 24 January 2018 refusing indefinite leave to remain. The
application of 30 May 2015 was a valid application and the appellant
satisfied paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules and qualified for
indefinite leave to remain.

9.   Ms Everett relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted the respondent
sent letters on 26 June 2015 and 31 July 2015, although she accepted there
was no evidence from the respondent that they had been sent.

10.  In summary, the Rule 24 response makes the following points. The
appellant accepts that he did not provide his original passport and it was
not clear if the argument made in the grounds of appeal was made to the
First-tier Tribunal. The appellant had failed to engage with Ahmed & Others
(valid application - burden of proof) [2018] UKUT 53 (IAC):

             "(2) The fact that an invalidity decision was not immediately
             challenged may be relevant in determining whether the legal
             burden, including an initial evidential burden requiring the
             Secretary of State to raise sufficient evidence to support her
             invalidity allegation, has been discharged.

             (3)  Whether the Secretary of State ultimately discharges the
             legal burden of proof will depend on the nature and quality of
             the evidence she is able to provide , having regard to the
             timing of any request for payment details and the reasons for
             any delay, balanced against any rebuttal evidence produced by
             the appellant."

11.  There was no good reason why the appellant did not challenge the
invalidity notice by judicial review in 2015 and the respondent was not in
fact required to provide detailed evidence as to why the application was
invalid. There was no material error of law.

12.  Further and alternatively, paragraphs 34BB(3)(iii) and (4) were
discretionary and the respondent was not obliged to accept the appellant's
explanation. The appellant's explanation, that his passport was with a
college during the process of his exams and therefore could not be sent in,
was not capable of amounting to a good reason as defined by the example in
the Immigration Rules.

13.  The appellant's reliance on 34C(b) was also misconceived. It was clear
from the letter of 2 September 2015 that the respondent wrote to the
applicant's then solicitors on 26 June 2015 giving him an opportunity to
submit his original passport. The appellant failed to do so.

14.  In response, Mr Malik submitted the respondent had not shown the
letter of 26 June 2015 was served. He accepted the respondent was not
obliged to accept the appellant's explanation but she was obliged to say
why it was not a good reason. The appellant's failure to submit his
passport was beyond his control. He needed his passport to attend his exam.
The reason was a good one and the judge failed to consider it.



Conclusions and reasons.

15.  The relevant Immigration Rules, as at 30 May 2015, are 34BB and 34C.
The salient subsections are set out below. It is not in dispute that an
application for indefinite leave to remain must be accompanied by an
original valid passport unless sub-paragraph (3) applies.

    34B(3)(iii):  This subsection applies where the Secretary of State
             considers that there is good reason beyond the control of the
             applicant, given in or with the application, why the original
             valid passport cannot be provided, e.g. where it has been
             permanently lost and there is no functioning national
             government to issue a replacement.

    34B(4):  Where sub-paragraph 3(iii) applies, the Secretary of State may
             require the person to provide alternative satisfactory
             evidence of his or her identity and nationality.

    34C(b):  The decision maker may contact the applicant or representative
             in writing and give the applicant a single opportunity to
             correct any omission or error which renders the application
             invalid.

16.  The respondent's letter of 2 September 2015, addressed to the
appellant's then representatives, stated: "We wrote to you on 26 June 2015
to notify you that the application was invalid. We told you the specific
reason for this and gave you the opportunity to provide the required fee,
additional information or documentation. You have failed to do so within
the specified timescale and, for the reasons set out below your application
is being rejected as invalid."

17.  It is the appellant's case that he did not submit his original
passport because he needed it as proof of identity to sit for his ACCA
exam. In his witness statement which was before the First-tier Tribunal the
appellant stated:

         "... informed the Home Office that I need to hold the passport for
         my ACCA exam and I will submit the passport as soon as my exam
         finished. I have sent a photocopy instead of the original
         passport."

18.  The appellant accepted he failed to submit his original passport with
his application. His application was prima facie invalid absent a good
reason. The reason given in the application was not a good one nor was it
beyond the applicant's control. On the facts, the appellant could not
benefit from paragraph 34BB(3)(iii).

19.  It is apparent from the decision letter of 2 September 2015 that the
appellant was given an opportunity to produce evidence and he failed to do
so. The applicant did not challenge the invalidity decision at the time.

20.  The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the evidence before him and
properly directed himself in law. His finding that the application was
invalid was open to him on the evidence before him. I find there was no
material error of law in the judge's finding that the appellant's leave
ended on 30 May 2015 and the appellant had failed to establish ten years'
continuous unlawful residence.

21.  The respondent conceded the judge erred in law in failing to consider
Article 8 and confirmed the appellant will be granted six months' leave to
remain in accordance with Home Office policy following the decision in
Khan. Accordingly, there is no public interest in removal.

22.  The decision to dismiss the appeal on human right grounds dated 12
October 2020 is set aside. I remake it as follows. The appeal is allowed on
human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 16 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make  no  fee  award.  The  appellant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
indefinite leave to remain was dismissed.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 16 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

