

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04780/2015
     HU/04786/2015
     HU/04791/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3rd November 2017                  |On 23rd November 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                             MR T.H.L. (1st Appellant)
                             Mrs H.C. (2nd Appellant)
                             Miss S.Y.L. (3rd Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Magne, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. At the outset, I express my gratitude to the representatives for  their
    respective submissions which were  considered  and  extremely  helpful.
    This appeal was one of some quite significant complexity and which took
    a great deal of time to comprehensively assess and decide.

 2. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    White dismissing their appeals on  human  rights  grounds  following  a
    refusal by the Respondent  dated  19th  August  2015.   The  Appellants
    appealed against the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  were  granted
    permission to appeal by Resident Judge  Appleyard.   The  grounds  upon
    which permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

         "1.  The Appellants are all citizens of South Korea; the first  and
             second  Appellants  being  husband  and  wife  and  the  third
             Appellant  their  child.   They  made   application   to   the
             Respondent for leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  grounds  and
             following  refusal  of   that   application   they   appealed.
             Following a hearing, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  P-J  S
             White,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  6th  February  2017,
             dismissed their appeals.  Albeit that in so  doing  Article  8
             fell to be considered the judge records at paragraph 10 of his
             decision that the appeal initially turned on  the  Appellants'
             ability to meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
             under  the  points-based  system  for  leave  as  a   Tier   1
             (Entrepreneur).  The  judge  found  the  first  Appellant  was
             unable to satisfy the requirements of the Tier 1 Rules  either
             in respect of the advertising material produced or in  respect
             of the 'contracts' produced.  He then focused on the issue  of
             a potential breach of human rights.  It was conceded that  the
             appeal  could  not  succeed  under   the   Immigration   Rules
             themselves and that it turned on Article 8.

         2.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal provide  reasons  for
             asserting that had the judge  'properly  concluded'  that  the
             first Appellant's application  met  the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules in light of existing  Home  Office  policies
             then he would have been bound to conclude that  there  was  no
             justification in the removal of  the  Appellants  pursuant  to
             Article 8 of the ECHR.  That final submission  is  not  one  I
             necessary accept but I do find that the  grounds  are  all  at
             least arguable."

 3. I was not provided  with  a  Rule  24  response  from  the  Respondent.
    However, I was addressed in  oral  submissions  by  Mr  Clarke  on  her
    behalf.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of submissions I  indicated  my  view  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision such that it should be set aside,
    but that my reasons for so finding would follow.   Those  I  shall  now
    give shortly.

 5. Before turning to those reasons I record that it was agreed between the
    parties that if Grounds 1, 4 and 5 of the Appellants' Grounds of Appeal
    were made out, those grounds would  collectively  revealed  a  material
    error of law in the determination which would  require  it  to  be  set
    aside and redetermined.  It was also agreed between  the  parties  that
    Grounds 2 and 3 need not be  looked  at  if  I  accepted  Ground  4  as
    revealing an error of law.

 6. It was further accepted by the parties that the assessment of Article 8
    ECHR and its consideration of the public interest and what  that  would
    require in respect of firm and fair immigration  control  would  depend
    upon the extent and manner in which the Immigration Rules governing the
    Tier 1 Entrepreneur points-based system  Rules  were  met.   Mr  Clarke
    accepted that it was the proportion to which the Rules  were  met  that
    could be taken into account in gauging the  public  interest  and  that
    this was appeal not a near-miss scenario. Mr  Clarke  helpfully  stated
    that, in the Secretary of State's view, a near-miss scenario arose when
    an individual appealing contended that their ability  to  "almost  meet
    the rules" formed a basis for the engagement of Article 8  ECHR.   This
    was not that situation, as both parties agreed.

 7. I will summarise the Grounds of Appeal  before  dealing  with  them  in
    turn.

 a) Under Ground 1 the Appellants in essence contended that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  had  erred  in  failing  to  apply  the  principles  of
    Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2002]  UKIAT
    00702 (STARRED) in failing to have regard to the previous  findings  of
    the Upper  Tribunal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  23rd  June  2015
    (comprised of a panel of judges including the Honourable Lord Matthews,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson, and myself).

 b) Ground 2 focused upon the First-tier Tribunal Judge's alleged errors in
    respect of not accepting the Appellant's evidence of contracts  in  the
    form of membership forms for want of specificity.

 c) Ground 3 argued in similar terms that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had
    erred in  his  consideration  of  whether  the  contract  stipulated  a
    duration or not.

 d) Ground 4 focused upon  an  alternative  form  in  which  paragraph  41-
    SD(e)(iv)(2) was met in the form of a letter from Barclays  Bank  which
    was said to have been submitted with the application on 16th July  2014
    and appeared at page 364 of the Appellants' bundle  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 e) Ground 5, finally, focused upon whether the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
    in  failing  to  consider  whether  the  Appellants  had   provided   a
    solicitor's certification which contained the relevant information  and
    whether this matter should have been assessed in light of the fact that
    there was no prohibition on the consideration of new  evidence  and  in
    respect of evidential flexibility as well.

 8. Turning to Ground 1, Mr Magne carefully set out the evidence  regarding
    advertising which had been submitted, including the Appellant's website
    at  page  235  of  the  Appellants'  bundle,  his  evidence  of  domain
    registration on 20th February 2014  at  page  249  of  the  Appellants'
    bundle, an invoice for his web design at page 241  of  the  Appellants'
    bundle dated 25th April 2014 and then made reference to  this  evidence
    against paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) of Appendix A of the immigration  rules
    in respect of advertising material, and whether the Appellant's website
    was sufficient to demonstrate continuous  advertising  for  the  period
    11th July 2014  till  relevant  date.   Mr  Magne  highlighted  that  a
    previous application had been made by the Appellants on  1st  May  2014
    which was refused  on  28th  May  2014  in  relation  to  the  previous
    iteration of  paragraph  41-SD(e)(iii)  and  the  Appellants'  business
    activity.  Mr Magne submitted that the Upper Tribunal had made findings
    of fact at paragraph 31 of the aforementioned  decision  of  23rd  June
    2015 such that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  failing  to  take
    those matters into account.

 9. Mr Clarke on the other hand  argued  that  the  rule  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal considered  in  June  2015  was  a  previous  version  of  41-
    SD(e)(iii) and that the current version of the rule  contained  further
    wording which had not appeared in the previous  version  and  thus  the
    Upper Tribunal's views on the previous rule were not  binding  and  did
    not form a starting point nor need any consideration by the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10. The previous version of paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) states as follows:

         "(e) If the applicant is applying under the provisions  in  (d)  in
             Table 4, he must also provide:

             (iii)    one or more of the following specified documents:

                  (1)   Advertising   or   marketing   material,   including
                      printouts  of  online  advertising,  that  has   been
                      published  locally   or   nationally,   showing   the
                      applicant's name (and the name  of  the  business  if
                      applicable) together with the business  activity  or,
                      where his business is trading online, confirmation of
                      his ownership of the domain  name  of  the  business'
                      website.  ..."

11. The version of 41-SD(e)(iii) in force at the date of the  impugned  and
    appealed decision, however, reads as follows:

         "(e) If the applicant is applying for leave to remain, and has,  or
             was last granted, leave as a Tier 1  (General)  Migrant  or  a
             Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant, he  must  also  provide  the
             following evidence that he meets the  additional  requirements
             set out in Table 4:

             (iii)    one or more  of  the  following  specified  documents
                  covering (either together or  individually)  a  continuous
                  period commencing before 11th July 2014 or 6th April  2015
                  (as applicable), up to no earlier than three months before
                  the date of his application:

                  (1)   advertising   or   marketing   material,   including
                      printouts  of  online  advertising,  that  has   been
                      published locally or nationally

                      (a)  showing the applicant's name (and  the  name  of
                           the business if  applicable)  together  with  the
                           business activity...

                      ..."

12.  The additional requirements set out in Table 4 which a Tier  1  (Post-
    Study Work) Migrant must provide, which corresponds to the  Appellant's
    last leave, are as follows:

    "Table 4: Applications for entry clearance or leave to remain  referred
         to in paragraph 36

    Investment and business activity

    An applicant who is applying for leave to remain and has, or  was  last
         granted leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant will be awarded
         no  points  under  (d)  above  unless  he  meets   the   additional
         requirements in (1) and (2) below.

         (1)  Since before the specified date below and up to  the  date  of
             his application, the applicant  must  have  been  continuously
             engaged in business activity which was not, or did not  amount
             to, activity pursuant to a contract of service with a business
             other  than  his  own  and,  during  such  period,  has   been
             continuously:

                . registered with HM Revenue & Customs as self-employed, or

                . registered with Companies House as a director of a new  or
                  an existing business.  Directors who are on  the  list  of
                  disqualified directors provided by  Companies  House  will
                  not be awarded points.

         ...

         The specified date in (1) and (2) above is:

                . 11th July  2014  if  the  applicant  has,  or  was  lasted
                  granted, leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.

         ..."

13. The specified date is clearly 11th July 2014 and the  access  to  funds
    referred to is not less than �50,000 as the  applicant  was  previously
    granted leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.

14. In respect of these competing versions of the Rules, with respect to Mr
    Clarke, I prefer Mr Magne's submissions.  This is because the  previous
    iteration of the rule does indeed discuss the topic of  advertising  or
    marketing material and business activity, as does the  new  rule.   The
    key distinction, as far as I can  see,  is  that  of  the  "continuous"
    nature of the advertising.  It is also fair to note that  the  previous
    iteration of the rule says that the  printouts  of  online  advertising
    should  be  "published"  locally  or  nationally.   Clearly,  the  word
    publication implies that the advertising material, in  this  case,  and
    before the Upper Tribunal on a previous occasion in terms of the online
    advertising, needed to be "live" or "published", in order for it to  be
    assessed in  the  first  place  by  the  Respondent.   Given  that  the
    application was made on 1st May 2014 and was refused on 20th  May  2014
    and given that the new version of 41-SD(e)(iii) requires  there  to  be
    continuous advertising of the business activity from 11th July 2014  up
    to shortly before the date of application, whilst I do  not  find  that
    the First-tier Tribunal was bound by the previous  finding  that  there
    was business activity in respect of the online advertising, I  do  find
    that the submission in relation to Devaseelan, particularly in relation
    to paragraph 41 of that reported and starred determination, does  apply
    to the instant scenario for the following reasons.

15.  Paragraph  41  of  Devaseelan,  which  appears  at  page  78  of   the
    supplementary Appellants' bundle, states as follows:

         "41. ...

             (6)  If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies  on
                  facts that are not materially different from those put  to
                  the first Adjudicator, and proposes to support  the  claim
                  by what is in essence the same evidence as that  available
                  to the Appellant at  that  time,  the  second  Adjudicator
                  should  regard  the  issues  as  settled  by   the   first
                  Adjudicator's determination and make his findings in  line
                  with that determination rather than allowing the matter to
                  be re-litigated."

                  (Emphasis appears in the original text)

16. In my view, that dicta clearly applies here, given that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had before it an Appellant who was  relying  upon  facts  that
    were not materially different in that the Appellant  was  relying  upon
    the online advertising which he  had  previously  relied  upon  in  his
    previous application and had proposed to support his appeal by what was
    in essence the same evidence as that available to him in  the  previous
    appeal and therefore the First-tier Tribunal should at least  have  had
    regard to the issue of the business  activity  having  been  made  out,
    notwithstanding that it did not have a "continuity" finding attached to
    it, that being the key distinction between the previous  rule  and  the
    current rule.

17. As such, although the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  not  referred  to
    this finding by Mr Magne in his submissions before it,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision inadvertently reveals a  wholly  unforced  material
    error of law in omitting regard to the  finding  as  described  in  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision at  paragraph  31  concerning  paragraph  41-
    SD(e)(iii) and  the  issue  of  whether  the  evidence  satisfied  that
    requirement.  Thus, I do find that Ground 1 has established an error in
    law in the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

18. Given the acceptance by the parties that I would not need  to  consider
    Grounds 2 and 3 if I were satisfied on Ground 4, I consider that ground
    next to see where it may lead.

19. Having considered this Ground at length, I do find that there has  been
    an error of law in  the  decision,  albeit  an  entirely  unforced  and
    inadvertent one, yet again.  In respect of this ground Mr Magne submits
    in  essence  that   although   the   First-tier   Tribunal   considered
    subparagraph (1) of paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv) in relation to contracts for
    service to establish that the business is "trading", the  Tribunal  did
    not  consider  subparagraph  (2)  of  paragraph  41-SD(e)(iv)  in   the
    alternative in relation to whether the business' trade was corroborated
    by  original  letters  from  a   UK-regulated   financial   institution
    establishing trading (during the period of 11th July 2014 to no earlier
    than three months before the date of his  application).   For  ease  of
    reference, paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv) states as follows:

         "(e) If the applicant is applying for leave to remain, and has,  or
             was last granted, leave as a Tier 1  (General)  Migrant  or  a
             Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant, he  must  also  provide  the
             following evidence that he meets the  additional  requirements
             set out in Table 4:

             (iv) one or more of the following documents  showing  trading,
                  which must  cover  (either  together  or  individually)  a
                  continuous period commencing before  11  July  2014  or  6
                  April 2015 (as applicable), up to no  earlier  than  three
                  months before the date of his application:

                  (2)   one  or  more  original  letters  from  UK-regulated
                      financial institutions with which the applicant has a
                      business bank account, on  the  institution's  headed
                      paper, confirming the dates the business was  trading
                      during the period referred to at (iv) above...

         ..."

20. This omission was entirely due to Mr Magne's  omission  in  failing  to
    make submissions upon the point before the First-tier Tribunal although
    the evidence was before it.  As Mr Clarke rightly  pointed  out,  there
    can be no culpability in respect of Judge White's  assessment  of  this
    Rule, given that he was not referred to it. However, as I  am  required
    to consider whether there is any perversity in the decision, I do  find
    that there is an unforced inadvertent perversity which has arisen as  a
    result of the determination containing what  is  a  potential  material
    error  of  fact  in  that  the  letter  from  the  financial  regulated
    institution at page 364 of the bundle has not been considered by  Judge
    White and was potentially a means by which the Rule could have been met
    (I will say no more on whether this rule is met by this evidence, as  I
    shall turn to it shortly).

21.  The  importance  and  implication  of  this  is   that   the   judge's
    consideration of contracts for service  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination at paragraphs 17 to 19 is only one means by which trading
    could have been established and, as such, the omission to consider  the
    alternate form of trading in  the  form  of  confirmation  from  a  UK-
    regulated financial institution is a material omission  such  that  the
    decision is erroneous in this regard.

22. Turning finally to Ground 5,  Mr  Clarke  pragmatically  accepted  that
    there was no finding made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of
    whether the Appellant  had  provided  a  solicitor's  certification  in
    respect of the third party funds from the Appellant's brother which met
    the requirements of paragraph 41-SD(d)(ii).

23. As such, given my findings in respect of Grounds 1, 4 and 5, I do  find
    that these grounds collectively reveal a material  error  in  law  such
    that the determination should be set aside as it  is  feasible,  as  Mr
    Clarke rightfully accepted, that the resultant assessment of the public
    interest may have been quite different  if  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    respect of qualifying for a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  visa  were
    met.  In light of those findings I do not go on to consider  Grounds  2
    and 3 as a material error of law has been discovered.  The decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is thus set aside.

Remaking the Decision

24. In light of my decision that there was a material error of law, which I
    announced to the parties at the close of their submissions, I indicated
    that I would go on to remake the appeal in respect of the remaining and
    discrete issues of the assessment of the advertising material  pursuant
    to paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii)(1) and in respect of the trading requirement
    pursuant to paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv)(2) and in respect of the solicitor's
    certification in respect of the third party funds  available  from  the
    Appellant's brother and whether this evidence should have  been  called
    out for  by  virtue  of  evidential  flexibility  -  in  light  of  the
    information missing from the solicitor's letter of 14th July 2015 which
    was the name  of  the  1st  Appellant,  which  could  have  been  found
    elsewhere, in the declarations for example, which  missing  information
    would have possibly resulted in the Appellant meeting the Rules in this
    respect in relation to paragraph 41-SD(d) and when using money from the
    third party.

25. Taking these remaining  issues  in  turn,  firstly,  in  my  view,  the
    Appellant has established on the evidence before me  that  he  has  met
    paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) in relation to  establishing  he  has  provided
    advertising or marketing material commencing before 11th July 2014,  up
    to no earlier than 20th April 2015 (i.e. three months before  the  date
    of his application on 20th July 2015).  Specifically, I note  that  the
    Appellant's previous application of 1st May 2014 was  refused  on  28th
    May 2014 in relation to whether  the  printouts  from  the  Appellant's
    website made mention of the services he provided.  As  observed  above,
    it  must  follow  that  the  Appellant  provided  evidence  of   online
    advertising dated prior to his application of 1st May 2014,  which  the
    Respondent considered and in her so considering refused the application
    on 20th May 2014 because she was not satisfied with the content of  the
    website printouts.  Ergo, it  must  follow  that  the  website  was  in
    existence prior to 1st May 2014 so that the Appellant could  produce  a
    printout of that website submitted with his first application.

26. In accordance with paragraph 41  of  Devaseelan  (supra),  I  have  due
    regard to the finding of the Upper Tribunal  at  paragraph  31  of  its
    decision of 23rd June 2015 in  relation  to  the  advertising  material
    referring to the relevant business activity for the Appellant's company
    which formed my starting point, so far as it  goes.   That  finding  in
    conjunction with the relevant evidence, that being  the  printout  from
    the website of 15th July 2015 giving  the  Appellant's  name,  business
    email and business activity and the invoice from LCN.com for one year's
    domain hosting dated 20th February 2014 and in particular  the  invoice
    at page 241 from SEO Image Company, which invoices  the  Appellant  for
    the creation of his internet website on 25th April  2014,  collectively
    establishes that the Appellant's website was live before 1st  May  2014
    till date and he has thus continuously advertised his business  in  the
    form of providing advertising or marketing material,  in  other  words,
    printouts of his live website which were  published  or  "live",  which
    show his name, the name of his business and his business activity  from
    before 1st May 2014 till date.

27. Turning to the next issue in respect of paragraph  41-SD(e)(iv)(2)  and
    the  production  of  documents  showing  "trading"  covering  the  same
    continuous period commencing 11th July 2014 up to no earlier than  20th
    April 2015, I note the evidence  provided  for  the  purposes  of  this
    rehearing by Mr Magne, which includes three screen  captures  from  his
    office law firm computer. These screen captures show on the first  page
    the contents of his "documents" tab, which contains a  folder  entitled
    "clients" and a subfolder with the title "L" and  a  subfolder  further
    bearing the 1st Appellant's initials and the designation "dm 493" and a
    subfolder within that entitled "leave to remain application" and yet  a
    further subfolder within that entitled "copy of application". I further
    note that that subfolder contains a scanned file which purports to be a
    copy of the application submitted by the Appellants which Mr Magne  had
    scanned and which was sent to the  Respondent  on  20th  July  2015.  I
    accept this reflects a scanned copy of the application that was sent to
    the Respondent. On the 364th page of  that  scanned  application  which
    corresponds to the 364th page of  the  Appellants'  bundle  before  me,
    appears a letter from Chris Mullings, Barclays Business Manager,  dated
    16th July 2015 (three days  before  the  date  of  application),  which
    although  not  mentioned  in  Mr  Magne's  covering  letter   for   the
    application does appear in the soft copy of the  application  which  he
    has scanned and saved to his office  computer  in  order  to  retain  a
    record of what was submitted.  Mr Magne is an Officer of the Court  and
    for the sake of completeness, I indicate that I accept  his  word  that
    this  soft  copy  reflects  a  contemporaneous  scanned  copy  of   the
    application prior to it being submitted. That original document was not
    returned to the Appellants by the Respondent and its  present  location
    is currently unclear, but a copy was placed before me which I  am  just
    able to read.

28. As such, I am prepared to take the copy of  the  letter  from  Barclays
    Bank at page 364 into account.  In relation to that letter and  whether
    it meets the requirements of paragraph 41-SD(d)(iv)(2), I find that  it
    is a letter from a UK-regulated financial institution  with  which  the
    1st Appellant has a business bank account and I do find that it appears
    on the institution's headed paper given that I can discern  a  familiar
    Barclays eagle in the top left-hand side and given that the  footer  to
    the letter  contains  the  name  Barclays  Bank  PLC  and  that  it  is
    authorised by the Prudential Regulation  Authority  and  the  Financial
    Conduct Authority and gives a Financial  Services  registration  number
    and also reflects that  it  is  registered  at  the  office  address  1
    Churchill Place, London E14 5HP which is the headquarters for  Barclays
    Plc.  The letter further states in terms that: "The company opened  its
    bank account with Barclays on 24/01/2014, started trading straight away
    and continues to trade to this date", the date on the letter being 16th
    July 2015.  The contents of  the  letter  thus  confirm  that  the  1st
    Appellant's business traded  before,  during  and  after  the  relevant
    period, that relevant period being 11th July 2014 to 20th  April  2015.
    As such, I find that this letter to be satisfactory evidence of trading
    which meets paragraph 41-SD(d)(iv)(2).

29. Finally, turning to the third and final issue in respect  of  paragraph
    41-SD(d)(ii), I pause to note that the refusal letter  of  19th  August
    2015 does not mention  a  specific  subparagraph  in  relation  to  the
    missing information from  the  solicitor's  letter.   However,  I  take
    judicial notice of the fact  that  paragraph  41-SD(d)  of  Appendix  A
    relates to third party funds and contains requirements  listed  therein
    in  its  subparagraphs  in  relation  to  a   letter   from   a   legal
    representative at subparagraph (ii) of 41-SD(d), specifically that  the
    letter must show the applicant's name (see paragraph 41-SD(d)(ii)(4)).

30. For ease of reference, paragraph 41-SD(d)(ii) states as follows:

         "(d) If the applicant is applying using money from a  third  party,
             which  is  either  held  by  the  third  party  or  has   been
             transferred to the applicant less than 90 days before the date
             of the application, he  must  provide  all  of  the  following
             specified documents, in addition to the specified documents in
             (c) above:

             (ii) A letter from a legal representative who  is  independent
                  from the third party  or  third  parties,  confirming  the
                  validity of signatures  on  each  third-party  declaration
                  provided, which confirms that the declaration(s) from  the
                  third party or parties  contains  the  signatures  of  the
                  people stated. It can be  a  single  letter  covering  all
                  third-party permissions, or several letters  from  several
                  legal representatives. It must be an original  letter  and
                  not a copy, and it must be  from  a  legal  representative
                  permitted to practise in the country where the third party
                  or  the  money  is.  The  letter  must  clearly  show  the
                  following:

             (1) the  name  of  the  legal  representative  confirming  the
                  details,

             (2) the registration or authority of the legal  representative
                  to practise legally in the country in which the permission
                  or permissions was or were given,

             (3) the date of the confirmation letter,

             (4) the applicant's name (and the name of the applicant's team
                  partner's name where relevant)  and,  where  (b)  applies,
                  that the applicant is a director of the business named  in
                  each third-party declaration,

             (5)  the  third  party's  name  (which  cannot  be  the  legal
                  representative themselves or their client),

             (6) that the declaration from the third party  is  signed  and
                  valid, and

             (7) if the third party is not a Venture Capitalist Firm,  Seed
                  Funding  Competition  or   UK   or   Devolved   Government
                  Department (or  intermediary  public  body  authorised  to
                  award funds from that Department), the number of the third
                  party  or  their  authorised   representative's   identity
                  document (such as a passport or national  identity  card),
                  the place of issue and dates of issue and expiry.

31. In respect of the letter in question not carrying the  1st  Appellant's
    name, I do find that  the  evidential  flexibility  policy  applies  in
    respect of this omission, given that the solicitor's  letter  submitted
    in respect of the  third  party  funds  from  the  Appellant's  brother
    contains the requisite identified features but for the Appellant's name
    and, given  that  this  missing  information  was  not  only  available
    elsewhere in the application but was also covered by  the  Respondent's
    evidential flexibility policy of August 2015, which appears at page 490
    of the Appellants' bundle and which, I find, should have  been  applied
    in light of my previous findings that the other  subparagraphs  of  the
    entrepreneurial Rules were met  (see  the  Supreme  Court  judgment  of
    Mandalia v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 59 at
    paragraph 31 in  particular  for  illustration  of  the  principles  of
    evidential flexibility).

32. Given my findings, which, in effect, are a substitution for  paragraphs
    14 onwards of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, I go on  to  consider
    Article 8 in the following terms.

Article 8 Consideration

33. As already mentioned above, it was agreed by the parties  that  if  the
    Rules governing the applicant's entrepreneurial  visa  were  met,  this
    would have an impact upon the public interest in respect of  Article  8
    ECHR.  I am grateful to Mr Clarke for his sensible submission  that  if
    the Rules were met, the public interest in  respect  of  an  Article  8
    assessment outside the Rules under the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights would only carry "nominal" weight.  I thus turn  to  the  Razgar
    questions and consider them as follows.

34. For ease of reference, those questions raised in the  House  of  Lords'
    decision of R (on the application of Razgar) v Sectretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27 state as follows at paragraph 17  of
    Lord Bingham's judgment:

         "(i) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (ii) If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (iii)    If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (v)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

35. In respect of the first question I do find that there  is  interference
    with the exercise of the 1st  Appellant's  right  to  respect  for  his
    private life, given that the Appellant has maintained a lawful presence
    in the United Kingdom since his entry on 22nd December 2010  until  the
    dismissal of his appeal by the Upper Tribunal on  23rd  June  2015  and
    given that there was an application made within 28 days of  permissible
    overstaying on 20th July 2015.

36. In respect of the second question, the interference  will  in  my  view
    have consequences of gravity as to potentially engage the operation  of
    Article 8 and will have more than a technical interference as  it  will
    result in the applicant being in a position  where  he  would  have  no
    option but to leave the United Kingdom  despite  having  established  a
    business.

37. In respect of the third question of  whether  the  interference  is  in
    accordance with the law, I  note  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decisions  in
    Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  00112  (IAC),  in
    particular paragraphs 18 to 24, and I also note  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    reported decision in Adjei (visit visas - Article  8)  (Rev  1)  [2015]
    UKUT 0261 (IAC),  which  confirm  that  where  the  Tribunal  considers
    whether a person satisfies the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and needs to decide upon the person's human rights, the requirements of
    the Rules will illuminate the Article  8  balancing  exercise  and,  as
    stated by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern at paragraph 13  of  Adjei,  in
    citing Mostafa:

    "If a person's circumstances do satisfy the Immigration Rules and  they
         have not acted in a way that undermines the system  of  immigration
         control, a refusal [of  entry  clearance]  is  liable  to  infringe
         Article 8."

38. On that note and in respect of the third question, the decision  is  in
    accordance with the law.

39. In respect of the fourth question, I pause to first give regard to  the
    public interest  as  mandated  by  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest. It  is  in  the  public
    interest, and in particular in the interests of the economic well-being
    of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in  the
    United Kingdom are able to speak English, which the 1st  Appellant  can
    do.  Furthermore, it is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
    the interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
    persons who  seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
    financially independent, and I have received no indication  that  these
    Appellants are not so.  I record that little weight should be given  to
    a private life that is established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the
    person is in the United Kingdom  unlawfully,  however  the  overstaying
    here has been less than 28 days.  I also acknowledge that little weight
    should be given to a private life established by a  person  at  a  time
    when the person's immigration status is precarious.

40. However,  having  taken  the  above  into  account,  in  my  view,  the
    interference in the Appellants' private lives is not a  necessary  one,
    given that the immigration  rules  governing  Entrepreneurs  and  their
    dependents are met.  Thus, in my view, whilst the decision demonstrates
    the lawfulness  in  pursuing  firm  and  fair  immigration  control,  I
    accordingly give that public interest a "nominal"  weight  as  accepted
    was possible by Mr Clarke and also given my view that the  interference
    is unnecessary.

41. Although it may be feasible in theory to stop there, I do not do so but
    go on to consider the fifth question to complete my assessment  and  in
    keeping with the reported decisions of the Upper Tribunal.

42. In terms of my independent proportionality assessment, I find that  the
    decision is disproportionate and infringes Article 8. As  noted  above,
    the  Appellants'  circumstances  do  satisfy  the   immigration   rules
    governing Tier 1 Entrepreneurs, when combining the uninfected  analysis
    and undisputed findings by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraphs  9  to
    13 of the previous decision, alongside my analysis and  above  findings
    concerning the three remaining issues under the rules.  The consequence
    of this is that the rules are  met  and  consequently,  notwithstanding
    section 117B of the 2002 Act, the public interest  is  given  "nominal"
    weight and the interference is unnecessary in any event.  Having  noted
    the  Appellant's  immigration  history   and   his   lawful   presence,
    notwithstanding the 28 days of  permissible  overstaying,  he  has  not
    acted in a way that undermines the system of immigration control. Thus,
    I do find that, balancing the competing interests of the Appellants and
    the nominal public interest in firm and  fair  immigration  control  in
    respect of removing those without leave to remain, the  effect  of  the
    impugned decision is disproportionate and the Appellants  rights  would
    be infringed were they to be removed for the reasons given.

Notice of Decision

43. Given my findings above that the immigration rules are in fact met, the
    appeal is allowed on the basis of the Appellants' private  lives  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

Anonymity

44. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and I  was  not
    asked to make one either and do not see any reason to do  so.  However,
    given that a child is involved in these proceedings, I have  sought  to
    abbreviate  the  names  of  the  Appellants  to   avoid   unnecessarily
    discussing the identity of the child, directly or indirectly.

Fee Award

45. I do not make a fee award as my decision is based upon the evidence  as
    presented before me and the submissions made today,  a  great  many  of
    which were not made by Mr Magne before the First-tier Tribunal.





Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

