
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04542/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 May 2018                                 |On 14 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               muhammad usman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Mair, instructed by Prolegis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Muhammad Usman, was born on 20 April 1989 and is a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  on  5
    October  2009  as  a  student.   On  24  May  2012,  he   was   granted
    discretionary leave to remain on the basis of his family life.   On  20
    May 2015, he  applied  to  extend  that  discretionary  leave  but  his
    application was refused by a  decision  dated  28  January  2016.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Thorne) which,  in
    a decision promulgated on 30 January 2017, dismissed the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Inter alia, the appellant's application  was  refused  under  paragraph
    322(1) of HC 395 (as amended) on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had
    perpetrated deception during a TOEIC English  language  test  in  2011.
    During an interview in connection with his most recent  application  in
    December 2015, the appellant  had  shown  a  poor  proficiency  in  the
    English language.  In consequence, the Secretary of State  was  of  the
    view that the appellant had cheated in his TOEIC language test and that
    his test certificate had been fraudulently obtained by  the  use  of  a
    proxy.

 3. Although he dismissed the appellant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds,
    Judge Thorne considered  at  considerable  length  the  allegations  of
    deception pursuant to paragraph 322.  Before determining the appeal  on
    the only ground (Article 8), the judge found at [77] that, "In light of
    my analysis and a myriad of difficulties with the respondent's evidence
    outlined above, I conclude that the Secretary of State  has  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof in fraud on the part of the appellant.  I
    am further fortified in this conclusion by my analysis of A's own  oral
    testimony outlined below."  The judge concluded the appellant  had,  as
    he had claimed, been living in the United Kingdom for a number of years
    and he noted also that he gave evidence before the Tribunal in English.
     Those findings of the judge have not been challenged by the  Secretary
    of State.

 4. Miss Mair submitted that the Secretary of State was in  breach  of  her
    own policy by refusing to grant  the  appellant  an  extension  of  his
    discretionary  leave.   The  policy  in  question  is   Asylum   Policy
    Instruction: Discretionary Leave (V7.0: 18 August 2015).  At 10.1,  the
    policy document provides that:

         Caseworkers must consider whether the circumstances  prevailing  at
         the time of the original grant of leave continue at the date of the
         decision.  If the circumstances remain  the  same,  the  individual
         does  not  fall  within  the  restrictive  leave  policy  and   the
         criminality thresholds do not apply,  a  further  period  of  three
         years  DL  [discretionary  leave]  should  normally   be   granted.
         Caseworkers must consider whether there are any circumstances  that
         may warrant departure from the standard period of leave.

         If there had been significant changes that mean  the  applicant  no
         longer qualifies for leave under the DL  policy  or  the  applicant
         falls for refusal on the basis of criminality,  the  further  leave
         application should be refused.

 5. Notwithstanding that the appellant is an adult,  he  had  been  granted
    discretionary leave on the basis of his family  life  with  his  family
    members in the  United  Kingdom.   Those  family  members  are  British
    citizens.  Miss Mair submitted that there was no  evidence  at  all  to
    suggest that  the  appellant's  circumstances  had  changed  since  the
    previous grant of discretionary leave; he continues to reside with  his
    United Kingdom family members.  The only change  in  his  circumstances
    had been the allegation that he had committed  deception  in  obtaining
    the ETS certificate.  Miss Mair acknowledged that, had the judge upheld
    that allegation, then the Secretary of State would  not  have  breached
    her own policy by refusing a further grant of discretionary leave;  the
    deception  would  have  constituted  a  change   in   the   appellant's
    circumstances justifying refusal.  However, the effect of  the  judge's
    decision is that the appellant did not commit any deception  either  as
    alleged  or  at  all.   As  a  consequence,  his  circumstances  remain
    unaltered and, in compliance with her  own  policy,  the  Secretary  of
    State should have granted a further period of  discretionary  leave  to
    the appellant.

 6. Mr Diwnycz,  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  made  no  submissions  in
    opposition to those advanced by Miss  Mair.   In  my  opinion,  he  was
    correct not to do so.  Good administration continues to rely  upon  the
    Secretary of State  putting  into  effect  her  published  policies  in
    individual applications (see SF and Others  (guidance:  post-2014  Act)
    Albania [2017]  UKUT  00120  (IAC)).   Judge  Thorne  should  not  have
    proceeded with the Article 8 appeal on the basis that he was faced with
    a tabula rasa.  Not  surprisingly,  having  ignored  the  Secretary  of
    State's policy, the judge concluded that the adult  appellant  was  not
    entitled to the protection of his family life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    under Article 8.  However, the terms of the policy are quite clear.   I
    accept Miss Mair's submission that the mere fact that the appellant  is
    now older than he was at the time of the last  grant  of  discretionary
    leave cannot, for the  purposes  of  the  application  of  the  policy,
    constitute a change of circumstances.  It follows that the judge should
    have allowed the Article 8 appeal.

 7. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I have remade the
    decision and, in the light of what I say above, I allow the  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 30  January
2017 is set aside.  The Tribunal's finding as regards paragraph  322  of  HC
395 is preserved.  I have remade the decision on Article 8 ECHR grounds.   I
allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds against the decision of the  Secretary
of State dated 28 January 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 6 MAY 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




