
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/04574/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 June 2017                     |on 22 June 2017                   |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                 HASSAN RAZA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr H B Samesa Janneh instructed by Sovereign Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 16 July 1985 and is a national of Pakistan.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge O'Donnell promulgated on 22 September 2016  which  allowed
   the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  4
   February 2016 to refuse the Appellants application for leave to remain as
   a spouse of a person present and settled in the UK.
5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons which were  in  essence  that
   it was not accepted that the marriage was genuine and subsisting and that
   the Appellant had not established by the evidence required under Appendix
   FM-SE that the Appellant met the financial requirements of the Rules. The
   refusal letter stated that the Appellant had a right  of  appeal  because
   the Secretary of State decided to refuse a human rights claim.


The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge O'Donnell ("the Judge") allowed the appeal against the Respondent's
   decision under the  Immigration  Rules  finding  that  the  marriage  was
   genuine and subsisting and that at the date of the decision the Appellant
   met the financial requirements of the Rules.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge was wrong  to  take
   into account specified evidence arising after the date of application  as
   Appendix FM-SE required that evidence to relate to a period prior to  the
   date of application.
8.  On 29 December 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge OGarro gave permission  to
   appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mc  Vitie  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

   a) The Judge allowed the appeal under the Rules when there was  no  power
      to do so as this was the refusal of a human rights claim: there is  no
      appeal against the refusal under the Rules.

   b) Had the Judge considered the matter on the  correct  basis  he  should
      have considered s 117B of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act
      2002.

10. On behalf of  the  Appellant   Mr  Janneh  conceded  that  there  was  a
   material error and asked me to set aside the decision and  remake  it  on
   the absis of the material before me.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

12. The Appellant in this case made  an  application  for  leave  to  remain
   under the Rules on the basis of his marriage to a  UK  citizen.  Both  Mr
   Senneh and Mr Mc Vitie accepted, as they must, that there was  no  appeal
   against the refusal decision under the Immigration Rules  only  on  human
   rights grounds. Therefore the Judge's decision  in  allowing  the  appeal
   under the Rules was underpinned by a fundamental error of law.   While  a
   consideration of the human rights appeal may have entitled the  Judge  to
   consider whether the Appellant had met the requirements of the Rules,  as
   that was relevant to the issue of proportionality, again I  am  satisfied
   that the mandatory requirements of  Appendix  FM  SE,  that  evidence  of
   income must predate the date of application, was overlooked by the  Judge
   and  the  Appellant  did  not  at  the  date  of  application  meet   the
   requirements of Appendix FM by reference to Appendix FM SE.

13.  It was also accepted  that  had  the  appeal  been  considered  on  the
   correct basis, as a human  rights  appeal,  the  Judge  would  have  been
   obliged to consider the provisions of  paragraph  117B  as  there  was  a
   British Citizen child. Therefore the  error  made  was  material  to  the
   outcome of the decision.

14. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to  address  and  determine  this
   appeal on the correct legal basis constitutes a clear error of law.  This
   error I consider to be material since had  the  Tribunal  conducted  this
   exercise the outcome could have been different. That in my  view  is  the
   correct test to apply.



Remaking the decision

The Law

15. The  Appellant's  appeal  is  pursuant  to  Section  82(1)  (b)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ('the  2002  Act')  which
   provides that a person may appeal to the Tribunal where the Secretary  of
   State has decided to refuse a human rights claim. S84 of the Act provides
   that an appeal under s82(1)(b) must be  brought  on  the  ground  that  a
   decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

16. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act  provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
   required to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration  Acts
   would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it  must,
   in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in  all  cases
   to  the  considerations  listed  in  section117B  of   the   Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014).
   Section 117 (3) provides that the 'public interest  question'  means  the
   question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for
   private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

17. The S117B considerations are as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner,that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

Section 117B6


  18. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

           "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
           who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;"

Findings

19. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round before  reaching
    any findings.  I have done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
    compartmentalised my findings in some respects below, I must  emphasise
    the findings have only been made having taken account of  the  evidence
    as a whole.
20. The Appellant is a 31 old citizen of Pakistan who was refused leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  his  family  and  private
    life.
21. The Appellant appeals the decision of the Respondent on the basis  that
    the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

22. I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions posed by Lord
    Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27


Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?


23. I am satisfied  that  the  Appellant  and  Jasmeen  Ellahi,  a  British
    citizen, have a family life in the United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  and
    Ms Ellahi married on 11 October 2015 in an Islamic ceremony  and  on  9
    December 2015 they married in a civil ceremony. On 27  July  2016  they
    had a son and as at the date of hearing before me I accept that she  is
    pregnant again.


If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


24. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


25. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate his conduct
    by reference to it.


If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?


26. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy their private and family life.


If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?


27. In making the assessment of the best interests of the children  I  have
    also taken into account ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011]  UKSC  4  where  Lady
    Hale noted Article 3(1) of the UNCRC which states that "in all  actions
    concerning  children,  whether  undertaken  by  ...  courts   of   law,
    administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of
    the child shall be a primary consideration."

28. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among  other
    things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary  of  State
    must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that  those   functions   "are
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom".  Lady  Hale  stated
    that "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not  be
    "in accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  article  8(2)".
    Although she noted that national authorities were expected to treat the
    best interests of a child as "a primary consideration", she  added  "Of
    course, despite the looseness with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes
    used, "a primary  consideration"  is  not  the  same  as  "the  primary
    consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration".

29. In relation to the Appellant's child I accept that the  starting  point
    is that it is in his best interests to be brought up  by  both  parents
    together.


30. Consideration of the issue of  proportionality  is  'consideration  of
    "the public interest question" as defined by section  117A(3)  of  the
    2002 Act. I am therefore required by section 117A(2)(a) to have regard
    to the considerations listed in section 117B.


31. I am satisfied that the Appellants child by his wife is  a  qualifying
    child under section117B6 as he is a British citizen. I am required  to
    consider therefore whether it would be reasonable to expect the  child
    to leave the United Kingdom because if I do not find it is  reasonable
    then the public interest does not require the Appellants removal.   Mr
    Mc Vitie  conceded  that  by  reference  to  the  Secretary  of  State
    published guidance taking into  account  that  there  was  no  adverse
    immigration history and no criminality it was not reasonable to expect
    the child to leave the United Kingdom. Therefore in  relation  to  the
    issue of proportionality the public  interest  does  not  require  the
    Appellant to be removed.


32. I have considered the issue  of  anonymity  in  the  present  instance.
    Neither party has sought a direction. The Appellant is an adult and not
    a vulnerable person. I see no reason to  make  any  direction  in  this
    regard.


CONCLUSION

33. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination be set aside.

Decision

34. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal such that the decision is set aside

35. I remake the appeal.

36. I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

Signed                                                              Date 22
June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

