
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04838/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 April 2017                    |On 4 May 2017                         |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


                                   Between

                                Muhammad ayaz

                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr ZH Mahmood (registered with OISC)
For the respondent:    Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     This is an appeal  by  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  1986  against  a
    decision of  Judge  James  Devittie,  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  1
    September 2016.  This appellant had been here as a student, but  failed
    to enrol in the second year of his course, following which he  was  met
    with by the police and immigration  officers,  and  removal  directions
    were given.

2.   The appellant made further applications on the  basis  of  private  and
    family life, and on 15 January 2015 went through an Islamic ceremony of
    marriage with a British citizen.  A subsequent application for judicial
    review was made, but withdrawn, and in due course he gave notice  of  a
    civil marriage with his partner, and made a  private  and  family  life
    application on 17 July 2015, citing his partner and her  son,  Carlton,
    who was by then 8.

3.   On 18 August 2015 this was refused because it was said  there  were  no
    very  significant  obstacles  to  his  return  to  Pakistan   and   his
    relationship with his partner and stepson was doubted.  There has  been
    a further significant development since then by way of a birth  to  the
    appellant's partner of his son, born on 22 April 2016.

4.   The judge, in a very detailed and  painstaking  decision  accepted  the
    appellant's relationship with the applicant's  partner,  and  with  her
    child.   He  dismissed  the  appeal  on  those  points,   but   without
    considering that the appellant's own child was a  British  citizen;  so
    the remaining question was  whether  that  child  could  reasonably  be
    expected to return with the  appellant  and  his  mother  to  Pakistan.
    However, Mr Wilding helpfully pointed out that Home Office policy  does
    not require return in such circumstances, and the  importance  of  Home
    Office policy is underlined by the decision in SF and Others (Guidance,
    post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC) as follows:-

         Even in the absence of a 'not in accordance with the law' ground of
         appeal, the  Tribunal  ought  to  take  the  Secretary  of  State's
         guidance into account if it points clearly to a particular  outcome
         in the instant case. Only in that way can consistency  be  obtained
         between those cases that do, and those  cases  that  do  not,  come
         before the Tribunal.

     Mr Wilding conceded that the outcome in the  present  case  was  clear,
    and invited me to allow the appeal, which I do.

Appeal
                               [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)

                                                                   Date   25
    April 2017

