
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/04279/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th July 2019                    |On 20th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                           Ms ayesha hussain aftab
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, born on 6th April 1972, is a citizen of  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Martin of Counsel.  The Respondent  was
    represented by Mr Kotas, a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 7th June 2017.  The Respondent had refused that  application
    on 30th January 2018.  The Appellant had appealed and  her  appeal  was
    heard at Taylor House on 20th September 2018 before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Davey.  The judge had dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 3. Application for permission to appeal had been made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that application had been refused on 29th January 2019  on
    the basis that the grounds  were  not  arguable  but  were  in  reality
    nothing more than a disagreement with the Tribunal's assessment.   That
    application was renewed to the Upper-tier and permission was granted on
    12th June 2019.  It was said that on the basis of the accepted evidence
    the judge may have erred in the approach to an  assessment  of  whether
    the appellant as a lone woman returning to  Pakistan  would  face  very
    significant obstacles to integration and that approach  may  also  have
    tainted the conclusion outside of the Rules.   Directions  were  issued
    for the Upper Tribunal first to consider whether an error  of  law  had
    been made in this case or  not  and  the  matter  comes  before  me  in
    accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. It was submitted in line with the Grounds of Appeal that the First-tier
    Judge had not focused on the question of integration nor said  how  she
    could integrate or reintegrate into Pakistan.  It was  noted  that  she
    was a single woman with no  employment  and  had  no  male  partner  or
    friends.

 5. In terms of an examination outside of the Rules it was  submitted  that
    there were other factors that needed to be looked at in  terms  of  her
    private and family life and that the judge had wrongly erred in finding
    that the public interest outweighed those matters.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 6. It was submitted that the case of Kamara defined what  were  considered
    to be very significant obstacles to reintegration.  The case had  noted
    that it was "a broad value judgment" and that is  what  the  judge  had
    done.  The Appellant had resided in Pakistan in the conditions that she
    had related for some years.  It was said there was no error of law.

 7. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider those  submissions
    and the evidence.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. The Appellant in this case was 47 years old.  The  Appellant  had  last
    entered the United Kingdom in January 2016  on  a  family  visit  visa.
    Prior to that the immigration history shows that she had visited the UK
    on family visit visas in the  latter  part  of  2010  and  the  end  of
    2014/early 2015.  Other than those two prior visits the  Appellant  was
    born and had lived all her life in Pakistan.

 9.  The  judge  had  accepted  the  facts  relating  to  the   Appellant's
    circumstances in Pakistan.  The issue for the  judge  to  consider  was
    whether the Appellant came within the terms of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    of the Immigration Rules and if not, whether on an examination  of  all
    factors  under  Article  8  outside  of  the  Rules  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.

10. In summary of the facts it was found that the Appellant had  originally
    lived with and cared for her mother until her mother's death  in  2007.
    Thereafter, she lived on her own in her flat within a block  of  flats.
    She had no  other  family  members  present  in  Pakistan  and  had  no
    employment.  It was said that she had no friends.  She was  financially
    supported by family in the UK and had been for some years.

11. The judge recognised and accepted that the Appellant's life in Pakistan
    was  not  without  difficulties   and   constraints.    It   contrasted
    unfavourably with life for a female in  the  UK.   However,  the  judge
    rightly looked at the test in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi),  namely  whether
    there were very significant obstacles to integration.

12. The Appellant had not only lived all  her  life  in  Pakistan  but  the
    precise set of circumstances that formed the core of her case had  been
    present for twelve years since the death of her mother  in  2007.   Her
    time out of Pakistan had been limited and no evidence was presented  of
    any dramatic or significant change in circumstances within Pakistan  or
    in any other manner materially since 2007.  It was clear therefore that
    the Appellant would  simply  be  returning  to  the  circumstances  and
    lifestyle that  she  had  been  used  to  for  the  last  twelve  years
    specifically (i.e. on her own)  and  in  general  terms  (a  female  in
    Pakistan) for all her life.

13. The judge was entitled when assessing the question  of  integration  or
    reintegration to find that those circumstances did  not  disclose  that
    there would be very significant obstacles to integration back into life
    in Pakistan.

14. He did thereafter look at factors outside of the Rules under Article 8.
     He accepted that there was  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and
    others  in  the  UK.   He  properly  looked  at  Section  117  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in  terms  of  the  public
    interest.  Thereafter, he conducted a balancing exercise in  line  with
    the  final  stage  test  of  Razgar.   He  found  removal  not  to   be
    disproportionate as the  public  interest  outweighed  the  Appellant's
    personal circumstances.  That  was  a  decision  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence and was neither perverse nor irrational.

15.  He  had  factored  in  that  on  return  the  Appellant  had  her  own
    accommodation to return to  and  would  continue  receiving  money  and
    support from her family in the UK as before.  The public  interest  was
    not without significance in this case.  This was not an  example  where
    the  Appellant  had  applied  for  settlement  under  the   appropriate
    Immigration Rules from Pakistan.  She had done that in 2008 and it  had
    been refused.  Rather, she came to the  UK  as  a  visitor  stating  or
    inferring therefore that she intended to return but  she  did  not  and
    indeed made an application in-country to remain.  The  public  interest
    is not without an importance in those sort of situations and there  was
    no material error of law in  the  judge  concluding  that  removal  was
    proportionate.

Notice of Decision

16. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

17. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
