
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/04321/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2nd September 2019                   |On 30th September 2019             |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                             Sanpreet Singh GILL
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik instructed by MYM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge C J Woolley, promulgated on 28 May 2019,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the refusal of leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.
2.   The Appellant entered the UK on 17 March 2006 with entry  clearance  as
    a student valid until 31 May 2009. On 30 December 2008 he  applied  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 Migrant which was refused  on  11  February
    2009 with no  right  of  appeal.  The  Appellant  remained  in  the  UK
    illegally. On 27 May 2009 he applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4
    Student, which was granted on 13 November 2009 valid until 27 May 2012.
    The Appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student on 24 May
    2012, which was granted on 30 July 2012 valid until 27 April 2014. This
    leave was curtailed to expire on 1 April 2014.  The  Appellant  applied
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student on 31  March  2014,  which  was
    refused on 15 May 2014 with no right of appeal.

3.   The Appellant was served with notice of removal on 26  March  2015.  He
    applied for indefinite leave to remain on grounds of long residency  on
    24 November 2016 which was refused on 6 September  2017  and  certified
    under Section 94(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act.
    The Appellant's subsequent judicial review application was  settled  by
    consent; the Respondent agreed to grant  the  Appellant  an  in-country
    right of appeal.

4.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for leave to  remain
    on 13 February 2019 on the grounds that he has used a proxy test  taker
    in his English language test certificate submitted with his application
    on 24 May 2012 and relied on in his application of 31 March  2014.  The
    Appellant could not satisfy paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules  or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

5.   The Appellant appealed. The judge found that the Respondent had  failed
    to  prove  the  allegation  of  deception.  It  was  conceded  by   the
    Appellant's  representative  that  the  Appellant  could  not   satisfy
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules and it was not  submitted  that
    he could satisfy the eligibility requirements of Appendix FM. The judge
    considered  paragraph  276ADE  and  found  that  there  were  no   very
    significant obstacles  to  reintegration  and  no  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences on return to India.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Gibb  on
    the grounds that, having found in favour of the Appellant on the  fraud
    point, it was arguable that the judge erred in not considering what the
    Appellant's situation would have been if the allegation  had  not  been
    made, and not applying the concession in Khan (see below) that in  such
    cases an opportunity to make a further application would be provided.


Submissions

7.   Mr Malik relied on Nabeel Ahsan & others v the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 and  Khan  and  others  v  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA  Civ  1684.   He
    agreed the Appellant's immigration history as set out  in  the  refusal
    letter and accepted that the Appellant could not satisfy paragraph 276B
    or 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  There  was  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's finding that  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration.

8.   There was some discussion on the basis  of  the  refusal  of  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 student on 15 May 2014. The decision was not on  the
    file and Ms Cunha did not have a copy of it. Mr  Malik  submitted  that
    the decision must have been taken on grounds of deception  because  the
    Appellant only had an out of country right of appeal against removal. I
    gave Ms Cunha an opportunity to obtain the  reasons  for  that  refusal
    letter and the decision to remove the Appellant.

9.   After consulting Home Office  records,  Ms  Cunha  confirmed  that  the
    student  application  was  refused  because  the  Appellant  had   used
    deception in a previous application. She provided a copy of the  notice
    of a person liable to removal under Section 10, which stated: "You  are
    specifically considered a person who has sought leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom by deception following information  provided  to  us  by
    Educational Testing Service (ETS) that on  23/5/2012  an  anomaly  with
    your speaking test indicated the presence of a proxy test-taker."

10.  Mr Malik submitted that the effect of  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant had not used deception was that  he  should  be  put  in  the
    position he would have been  in  had  the  allegation  not  been  made.
    Following Ahsan and Khan, he should be given an opportunity to  provide
    information in relation to the Tier 4 application made in  March  2014.
    The judge had failed to appreciate the  Respondent's  own  policy  when
    assessing proportionality. It  was  not  proportionate  to  remove  the
    Appellant without giving him an opportunity to submit further  evidence
    on his Tier 4 application.

11.  Ms Cunha sought to challenge the finding that  the  Appellant  had  not
    used deception on the basis that there was an error of law. I  was  not
    minded to entertain such a submission because the  Respondent  had  not
    applied for permission to appeal  within  the  relevant  time  and  had
    failed to raise this issue before today's hearing. There was no Rule 24
    response to the grant of permission by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  19
    July 2019. I refused Ms Cunha's application for  permission  to  appeal
    against the judge's finding that the Appellant had not  used  deception
    because it was significantly out of time and  there  was  no  plausible
    explanation for the Respondent's failure to submit  a  cross-appeal  or
    the failure to raise any arguable errors of law prior to today. It  was
    not in the interests of justice to allow the Respondent to rely on such
    a point.

12.  Ms Cunha submitted that there was no  material  error  in  the  judge's
    conclusion at paragraph 51(i) in which he stated:

         "I find that the appellant's immigration status has been precarious
         from the moment he arrived in the UK.   He  arrived  as  a  Tier  4
         (General) student in 2006.  This was always going to be a temporary
         status and he could not have anticipated  that  he  would  ever  be
         granted permanent status from this. He was an overstayer from  15th
         May 2014, and had no leave after that date  (I  have  not  accepted
         that the decision  in  Khan  can  operate  so  as  to  grant  leave
         retrospectively). When his immigration history is considered  as  a
         whole his status at all times has been precarious."


13.  Ms Cunha submitted that, notwithstanding the error  by  the  Respondent
    in relation to the fraudulent English language certificate,  the  judge
    considered the Appellant's private life in the UK and properly assessed
    proportionality. Even though the judge did not specifically refer to or
    consider the  position  the  Appellant  would  have  been  in  had  the
    allegation of deception not be made, the  judge  still  considered  all
    relevant factors. There were no unjustifiably harsh consequences on the
    Appellant's return to India. His private life had  been  precarious  in
    all respects and he could not satisfy the Immigration Rules.

14.  In order to allow an Article 8 appeal outside the Immigration Rules  on
    the basis of private life in the UK as a student, the circumstances had
    to be truly exceptional and that was not the case here. Notwithstanding
    the judge's alleged  failure  to  properly  apply  Khan,  the  historic
    injustice in this case  was  not  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest and any error on the part of the judge was immaterial.

15.  There was then some discussion on whether  to  dispose  of  the  appeal
    under Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Mr
    Malik made the following proposal: "Upon  the  Respondent  agreeing  to
    reconsider the Appellant's application of 31 March 2014, having given a
    period of 60 days to vary  that  application  or  provide  any  further
    evidence in support of that application, by consent it is ordered  that
    the Appellant be given  permission  to  withdraw  the  appeal  and  the
    finding that the Appellant  had  not  submitted  a  fraudulent  English
    language test certificate should stand. However,  Ms  Cunha  wished  to
    proceed in relation to the error of law issue and asked me to  conclude
    that any error on the part of  the  judge  was  not  material.  It  was
    apparent that she had not consented to the proposed order and therefore
    it would not be appropriate to make such an order under Rule 39.

16.  Mr Malik submitted that the Appellant should be put in the position  he
    would have been in had the allegation of a deception not been made.  It
    would  not  be  appropriate  to  remove  him  without  giving  him   an
    opportunity to submit further evidence in relation to  his  application
    made in March 2014 for leave to  remain  as  a  student.  The  decision
    should be set aside and the appeal allowed under Article 8.

17.  The Appellant's human rights claim was  not  based  on  his  length  of
    residence in the UK.  The Appellant had established private life in the
    UK and the only justification for interfering with his private life was
    the allegation that he used deception. That allegation was not made out
    and, therefore, there was no justification for removing  the  Appellant
    at this time. The appeal should be allowed in order for  the  Appellant
    to be given an opportunity to provide further information and  for  the
    Respondent to consider a grant of leave as a student.

18.  Mr Malik submitted that Article 8  was  engaged  relying  on  Ahsan  at
    paragraph 88:

         "In the particular circumstances of the present cases, it  is  also
         worth emphasising that, as  Mr  Knafler  correctly  submitted  (see
         para. 76 above), whether the Appellants' removal would be a  breach
         of their article  8  rights  depends  not  on  any  multi-factorial
         assessment of proportionality but on the single factual question of
         whether they cheated in their TOEIC tests - and on whether  a  fair
         procedure has been made available for deciding that question."


19.  Mr Malik also relied on Khan at paragraph 37:
         "Further, at paragraph 8 of the note, it was stated:
                  'Nonetheless, for the avoidance of doubt, the Secretary of
                  State for the Department confirms that:


                    i) For those individuals whose leave was curtailed, and
                       where that leave would still have time to run as  at
                       the date of an FTT determination that there  was  no
                       deception, subject to any further appeal to the  UT,
                       the curtailment decision would be withdrawn and  the
                       effect  would  be  that  leave  would  continue  and
                       individuals would not be disadvantaged in any future
                       application they chose to make;


                   ii) For those whose leave has been curtailed, and  where
                       the leave would in any event  have  expired  without
                       any further application being made,  the  Respondent
                       will  provide  a   further   opportunity   for   the
                       individuals to obtain leave with the  safeguards  in
                       paragraph (iii) below.


                  For those whose leave had expired, and who had made an  in
                  time application for further leave  to  remain  which  was
                  refused on ETS grounds, the effect of an FTT determination
                  that there was no deception  would  be  that  the  refusal
                  would be withdrawn. The applicant in question would  still
                  have an outstanding application for leave  to  remain  and
                  the  Respondent  will  provide  them  with  a   reasonable
                  opportunity  to  make  any  further   changes   to   their
                  application which would be considered on the basis of them
                  not having employed any  deception  in  the  obtaining  of
                  their TOEIC certificate, and  they  would  in  no  way  be
                  disadvantaged in any  future  application  they  chose  to
                  make.


                  iii) In all cases, the Respondent confirms that in making
                       any future decision he will not  hold  any  previous
                       gap in leave caused by  any  erroneous  decision  in
                       relation to ETS against the applicant, and will have
                       to take into account all the  circumstances  of  the
                       case.


                  However, the Respondent does not accept that it  would  be
                  appropriate for the Court  now  to  bind  him  as  to  the
                  approach  that  he  would  take  towards   still   further
                  applications in the future, for example  by  stating  that
                  each applicant has already accrued  a  certain  period  of
                  lawful leave.  The potential factual permutations  of  the
                  cases that may need to be considered are many and various.
                   In some cases, for example, it  will  be  apparent  that,
                  whilst  on  the  facts  as  presented  at  the  appeal  an
                  Appellant's human rights claim is successful, he would not
                  have been able to obtain leave at previous dates.   Again,
                  this issue will have to be dealt with on a  case  by  case
                  basis."

20.  Mr Malik referred to the  appendix  in  Khan  and  the  consent  orders
    therein in support of his submission that, if the removal decision  had
    not been made, the 2014 application for leave to remain  as  a  student
    would still be live and the Appellant should be given  time  to  submit
    further  information  in  support  of  that  application.  Without  the
    opportunity to do so, his removal would be unlawful.

Conclusions and Reasons

21.  This is an appeal against the decision dated 13 February 2019  refusing
    indefinite leave to remain and the Appellant's human rights claim under
    paragraphs S-LTR and R-LTPR of Appendix FM, 276B, 276ADE and 322 of the
    Immigration Rules.

22.  The judge found in the Appellant's favour in respect of  paragraphs  S-
    LTR and 322  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy Appendix FM,  276B  or  276ADE.  The  judge
    considered Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and found  that  the
    Appellant's removal would interfere with his private and  family  life.
    It  is  submitted  that  the  judge  erred   in   his   assessment   of
    proportionality  because  he  failed  to  consider  the  position   the
    Appellant would have been in if the allegation  of  deception  had  not
    been made following Ahsan and Khan.

23.  Taken at its highest, the position the Appellant would  have  been  in,
    absent the deception allegation, is that the decision to refuse student
    leave (dated 31 March 2014)  remains  outstanding  and  the  Respondent
    cannot rely on the notice of removal under  section  10  served  on  26
    March 2015.

24.  However, I agree with First-tier Tribunal Judge C J  Woolley  that  the
    decision in Khan does not operate to grant  leave  retrospectively.  At
    best the weight attached  to  the  public  interest  could  be  reduced
    because the Appellant could not be considered an overstayer from 15 May
    2014. This does not, however, alter the position that  the  Appellant's
    status in the UK has been precarious at all times. I find that there is
    no material error of law in the judge's findings at paragraph 51 (i).

25.  In Ahsan, at paragraph 87, Underhill LJ stated:  "Specifically  in  the
    case of a student, even if his or her article 8 rights are engaged,  it
    does not follow that those rights are breached by their removal  before
    they have completed their course.  On  the  contrary,  if  they  cannot
    comply with the applicable Immigration Rules,  their  removal  is  very
    likely to be justified."
26.  There was no evidence before the Respondent or the First-tier  Tribunal
    to show that the Appellant could succeed on his application  for  leave
    to remain as a student. It is open to the Applicant to  submit  further
    evidence to the Respondent, relying on Khan

27.  The Appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    and the weight to be attached to the public  interest  is  significant.
    Little weight should  be  attached  to  the  Appellant's  private  life
    established at a time when his immigration status was precarious. There
    were no exceptional circumstances which would  render  the  refusal  of
    leave to remain disproportionate.

28.  The judge's conclusion that the decision of 13 February  2019  did  not
    breach Article 8 was open to him on the evidence  before  him.  I  find
    that there was no material error of law in the decision promulgated  on
    28 May 2019 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.



              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 27 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 27 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

