
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/04104/2017
     HU/04105/2017
     HU/04107/2017
     HU/03642/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1st November 2018                    |On 15th November 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                         mr V.M.N. (first Appellant)
                      miss T.H.D.N. (second Appellant)
                      master n.t.h.n. (third Appellant)
                        miss J.N. (fourth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Harding, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior HOPO


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made because evidence relates to two minor
appellants.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Vietnam who were  born  in  1976,  1989,
    2010 and 2012 respectively.  The first and second Appellants are  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage and the third and fourth  Appellants  are
    their children.  The  Appellants  made  human  rights  applications  to
    remain in the United Kingdom but, by  a  decision  dated  8th  February
    2017, their applications were refused by the Secretary of State.   They
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Solly) which in  a  decision
    promulgated on 31st January 2018, dismissed the appeals.

 2. The  Appellants  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  FtT.   An
    adjournment request made by prior application to the FtT  was  refused.
    The FtTJ dealt with  the  appeals  on  the  basis  of  the  documentary
    evidence before her.  The Appellants now appeal with permission to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grant of permission which was made  on  a  renewed
    application to the Upper Tribunal was in the following terms:

         "Though I see no arguable merit to the challenge to the decision to
         refuse an adjournment, it  is  arguable  that  the  judge  did  not
         properly consider the section 55 issues in relation to  either  set
         of children.  This  has  clear  relevance  to  the  proportionality
         evaluation."

    It is correct to note at this stage that as well as  the  two  children
    who form part of the family unit in these appeals, the first  Appellant
    is the father of  two  children  by  a  previous  relationship.   Those
    children are British citizens born in 2005 and 2006 respectively.

 3. The issue in the present  appeal  is  whether  the  judge  applied  the
    relevant law including Section 117 of the 2002 Act (as amended) and the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705.
    The third Appellant was 7 years old and had lived throughout  his  life
    in the United Kingdom at the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.
    However, the third Appellant had not completed seven years of residence
    in the United Kingdom  as  at  the  date  of  the  application  to  the
    Secretary of State.  It is therefore correct to note, as the FtTJ  did,
    that none of the Appellants qualified for leave under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 4. The judge then reminded herself that as the Appellants did not  succeed
    under  the  Immigration  Rules  she  had  to  turn  to  the  issue   of
    proportionality [29].   She  further  said  that  in  arriving  at  her
    conclusions she had kept in mind the best interests of the child "as  a
    starting point" [28].

 5. Undoubtedly the lack of attendance of the Appellants placed  the  judge
    in a difficult position. She made a finding that she gave little weight
    to family and private  life  established  when  the  first  and  second
    Appellants' status in the UK was either precarious  or  unlawful.   She
    also considered the position of the two British  children  and  whether
    removal would deprive the first Appellant  of  family  life  with  them
    [35].

 6. The judge made findings that the evidence of  family  life  with  those
    children is limited.  There was some evidence contained in  the  papers
    that the British children had moved in with the first Appellant and had
    started school.  The judge, however, found the evidence  pertaining  to
    contact between the first Appellant and his  British  children  was  so
    sparse that she could not be satisfied that there was meaningful family
    life  between  the  first  Appellant  and  his  British  children.  She
    dismissed the appeal.

Error of law hearing

 7. Before me Mr Harding appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants  and  Ms
    Isherwood for the Respondent.  At the outset of the hearing, Mr Harding
    made a S.15 application for the inclusion of  witness  statements  from
    the first and second Appellants.  Those statements  showed  that  there
    was relevant medical evidence pertaining  to  the  Appellants'  younger
    child J.N. Ms Isherwood objected to the inclusion of this  evidence  on
    the basis that it had not been put before the FtTJ.  Therefore the FtTJ
    could not be said to have erred.   In  the  interests  of  justice  and
    bearing in mind that the issue before me centred on the best  interests
    of the minor Appellants, I admitted the evidence on the basis that  the
    thrust of this evidence was before the FtTJ in  any  event.  There  was
    mention of J.N.'s medical history in the appeal papers although  it  is
    correct to say that it was to the effect that  fortunately  the  cancer
    from which J.N. suffered had regressed.

 8. Mr Harding followed his initial application by saying that the FtTJ had
    not addressed adequately or at all the provisions of Section 117B(6) of
    the 2002 Act:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

 9. In the light of MA it was necessary for the judge to  consider  whether
    there were "strong reasons for removing a child who had been living  in
    the United Kingdom for more than seven years (a  qualifying  child  for
    the purposes of Section 117)." A reading of  the  decision  would  show
    that the FtTJ had not  turned  her  mind  to  the  two  stage  approach
    advocated  in  the  jurisprudence  and  had  not  brought   into   that
    consideration the medical condition of J.N. The decision would need  to
    be set aside and re-made with proper consideration being given to those
    factors.

10. Ms Isherwood submitted that  in  the  light  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    judgment in AM (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ  180  and  KO  and  Others  v
    Secretary of State [2018] UKSC 53 the  decision  was  sustainable.  The
    FtTJ was entitled to weigh the public interest considerations  relating
    to the first and second Appellants against the seven year residence  of
    the third Appellant. These were cases in which  the  first  and  second
    Appellants had demonstrated a blatant  disregard  for  immigration  law
    giving rise to a substantial public interest in their removal.

11. Ms Isherwood's submissions further focused  on  the  lack  of  evidence
    which was down to the Appellants choosing not to attend the  First-tier
    hearing. The judge had considered  all  the  evidence  before  her  and
    therefore could not be said to have erred.

Consideration

12. I find that I agree  with  Mr  Harding's  submissions.   On  a  careful
    reading of the decision, I find I cannot be satisfied that Judge  Solly
    demonstrated that she kept the provisions of Section  117B(6)  in  mind
    when she dismissed the appeals on Article 8 grounds. For example  there
    was some evidence contained in the papers that the Appellants'  younger
    child, J.N., was diagnosed with an aggressive form of childhood cancer.
     The evidence does suggest that fortunately the cancer is in  remission
    but nowhere in the FtT's decision  do  I  see  any  reference  to  this
    evidence nor any consideration of whether this has been  factored  into
    the Article 8 assessment.

13. Equally I see no consideration given to the fact that  the  Appellants'
    eldest child has lived all his life in the UK and by the  time  of  the
    FtT hearing had attained 7 years of age.  Clearly he is now  at  school
    in the U.K.

14. The factors outlined in the previous  two  paragraphs  are  ones  which
    should be considered  in  order  to  demonstrate  that  the  judge  has
    sufficiently turned her  mind  to  where  the  best  interests  of  the
    children lie.  It is necessary for this process to be carried out first
    because these factors have relevance to the Article  8  proportionality
    evaluation.

15. For the reasons that I have given above, I am not  satisfied  that  the
    judge has properly applied the case law in this decision.  I set  aside
    the decision.  There will need to be further fact-finding to update the
    family circumstances and that is an exercise better  conducted  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In these circumstances, I find  that  the  appeal
    will have to be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    decision to be made. None of the findings are preserved.

16. Mr Harding requested that I direct the appeals be  heard  in  a  London
    Tribunal centre. Whilst I pointed out that listing is solely  a  matter
    for the FtT I declined  his  request  on  the  basis  that  it  was  my
    understanding that the appeals would be heard more quickly  in  Newport
    and that in the interests of justice, the matter should return there.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  31st
January 2018 is set aside.  The  appeals  are  returned  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge Solly) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     08 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts








