
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04138/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th November 2018                         |On 6th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     y s
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Shah (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Meyler,  promulgated  on  1st  August  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 9th July 2018.  In the determination, the  judge  allowed
    the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State, subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and was  born  on  29th
    November 1980.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 22nd January 2018, refusing his  human  rights
    claim.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that  he  married  a  Pakistani
    woman, Miss [FY], in Pakistan on 13th January  2007,  and  they  had  a
    daughter together in 2010, who was born  in  Pakistan.   The  Appellant
    then entered the UK on 17th March  2011,  and  his  wife  and  daughter
    joined him later in January 2014.  However, during his time in the  UK,
    the Appellant  had  an  extramarital  relationship  with  a  Portuguese
    national, following which he made an EEA application to remain in  this
    country on that basis on 28th January 2013, which was refused  on  17th
    September 2013.  He made a further application which was  then  refused
    on 26th January 2014.  The relationship then broke down.

 4. In the meantime, the Appellant's wife formed a new relationship with  a
    British man, and they had a child together.  The  Appellant's  daughter
    lives full-time with her mother, stepfather, and half-sister,  and  the
    Appellant sees his daughter during the day on Saturdays.  His  daughter
    was in year 3 of primary school.  She has certain  special  educational
    needs and receives speech and language therapy at school.

 5. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that he has a  family  life  with
    his daughter whom he sees and is in contact with.   However,  when  the
    Appellant made his application on  31st  March  2012  he  relied  on  a
    speaking test taken on 22nd February 2012 at Metro College,  which  was
    subsequently declared as having been taken by a proxy  test  taker  and
    the decision letter took this against the  Appellant.   Whilst  it  was
    accepted that  the  Appellant  had  a  general  relationship  with  his
    daughter, it was not considered disproportionate for the  Appellant  to
    make the appropriate entry clearance application to visit his  daughter
    from Pakistan (paragraph 29).  None of the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE were considered to be met (paragraph 30).  There were said to be
    no exceptional circumstances (paragraph 31).

The Judge's Decision

 6. At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Meyler,  he  was  concerned  with  the
    Appellant's level of English, which he regarded to be  insufficient  to
    dispense without the use of the interpreter, but the Appellant  decided
    to go alone  without  the  interpreter,  and  he  struggled  repeatedly
    (paragraph 32). The judge  observed  that  the  Appellant  nevertheless
    succeeded in getting the "maximum spoken score that can be achieved  in
    the test" (paragraph 33).   Moreover,  his  pronunciation  was  further
    recorded  "as  highly  intelligible"  (paragraph  34).   Against   this
    background, the judge held that the  speaking  scores  awarded  to  the
    Appellant on 22nd February  2012  "could  not  possibly  have  been  in
    respect of the Appellant who gave oral evidence  before  me,  some  six
    years later, by which  time  one  would  expect  his  English  to  have
    improved considerably" (paragraph 35).  The judge concluded  that  "the
    Appellant participated in an  organised  and  serious  attempt  to  use
    deception" (paragraph 36).

 7. The judge further found that the  Appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of E-LTRPT.2.2 because his  daughter  is  not  British  or
    settled and has not lived in the UK continuously  for  at  least  seven
    years (paragraph 37).  The judge also held that the Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph  27ADE  because  he  had  not  lived
    continuously in the UK for twenty years.  Despite the past seven  years
    that the Appellant had  lived  in  the  UK  there  would  not  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Pakistan either.  He  was
    31 years old when he arrived in this country and his  English  "remains
    very broken and I deduce from this that Urdu  and  Punjabi  remain  the
    languages he uses with greatest ease" (paragraph 38).

 8. However, it was in relation to Article 8, that the judge then proceeded
    to allow the appeal.  He held that family life was engaged "between the
    Appellant and his daughter" and that he was shown some  photographs  of
    the Appellant with his daughter on his mobile  phone.   Moreover,  "the
    Respondent concedes that  there  was  a  general  relationship  between
    father and daughter in the refusal letter".   Indeed,  the  judge  also
    "had regard to the family court order concerning  contact  between  the
    Appellant and his daughter", and there was "the letter from the  mother
    of the child" (paragraph 42).

 9. Nevertheless, the daughter was not British, she was  not  settled,  and
    she did not have refugee or protection leave.  In addition,  the  judge
    also held that,

         "nor is the Appellant the  primary  carer  of  his  daughter.   His
         daughter has leave outside of the Rules until the end of the  year,
         in line with her mother, who is now in  another  relationship  with
         another man.  The Family Court order gives  the  Appellant  contact
         with his mother once per week during the day on a Saturday, between
         the hours of 11am and 5pm and more by mutual agreement"  (paragraph
         43).

10. That aside the judge held that "the best interests of the child are for
    her to remain with her mother, as she is doing at present".  The  judge
    also inferred from the letter from the school and the letter  from  the
    mother "that it is also in the best interests of the child to  continue
    having contact with the father" (paragraph 44).

11. In the event, therefore, the judge went on to conclude  that,  "I  find
    that the effect of removal would be that the Appellant would  never  be
    able to meet the requirements of the entry clearance Rule for entry  as
    a parent on account  of  his  wrongdoing  in  2012",  even  though  the
    decision against the Appellant was on the basis that  his  conduct  was
    not conducive to the public good (paragraph 45).  The  judge  concluded
    that it will be disproportionate for the Appellant "not to  enjoy  face
    to face contact with his daughter unless his ex-wife, with whom  he  is
    now estranged, decides to take her to see her father in Pakistan, which
    seems a remote possibility.

12. The judge further found that,

         "although the  Appellant's  daughter  only  has  limited  leave  to
         remain, the fact is that as long as the Appellant's ex-wife remains
         in a genuine relationship with her new partner and  second  British
         child in the UK, they are most likely to be granted  further  leave
         to remain.  It therefore seems most unlikely that  the  Appellant's
         daughter will return to Pakistan for the foreseeable future and the
         Appellant  cannot  qualify  for  entry  clearance  as   a   parent"
         (paragraph 45).

13. Finally, the Appellant's own position was not overlooked by the  judge,
    who concluded that he had taken into consideration the  fact  that  the
    Appellant has been present in the UK for over six years but that

         "he has overstayed for most of those years and never held  anything
         other than a short student visa.  He has shown a blatant  disregard
         for the immigration laws and Rules in the UK by  engaging  a  proxy
         tester to sit his English exam for him and he  did  not  return  to
         Pakistan despite the assertions that he  would  have  made  in  his
         student visa application" (paragraph 46).

14. In the end, the  judge  concluded  that  "this  is  a  finely  balanced
    decision", and  that  "weighing  all  the  factors  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant and the public interest in removal, I find that in  the  end,
    despite the Appellant's conduct in 2012, it will be a  disproportionate
    result for a genuine relationship between father  and  daughter  to  be
    indefinitely severed as a result of the decision" (paragraph 51).

15. The appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

Grounds of Application

16. The grounds of application state that the  judge  had  found  that  the
    Appellant had employed deception and his remaining in the  UK  was  not
    conducive to the public good  (paragraph  36).   However,  the  judge's
    conclusions that, "I find that the effect of removal would be that  the
    Appellant would never  be  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  entry
    clearance Rule for entry as a parent on account of  his  wrongdoing  in
    2012", was wrong because it is not for the court to  speculate  on  the
    outcome of future entry clearance applications.  Second, the judge  had
    failed to explain why the maintenance of law and order  and  prevention
    of fraud, such as that displayed by this  Appellant  in  attempting  to
    gain leave here through deception, should be set aside in favour  of  a
    perpetrator of these actions.  Third, the  judge  embarked  on  further
    speculation in stating that it was unlikely that  the  Appellant's  ex-
    partner would take his daughter for visits to  Pakistan  because  there
    was no evidence before the court to that effect in the judge coming  to
    that conclusion.

17. On 14th September  2018,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the
    Tribunal.

Submissions

18. At the hearing before me on 30th November 2018, Mr  McVeety,  appearing
    as Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  relied  upon  the  judge's
    conclusions at paragraph 45, to point out that the reasons for why  the
    judge had allowed the appeal were  entirely  speculative,  because  one
    could not say whether the Appellant's ex-wife, who was now  in  another
    relationship with her British citizen, would herself be granted further
    leave to remain.  In the same way one would  not  say  whether  in  the
    future the Appellant's ex-wife would  take  the  Appellant's  child  to
    Pakistan for visits to see him.  What was, however,  entirely  certain,
    was the fact that none of these people had settled status  in  the  UK.
    Second, and even more importantly, none of the findings that the  judge
    makes in favour of the  Appellant  in  this  speculative  fashion,  are
    actually set out in the Appellant's witness statements or  the  witness
    statement of any other person.  Accordingly, the judge could  not  have
    come to a firm finding of fact on this basis.

19. For his part, Mr  Shah  relied  upon  his  skeleton  argument,  and  in
    particular pointed out that the judge  had  stated  (at  paragraph  51)
    that, "this is a finely balanced decision" and that he had proceeded on
    the basis of "weighing all the factors in favour of the  Appellant  and
    the public interest in removal", so that nothing was left unconsidered.
     The judge took into account the best interests of the child.  He  took
    into account the fact that the daughter needs therapy and  has  special
    needs.  He took into account that there was a Family Court order in the
    Appellant's favour.  He took into account the fact that the Appellant's
    parental relationship with his child started at birth.   He  took  into
    account the fact that the Appellant's former wife wanted the  Appellant
    to play a role in the upbringing of his daughter (paragraph 11).

20. Second, in granting permission to appeal, the Tribunal had relied  upon
    the case of Ekenci [2003] EWCA  Civ  765,  but  that  was  an  entirely
    different case.  In that case, Ekenci was an  asylum  seeker,  who  had
    lied about his application for asylum in Germany on 1st  October  1991,
    before seeking asylum in the UK, and the Court of Appeal  observed  (at
    paragraph 3) that, in response to a request from  the  United  Kingdom,
    Germany  had  accepted  responsibility  for  the  examination  of   the
    Appellant's asylum claim on the basis of  the  Dublin  Convention.   Mr
    Ekenci had also formed a relationship with a British citizen  when  his
    immigration status was precarious, which is not the case here  for  the
    Appellant.  Mr Ekenci's child also did not  require  special  needs  at
    school or otherwise.  Moreover the nature and degree of involvement  of
    the Appellant with his daughter is far greater than that of Mr  Ekenci.



21. In reply, Mr McVeety  submitted  that  the  weight  to  be  granted  to
    evidence is a matter for  the  judge,  but  the  Statute  requires  the
    decisionmaker to put  in  the  balance  of  considerations  the  public
    interest in favour of immigration control, and  the  statement  by  the
    judge that the "Appellant would never be able to meet the  requirements
    of the entry clearance" (paragraph 45), but this very  fact  is  surely
    something  that,  has  to  weigh   against   the   Appellant   in   any
    proportionality exercise.  If the judge had  found  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant, he had done so on a purely speculative  basis.   As  against
    that, what needed to be taken  into  account  was  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was an immigration offender, an overstayer, and  had  cheated
    in an exam.

Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  I come  to  this  conclusion,  notwithstanding  the  judge's
    comprehensive, detailed, and careful assessment of the facts that  were
    before him.  This is a decision that is moreover sensitive to the needs
    of the parties concerned, and not least to the Appellant's child,  with
    whom the Appellant has an  existing  contact  order,  and  an  accepted
    family life.  Moreover, I note Mr Shah's  carefully  compiled  skeleton
    argument before  me,  and  is  a  commendable  effort  to  persuade  me
    otherwise.

23. However, this is a case where the Appellant could not succeed under the
    Immigration Rules, for reasons that were very carefully laid out by the
    judge in considerable detail (from paragraphs 32  to  40).   The  judge
    then, however, allowed the appeal on the basis of Article 8.   However,
    that decision failed to give the requisite attention to  the  interests
    in immigration control as a matter of public interest, with respect  to
    parties none of whom had settled status in the UK.

24. First, the Appellant's daughter is not British and she is  not  settled
    in the UK and has not lived in the UK for at  least  seven  years  (see
    paragraph 37).  Second, the Appellant himself is not the primary  carer
    of his daughter.  He has contact with his daughter only once a week  on
    a Saturday (paragraph 43).   Third,  as  against  these  two  important
    facts, the judge speculated that as long  as  the  Appellant's  ex-wife
    remains in a relationship with her new partner and the  second  British
    child born to them in the UK, "they  are  most  likely  to  be  granted
    further leave to remain" (paragraph 45).   Fourth,  there  was  similar
    speculation on the basis that, "it therefore seems most  unlikely  that
    the Appellant's daughter will return to Pakistan  for  the  foreseeable
    future and the Appellant  cannot  qualify  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    parent", as there is speculation  also  in  the  assertion  that,  with
    respect to the Appellant's ex-wife, "it is likely that visits  will  be
    infrequent, not least because of the  cost  involved"  (paragraph  45).
    Fifth, and as against all of the above considerations,  the  judge  had
    observed that the Appellant had overstayed for most of the  years  that
    he had been in this country, had demonstrated a blatant  disregard  for
    the immigration laws, and have engaged a proxy test taker  to  sit  his
    English exam for him (paragraph 46).

25. Most importantly, however, although the judge concludes that "this is a
    finely balanced decision", there is no basis for the assertion that  "a
    genuine relationship between father and daughter [will] be indefinitely
    severed as  a  result  of  the  decision"  (paragraph  51).   For  that
    conclusion to have been drawn, there had to  be  a  statement  to  that
    effect by the Appellant in his witness statement, or orally in evidence
    before the judge, and even then it had  to  be  properly  evaluated  as
    against the other considerations.  The  fact  that  the  judge  had  to
    speculate with respect to the two  important  matters  set  out  above,
    indicates that the evidence was not to this  effect.   It  was  reliant
    upon someone having to make a speculation to that  effect.   Therefore,
    notwithstanding the care with which the judge has approached the matter
    before him, the appeal could  not  have  succeeded,  either  under  the
    Immigration Rules, or outside those Rules on the basis of  freestanding
    Article 8 jurisprudence.



Re-Making the Decision

26. I have remade the decision on the basis  of  the  findings  before  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing the appeal of the Respondent Secretary
    of State for the reasons that I have set out above.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law, such that it falls  to  be  set  aside.   I  set  aside  the
decision of the original judge.  I remake  the  decision  as  follows.  This
appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

Anonymity

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th January 2019










