


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                         Appeal  Numbers:
HU/04084/2017

                                                HU/04087/2017

                                                              HU/04091/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                 Decision & Reasons
Promulgated
On 4 October 2018                                   On 11 October 2018


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              1) CATHERINE [G]
                                 2) IVY [G]
                                  3) [A G]
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A I Corban, Solicitor (Corban Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department)
           appealed with permission granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Kelly on 13 August 2018 against the determination of  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Zahed who had  allowed  the  Respondents'  linked
           entry clearance appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds. The  decision
           and reasons was promulgated on 23 May 2018.


      2.    The Respondents, mother and daughters, are nationals  of  Kenya,
           born respectively on 9 May 1968, 18 December  1998  and  11  May
           2005.  They had sought entry clearance to join their husband and
           father, their sponsor.  The Entry Clearance Officer  ruled  that
           the Appellants had failed to provide their TB  certificates  and
           evidence of relationship and that the First Appellant had failed
           to provide her English language  test  certificate.   The  Entry
           Clearance  Officer  considered  that   the   First   Appellant's
           impending operation was not an  exceptional  circumstance  which
           prevented her from sitting the required English language test.


      3.     The  judge  found  that  the  Respondents  did  not  meet   the
           Immigration Rules at the date of the decisions.  He  also  found
           that the First  Respondent's  medical  condition  (an  impending
           procedure) was not an exceptional  circumstance  which  exempted
           her from the English  language  requirement:  see  [19]  of  the
           decision and reasons.  The judge went on to find that the  Entry
           Clearance Officer should have permitted the First Respondent  to
           take the English language test after her operation.   There  was
           urgency as the Second Respondent was  about  to  turn  18.   The
           judge found that the marriage was genuine and  that  the  family
           relationships were as claimed.  There was  strong  family  life.
           The TB certificates and English language  certificate  had  been
           produced after the applications were made and had  not  been  in
           existence as at the date of the applications: see  [18]  of  the
           decision and reasons.  The judge found that the  proportionality
           balance favoured the Respondents, as the Second Respondent would
           not be able to apply again.  Thus he allowed  the  human  rights
           appeals.


      6.    Permission to appeal was granted because it  was  arguable  that
           the judge had treated Article 8 ECHR  as  a  general  dispensing
           power to cure failure to comply with  the  requirements  of  the
           Immigration Rules, and had failed to consider  why  family  life
           could not be enjoyed in Kenya.




      Submissions


      7.    Mr Lindsay for the Appellant submitted  that  the  decision  and
           reasons could not stand.  The judge had found as a fact that the
           Immigration Rules had not  been  met  and  that  there  were  no
           exceptional circumstances.  He had no jurisdiction to find  that
           the Entry  Clearance  Officer  should  have  extended  time  for
           submission of the test certificates.  There was no reasoning  to
           support the assertion that  the  Article  8  ECHR  decision  was
           disproportionate, as the family were living together  in  Kenya.
           The decision should be set aside.


      8.    Mr Corban for the Respondents served a rule 24 notice on the day
           of the hearing, on which he relied.  He submitted that the judge
           had found exceptional circumstances and so had been entitled  to
           allow the appeal.




      Material error of law finding


      9.    The tribunal finds that there were a number of  material  errors
           of law in the decision and reasons, such that  it  must  be  set
           aside.   The judge appears to have intended  to  find  that  the
           Immigration  Rules  were  not  met  as  at  the  date   of   the
           applications, not the decisions, although that is  not  what  he
           said at [19] of the decision and reasons.   It is plain from the
           evidence that the Immigration Rules were not met as at the  date
           of the applications.  The judge further found that there were no
           exceptional circumstances which exempted  the  First  Respondent
           from submitting  an  English  language  test  certificate.   The
           judge's further findings under  Article  8  ECHR  conflict  with
           those findings and make little sense.  They fail to explain  his
           decision.


      10.   It had nothing to do with the Entry Clearance Officer  that  the
           Respondents chose to submit their entry  clearance  applications
           just before the Second Respondent turned 18.  In any event, that
           did not, as the judge suggested at  [25]  of  the  decision  and
           reasons,  prevent  her  from  making  another  entry   clearance
           application to join her father.  The  Second  Respondent  simply
           had to make the entry clearance application under  a  different,
           albeit more stringent, Immigration Rule.


      11.   The First-tier Tribunal  has  no  supervisory  role  over  Entry
           Clearance Officers and the exercise of  their  discretion.   The
           judge's finding at [20] of his decision  and  reasons  that  the
           Entry  Clearance  Officer  should  have  approached  the   entry
           clearance  applications  in  a   different   way   was   without
           jurisdiction.  The requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  are
           clearly set out and apply to all.  It was for the Respondents to
           assemble their supporting documents in  good  time.   The  judge
           specifically found  that  the  First  the  Respondent's  medical
           condition was not an exceptional circumstance, so his  criticism
           of the Entry Clearance Officer is not easy to understand.


      12.   As to the judge's proportionality analysis, this lacked  rigour.
           The judge failed to consider that the Respondents'  decision  to
           live separately from the sponsor was on the evidence a matter of
           choice.  No evidence was advanced to show that the sponsor could
           not live with the Respondents in Kenya.  In that  way  the  best
           interests of the third Respondent  to  live  with  both  of  her
           parents (as found by the judge)  would  have  been  met.     The
           Entry Clearance Officer's decision did  not  affect  the  status
           quo.  These facts were not considered by the judge, sufficiently
           or at all, and his reasoning was defective.


      13.   The decision and reasons must accordingly  be  set  aside.   The
           tribunal has considered whether the decision can  be  remade  in
           the Upper Tribunal.  While  that  might  be  possible,  this  is
           perhaps a borderline case because of the nature of the errors of
           law, and to do so might deprive the Respondents of the advantage
           of a First-tier Tribunal hearing.  It is not entirely clear from
           the decision and reasons whether the judge intended to find that
           there were exceptional circumstances or not.  Certainly  he  was
           sympathetic to their situation.  The tribunal concludes  that  a
           full First-tier Tribunal rehearing should be made  available  to
           the Respondents.  They should, however, consider their  position
           with great care as it may be that they will be better advised to
           make fresh entry clearance applications, ensuring that they  are
           properly prepared  and  accompanied  by  all  of  the  specified
           evidence listed in the Immigration Rules.  In  that  event,  the
           Respondents should apply to withdraw the present appeals.


      DECISION


      The appeal is allowed


      The making of the previous decision involve the making of  a  material
      error on a point of law. The decision is set aside, to be  reheard  in
      the First-tier Tribunal by any judge except First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Zahed









      Signed                                              Dated  4   October
2018
      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




