
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04219/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16 October 2017                    |On 7 November 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    [y c]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mahfuz, Counsel instructed by Visa Direct
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  China  born  in  September  2002.   Her
    mother and father are in the  UK  and  her  two  siblings  are  British
    citizens.  When her mother and father left China the appellant remained
    behind in the care of her  grandmother  and  legal  guardian,  QC.   In
    October 2015 the appellant applied for  entry  clearance  to  join  her
    parents in the UK.  In a decision  dated  13  January  2016  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (ECO) noted that the father came to the  UK  in  2009
    and was granted discretionary leave to remain and did not have  settled
    status.  The ECO refused the appellant's application  under  paragraphs
    297 and 301 of the Immigration Rules and stated that this decision  did
    not breach Article 8 ECHR because the appellant's  case  did  not  fall
    within Article 8(1).  The appellant's appeal was heard on the papers by
    First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge O'Hagan.   In  a  decision  sent  on  8
    December 2016 he dismissed it.  The judge was not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e)  as  it  had  not
    been demonstrated that the mother had had sole responsibility  for  her
    upbringing.  At paragraph 12 the judge stated that "[t]he circumstances
    of the case point to the  responsibility  having  been  shared  between
    three people, the appellant's mother, her father and her  grandmother".
    The judge also concluded that the appellant had not shown  serious  and
    compelling  family  or  other  circumstances   which   made   exclusion
    undesirable.  At paragraphs 14 and 15 the judge wrote:

         "14. I considered whether there were serious and compelling  family
             or  other  considerations  which  made  be  exclusion  of  the
             Appellant undesirable.  Although I find that  the  Appellant's
             mother has not exercised sole responsibility, I see no  reason
             to doubt that she has maintained an  active  concern  for  the
             daughter and an ongoing involvement in her life so far as  she
             could from this country.  That would, nonetheless,  have  been
             limited by distance and by  circumstance.   In  terms  of  the
             attachment between them, I readily accept that  the  Appellant
             and  her  mother  love  each  other,  and  that  they  have  a
             relationship  sustained  by   telephone   and   other   online
             communication, as set out in the grounds of appeal,  and  that
             there have also been visits.  From the grounds  of  appeal,  I
             note that the last such visit was in 2013.


         15.  Nonetheless, the fact that the Appellant's mother felt able to
             leave China, having  made  arrangements  for  the  Appellant's
             care, and to settle in this country,  does  suggest  that  the
             attachment is not as strong as the grounds of appeal  suggest.
             Having regard to the realities  of  the  Appellant's  life,  I
             consider that her primary attachment will be likely to  be  to
             her grandmother who has been her primary  carer.   The  points
             made in respect  of  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  her
             mother apply with equal force to the Appellant's  brother  and
             sister."

2.   The judge went on to conclude that  the  appellant  could  not  benefit
    from paragraph 301 as her father did not have settled status.

3.   The grounds of  appeal  raised  the  following  main  points.   It  was
    submitted that the judge had erred:

    -    by failing to note that the mother makes all the key decisions for
         the child  and  hence  exercised  sole  responsibility  within  the
         meaning of that term as  analysed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  TD
         (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole  responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
         00049;


    -    by contradicting himself on this matter;


    -    by considering that the appellant would not find it easy to  adapt
         to life in the UK - "an issue for the family to face  and  not  one
         for the [FtT judge] to consider";


    -    by assessing  the  grandmother's  health  without  regard  to  the
         medical evidence that the appellant had provided to the ECO;


    -    by assessing that the appellant was not of an age where she needed
         the kind of care that a young child will need.

4.   I am grateful to both representatives for their pertinent submissions.

5.   I am not persuaded that the FtT judge erred in law.

6.   In considering the issue of sole  responsibility  the  judge  correctly
    directed himself as to the applicable principles as set out in TD.   He
    correctly noted that the evidence had limitations. In particular he was
    entitled to treat as relevant that  the  sponsor  had  chosen  a  paper
    determination, meaning that he had to determine the case  "without  the
    benefit of hearing directly from the sponsor".  I also observe that the
    appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  against  the  ECO  decision  did  not
    specifically argue that the mother had sole responsibility  and  indeed
    stated that "[I] still depend on my  parents.   I  need  the  care  and
    guidance  from  my  parents".  That  is   a   description   of   shared
    responsibility.   Bearing  in  mind  the  limited  evidence   and   the
    appellant's own statement that she needed the care and guidance of both
    her parents, the judge was fully entitled to conclude at  paragraph  12
    that the appellant's was  a  case  of  shared  responsibility  (between
    mother, father and grandmother), not sole responsibility.

7.   I discern  no  contradiction  between  that  finding  and  the  judge's
    statement at paragraph 14 that:

         "14. I considered whether there were serious and compelling  family
             or  other  considerations  which  made  be  exclusion  of  the
             Appellant undesirable.  Although I find that  the  Appellant's
             mother has not exercised sole responsibility, I see no  reason
             to doubt that she has maintained an  active  concern  for  the
             daughter and an ongoing involvement in her life so far as  she
             could from this country.  That would, nonetheless,  have  been
             limited by distance and by  circumstance.   In  terms  of  the
             attachment between them, I readily accept that  the  Appellant
             and  her  mother  love  each  other,  and  that  they  have  a
             relationship  sustained  by   telephone   and   other   online
             communication, as set out in the grounds of appeal,  and  that
             there have also been visits.  From the grounds  of  appeal,  I
             note that the last such visit was in 2013.

8.   "Active concern" and "ongoing involvement" are  not  the  same  as  the
    test set out in paragraph 297.  The letter comprises (in the  words  of
    TD at paragraph 52(ix)):  "continuing  control  and  direction  of  the
    child's upbringing including making all the important decisions in  the
    child's life".  If not, responsibility is shared and so not "sole".  Mr
    Mahfuz contended that "active concern" and "ongoing involvement"  could
    in some circumstances constitute sole responsibility and the judge  did
    not specify what he meant by these broad terms.   However,  read  as  a
    whole, particularly in the light of paragraph 12, it is clear that  the
    judge intended by these terms to identify a lesser level of involvement
    than that specified in TD.

9.   I see nothing in the contention that the judge erred in treating  as  a
    relevant  consideration  that  the  appellant  would  likely  find   it
    difficult to adapt to life in the UK.  The judge's assessment  of  this
    matter arose in the context of paragraph 297(i)(f) which requires there
    to be "serious and compelling family or other considerations which make
    exclusion undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for  the
    child's care".  In that context it was  entirely  appropriate  for  the
    judge to consider  whether  the  best  interests  and  welfare  of  the
    appellant were served by exclusion or not.  At paragraph 17  the  judge
    stated:

         "It is convenient to address at the same time the first  ground  of
         appeal, which challenges the judge's reliance  on  the  appellant's
         age.  The judge cannot be criticised for attaching  weight  to  the
         fact that the appellant was no longer a young child.  The judge was
         not seeking to say that a 14 year old child no longer  needs  care,
         only that it would not involve the same level  of  dependency  that
         exists in the care of a younger child."

10.  I consider this assessment is free of legal error.

11.  As regards the grandmother's health, I would observe first of all  that
    the appellant has failed to demonstrate that the application  she  made
    to the ECO contained medical evidence  regarding  this  lady's  health.
    Quite properly, in the absence of any mention of such evidence  in  the
    application or in the ECO's decision, Mr  Mahfuz  did  not  pursue  the
    argument that the judge erred in not having regard to it.  I would also
    observe that even if the medical evidence that was  adduced  before  me
    had been available to the FtT judge, it  would  have  been  of  limited
    assistance,  in  that  it  relates  to  medical  examination   of   the
    appellant's grandmother in December 2016, some ten-eleven months  after
    the date of decision.

12.  The appellant's skeleton argument also  contained  an  allegation  that
    the judge had applied "the wrong Immigration Rules".  Sensibly Mr Mafuz
    abandoned this ground of appeal, since the skeleton itself then goes on
    to argue that the judge wrongly  concluded  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297 (the correct rule) were not met.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 6 November 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
