
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04134/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 April 2019                     |On 09 May 2019                       |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                    M. S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw of Counsel instructed by Citadel
Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lodge promulgated on 15 January 2019 dismissing on human rights grounds
    the appeal against a decision of the Respondent,  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer in Sheffield, to refuse entry clearance to the Appellant as  an
    adult dependent relative.



2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Yemen born on  28  August  1995.   On  21
    September 2017 an application was made online for  entry  clearance  as
    the adult dependent relative of his mother E.A-N ('the sponsor').   The
    sponsor is a national of Yemen settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She
    entered on 4 March 2009 and obtained settled status  on  7  June  2011.
    She is  married  to  a  British  citizen  husband  -  who  is  not  the
    Appellant's father; he has his own particular mental health needs which
    are looked after primarily by the sponsor.  The sponsor and her husband
    in the United Kingdom have two children who, at the time of the  making
    of a supporting statement on 10 October 2017, were 5 years  old  and  4
    months  old  respectively.   The  children  are  half-siblings  of  the
    Appellant, but have never met the Appellant in person.



3.   When the sponsor came to the United  Kingdom  she  left  the  Appellant
    with her parents - i.e. his maternal grandparents - with  whom  he  has
    resided ever since.  The sponsor has only been  able  to  make  limited
    visits to see the Appellant since her arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.
    She went to see him between 15 December 2012 and 14 January  2013;  she
    also saw him in September 2013 in Egypt when she was hoping to be  able
    to make an application for entry clearance at that time, in the end not
    being able to do so and returning to  the  United  Kingdom  in  January
    2014.



4.   In support of the application the Appellant and the sponsor  emphasised
    that the Appellant is a person with cognitive impairment who  has  been
    attributed a mental age  of  8  years.   It  was  also  said  that  his
    grandparents were facing increasing difficulties in looking after him.



5.   In  support  of  the  application  amongst  other  things  two  medical
    documents were provided - which are included in the Respondent's bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  There was a letter dated  21  February
    2017 from the Saber Hospital in Aden in Yemen which gave details of the
    Appellant's underlying medical conditions in these terms:

         "Low intelligence,  hyperactivity,  stubbornness,  destructive  and
         aggressive, talking irrelevant.

         Duration:  since   early   childhood,   ...   delayed   psychomotor
         development; failure in school.

         MSE:   uncooperative,   inappropriate   behaviour,    irritability,
         irrelevant talk.

         IQ mental age 8 years.

         Diagnosis: mental retardation with psychotic features".

    It is apparent that two types of  medication  were  prescribed  to  the
    Appellant.



6.   Further to this there is a document from the Ministry of Public  Health
    and Population, Al-Gamhuria Modern General Hospital in Aden,  the  date
    of which is not readily manifest being rendered in  Arabic  script  and
    not being translated. It is stated:

         "The abovementioned male has  history  of  cerebral  palsy  due  to
         difficulty in birth.  He [complains of] difficulty in speaking  and
         walking since long time, he is under go to  intrusive  medical  and
         physiotherapy and improved".

    Nothing physically was noted, his chest  being  clinically  clear,  his
    pulse rate not indicating any particular concerns, and there  being  no
    problems otherwise in respect of his central nervous system.



7.   The application for entry clearance was refused for reasons set out  in
    a combined Notice of Immigration Decision  and  'reasons  for  refusal'
    letter dated 8 January 2018, with  reference  to  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM in respect of adult dependent relatives.  The  Respondent's
    decision  maker  was  satisfied  in  respect   of   the   'suitability'
    requirements of the Rules, the 'eligibility' financial requirements and
    the  'eligibility'  English  language   requirements.    However,   the
    application was refused with  particular  reference  to  paragraphs  E-
    ECDR.2.4 and E-ECDR.2.5 in the following terms:

         "You do not  meet  the  eligibility  relationship  requirements  of
         paragraphs E-ECP.2.1 to 2.10 because you  state  that  you  require
         long term personal care to perform everyday tasks because you  have
         mental retardation with psychotic features as described by a letter
         from Saber Hospital.  Although the letter explains your  condition,
         it makes reference to the medication you are  prescribed  but  does
         not give any  details  with  regard  to  level  of  care  you  have
         provided.  Therefore, I am not satisfied that you require,  due  to
         either age, illness or  disability,  long  term  personal  care  to
         perform everyday tasks.  I therefore refuse your application  under
         paragraph  EC-DR.1.1(d) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (E-
         ECDR.2.4)

         You state that you require  long  term  personal  care  to  perform
         everyday tasks because you have mental retardation.  You state that
         you cannot obtain the care you require in the  Republic  of  Yemen.
         As evidence of this you have provided a letter from Saber Hospital.
          Your mother left for the UK in March 2009 and since that date  you
         have been living with  your  grandparents  and  receiving  all  the
         prescribed medication that you require with financial support  from
         your mother.  Although your grandparents  are  elderly  this  alone
         does not demonstrate that you cannot receive  appropriate  care  in
         your home country.  The letter from Saber  Hospital  confirms  that
         you are in receipt of prescription  medication  required  for  your
         condition.  There has been no evidence provided  that  states  that
         you would be unable to receive the relevant level of care  if  your
         application was refused in the interests of maintaining a fair  and
         robust immigration control.  I am not satisfied that you are unable
         to obtain the required level of care in Yemen.  I therefore  refuse
         your application under paragraph EC-DR.1.1(d) of Appendix FM of the
         Immigration Rules (E-ECDR.2.5)".




8.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.



9.   On appeal the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  in  the  Appellant's
    favour in respect of paragraph E-ECDR.2.4:

         "The appellant is twenty three  years  of  age.   He  suffers  from
         cerebral palsy and is mentally retarded.  He has a  mental  age  of
         eight years.  He also suffers  from  psychosis.   There  are  three
         medical reports testifying to his mental and intellectual  problems
         at pages 30-33 in the appellant's bundle.  I am  satisfied  on  the
         basis of those reports  the  appellant  meets  E-ECDR.2.4.   It  is
         almost self-evident that a person with a mental age of 8  years  is
         not likely to be able to perform the activities of daily living for
         themselves". (paragraph 22).



10.  I pause to note that it is clear from this passage that the  Judge  had
    well in mind the exact medical problems of the Appellant  as  indicated
    in the supporting medical evidence, referencing the supporting  medical
    evidence in terms.



11.  Notwithstanding this favourable finding in respect of  E-ECDR.2.4,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge found against the Appellant in respect of the
    requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.5.   The  Judge's  consideration  of
    these matters is set out at paragraphs 23-30 in these terms:

         "23. When the appellant was twelve years of  age  his  mother,  the
             sponsor, came to the UK.  She has lived here ever since though
             she has visited  the  Yemen  twice  in  2011  and  2013.   The
             appellant was left in the care of his grandparents.   All  the
             indications are that he has lived happily and  contentedly  in
             his home country with his grandparents.  It is said  that  his
             condition  has  worsened  but  there   is   no   evidence   to
             substantiate that.  The medical reports do not suggest that.

         24.  It is said that his grandparents cannot continue to  care  for
             him as  they  are  old  and  suffering  from  various  medical
             problems themselves.

         25.  The grandfather is 77 years of age and suffers from  shortness
             of breath and fatigue (see medical letter  pages  83-84).   He
             appears to be modestly medicated for these problems (see  page
             85).

         26.  The Appellant's grandmother is  65  years  of  age.   Somewhat
             bizarrely she suffers from some  of  the  exact  same  medical
             problems as her husband,  for  example,  "chest  pain  stating
             (sic)  radiate  left  indies  (sic)  exertion,  shortening  of
             breathily (sic) in night".   There  are  references  again  to
             identical problems such as anxiety and fatigue.

         27.  It is unnecessary, however, for me to come to any  conclusions
             as to the credibility of the medical evidence as it  does  not
             in any event  support  the  appellant's  contention  that  his
             grandparents are, because of their medical problems, unable to
             care for him.  I accept that his grandfather is  77  years  of
             age but  there  is  no  evidence  that  his  medical  problems
             significantly affect his ability to care  for  the  appellant.
             In the same way his grandmother is 66 years of age but I  have
             no objective evidence of how her medical conditions affect her
             and certainly no evidence to support the sponsor's  contention
             that she cannot care for the appellant.

         28.  I note that the sponsor provides  financial  support  for  the
             appellant as is demonstrated by the  money  transfers  in  the
             appellant's bundle.  There is nothing to suggest  that  cannot
             continue.

         29.  Although in evidence before me the sponsor said the  appellant
             was not getting the medical help that he required I again have
             no evidence that that is the case.  He appears  to  be  or  to
             have been  under  the  care  of  both  a  psychiatrist  and  a
             neurologist.

         30.  On the evidence I am satisfied the appellant does not meet  E-
             ECDR.2.5".



12.  I have been told today that the ages of the  maternal  grandparents  at
    the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal were in fact  78
    and 66, not 77 and 65.  It seems to me that ultimately nothing turns on
    any such slight error.



13.  The Judge considered that the failure to meet the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules was  essentially  dispositive  of  the  appeal  under
    Article  8  (paragraph  31).   The  Judge  nonetheless  gave   separate
    consideration to Article 8, but found that there was no breach in  this
    regard.



14.  I note that the Judge found that there  was  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and the sponsor but characterised this as being "very limited
    family life over the last eleven  years"  (paragraph  32).   The  Judge
    explains this finding essentially on the basis of the circumstance that
    the sponsor had not been able to  visit  the  Appellant  on  a  regular
    basis. The Judge consequently concluded "There will therefore  be  very
    little disruption to the existing family life".  The Judge  also  noted
    the public interest consideration that the Appellant "will be a  burden
    upon public funds given his medical problems", before  concluding  that
    the appeal should be dismissed on Article 8 grounds.



15.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted on 18 February 2019.   The  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal in material part is in these terms:

         "Although the Appellant may well not succeed, it is  arguable  that
         the Judge erred in failing to give adequate  consideration  to  the
         fact that the Appellant is 23 years of age, has cerebral  palsy,  a
         mental age of 8 and has psychosis when considering the  ability  of
         his carers, his grandparents, to look after him when they are  both
         aged 77 and 65".



16.  In my judgment, respectfully, it is not immediately  obvious  that  the
    grant  of  permission  identifies  an  arguable  error  of  law.    The
    suggestion that it is  arguable  that  there  was  a  failure  to  give
    'adequate consideration' to the key facts in circumstances where it  is
    not identifiable that  any  facts  were  overlooked  in  the  Decision,
    appears in substance to be founded on criticisms of 'weight' and/or the
    premise that a different outcome might have been reached.  This  echoes
    the  grounds  of  challenge  which  are  couched  in  the  language  of
    disagreement rather than error of law.



17.  Indeed, it seems to me that ultimately in each of the application,  the
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, the grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and the submissions before me that a  significant  part
    of the Appellant's case is in substance to invite the decision-maker to
    conclude that 'it speaks for itself' that people  of  the  age  of  the
    Appellant's grandparents cannot ably look after an individual with  the
    characteristics of the Appellant.  I do not accept that this is a 'self-
    evident' proposition. The case, like any other, needs to be  proved  on
    its own particular facts, and on the basis of evidence.



18.  The grounds of appeal, so far as are relevant, are in these terms:

         "2.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   has   not   taken   proper
             consideration to the evidence provided by the Sponsor in  oral
             evidence as well as the  submission  provided.   It  has  been
             accepted that the Appellant has the mental age of  an  8  year
             old hence will not be able to perform everyday living tasks on
             his own (see paragraph 22).  The Appellant is currently  being
             cared for by his grandparents who are  77  years  old  and  65
             years old who suffer their own medical problems which has been
             accepted.  The FtT believed that there was  no  evidence  that
             their age and medical problem stops them from caring  for  the
             Appellant who suffers cerebral palsy and is mentally  retarded
             with a mental age of an 8 year old.   However,  it  is  almost
             self-evident that a 77 year old and a 65 year old  are  unable
             to  care  for  Appellant  due  to  his   condition.    It   is
             unreasonable to expect an elderly couple to continue  to  care
             for the Appellant especially now that he has grown  up  and  a
             bigger build.

         3.   The FtT Judge has not properly  considered  skeleton  argument
             submitted with the appeal detailing the difficulties with  the
             Appellant's current care as well as the  severe  conflict  war
             zone Yemen is in.

         4.   The FtT Judge has not properly assessed  Article  8  ECHR  and
             concluded there has been limited family life when the  Sponsor
             has  been  on  daily  contact  with  the  Appellant,  constant
             financial  and  emotional  support  (evidence  provided   with
             bundle).  The only factor is that the Sponsor has not  visited
             the Appellant since 2014 due  to  the  security  situation  in
             Yemen and no flights.  No consideration has been given to  the
             family life that will be breached between  the  Appellant  and
             his younger siblings residing in the UK.   Regardless  of  the
             Appellant's date of birth making him over 18 years of age  the
             assessment should be to assess the Appellant as a child as  he
             has a mental age of an 8 year old.   As  such  the  FFT  Judge
             should have considered whether that finding should lead her to
             consider there are unjustifiably harsh  consequences  so  that
             the refusal is disproportionate (see R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017]
             UKSC 11)".



19.  In my judgment the grounds of appeal do not disclose an error of law.



20.  It seems clear  from  the  multiple  use  of  the  word  'accepted'  at
    paragraph 2 of the grounds, that it is in substance  acknowledged  that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  have  regard  to  the  evidential
    material before him, and therefore the essence of the Appellant's  case
    with regard to  the  Appellant's  own  medical  circumstances  and  the
    position of the Appellant's grandparents.  I do not see how it  can  be
    argued where it is repeatedly said  that  the  Judge  accepted  certain
    matters that the Judge somehow then failed to take those  matters  into
    account. In reality the phrase "has not taken proper  consideration  to
    the evidence" is really no more than an assertion that  the  Judge  has
    not given the primary facts the weight that the  Appellant  would  have
    liked: this is to disagree with the Judge, but is  not  to  suggest  an
    error of law.



21.  It also seems to me in particular that in the  phrase  "however  it  is
    almost self-evident ...", the word 'almost' is a plain indication  that
    it is acknowledged that it is not  inevitably  self-evident.   To  that
    extent, the drafting of the ground essentially seeks to re-put the case
    on behalf of the Appellant, rather than  pleading  in  terms  that  the
    Judge reached a perverse conclusion, or one that was otherwise in error
    of law.



22.  In respect of paragraph 3 of the grounds, I find it is not possible  to
    identify anything significant in the  Skeleton  Argument  that  is  not
    essentially encompassed in the findings and consideration of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  Insofar as the situation in Yemen was pleaded in aid of
    the Appellant, Ms Shaw indicated in her submissions before me that that
    was something that impacted upon the availability of medical care,  the
    medical and health services in Yemen being restricted and  depleted  by
    the  unfortunate  situation  in  that  country.   It  follows,  in   my
    judgement, that the country situation was not something  that  directly
    impacted upon the Appellant's personal care needs beyond his healthcare
    - i.e. his care needs in respect of daily living activities, which  are
    distinct from medical input  through  medical  services.  As  such  the
    country situation did not specifically impact upon the ability  of  the
    grandparents to meet the Appellant's personal care needs.



23.  Insofar as the country situation may have had an  impact  generally  on
    the medical services available in Yemen, it is  clear  that  the  Judge
    made a finding on the evidence before him  that  the  Appellant  seemed
    able to access medical care (paragraph 29). In this context I note that
    the Appellant's medical issues are essentially chronic in  nature,  and
    his underlying diagnoses seemingly longstanding; he was not the subject
    of ongoing investigation so much as a continuing medication regime that
    had been established over a period of  years.   There  was  nothing  to
    indicate that the country situation had resulted in the Appellant being
    unable to obtain the medications that he was taking.



24.  Paragraph 4 of the grounds essentially pleads that the Judge was  wrong
    in concluding that there was limited family life.  The  matters  relied
    upon in  the  ground  of  appeal  -  the  Appellant's  dependency  both
    financially and in consequence of essentially having the mental age  of
    a child - are all matters that go to the question of whether  there  is
    or is not a family life.  The Judge found that there was a family life.
     It seems to me that the Judge cannot be criticised for  characterising
    the family life as between the Appellant and his mother as having  been
    limited over the last eleven years.  I can see nothing in substance  in
    this ground of challenge.  Insofar as  the  Appellant's  siblings  were
    concerned, there had been no actual meeting and to that  extent  again,
    it  cannot  be  said  that  there  was  anything  undue  in  the  Judge
    essentially characterising family life as being limited.



25.  In all the circumstances I find the grounds of  appeal  to  be  without
    merit.



26.  I note that Ms Shaw valiantly sought to develop the grounds  of  appeal
    with  reference  to  the  supporting  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in particular in respect of the Appellant's  actual  personal
    care needs. In this context, pursuant to the wording of E-ECDR.2.4  and
    2.5, and it being the finding of the Judge that the Appellant was  able
    to access medical care, the focus of the appeal was indeed on the  long
    term personal care needs required to perform everyday tasks.



27.  The nature and extent of those needs were in  part  a  matter  of  oral
    evidence.  The Judge records this:

         "[The sponsor] said that her son could not feed himself.  He  could
         not be relied upon to look after himself.  If he had  food  put  in
         front of him he could eat it but he needed to be  prompted  and  he
         needed to be prompted to take his medication" (paragraph 13).



28.  Further to this  my  attention  has  been  directed  to  the  sponsor's
    witness statement before the First-tier Tribunal signed on  8  December
    2018 (Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal,  pages  9-12).
    At paragraph 6 the sponsor said this:

         "The Appellant suffers from mental retardation.  He  has  a  mental
         age of 8 years.  He has been cared for by my parents in my  absence
         however this has been difficult for them as he has grown older.  My
         parents are unwell and getting old.  They  cannot  continue  caring
         for Mohammed.  There are times when Mohammed has just walked off in
         the streets after hearing sounds of firearms.  He was fascinated by
         the sound and wanted to see what it was.   Thankfully  a  neighbour
         recognised him and took him back home.  He has  wandered  off  more
         than once and my parents  are  finding  it  hard  to  control  him.
         Mohammed is big  and  well-built  while  my  parents  are  old  and
         fragile".

    Reference is also made in the witness statement to the Appellant  being
    "depressed and cries like a baby.  He says that he  does  not  want  to
    live any more if he is not  with  me.   He  constantly  blames  me  for
    leaving him and not bringing him earlier  and  now  the  same  is  used
    against me by the Entry Clearance Officer".  I  was  directed  to  this
    passage as illustrative of emotional needs of the Appellant.



29.  In this context I was also directed to the supporting medical  evidence
    at pages 30-33 of the bundle (cited by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at
    paragraph 22).  The documents at pages 32  and  33  are  the  documents
    submitted with the application to which  I  have  already  referred  at
    paragraphs 5 and 6 above.  The document at page 30  is  from  the  same
    Saber Hospital, but is dated  18  October  2018.   Notwithstanding  the
    change of date, the contents of that document appear to be  essentially
    identical to the earlier letter  from  the  hospital  -  even  down  to
    stating the age of the Appellant to be 20  years,  notwithstanding  the
    intervening 18 month period.  Those documents  are  highlighted  by  Ms
    Shaw as indicating  the  Appellant's  behavioural  characteristics  and
    emotional problems, which are necessarily matters in respect  of  which
    he requires input from any carer.



30.  In terms of assistance with everyday tasks, the only  specific  matters
    identified are in respect of feeding and medication.  It has  not  been
    disputed that the Appellant has a mental age of 8. As such there is  no
    reason to think that - providing he receives an  appropriate  level  of
    encouragement and direction - he is not able to get himself out of bed,
    is not able to wash himself, is not able to make use of  a  toilet,  is
    not able to dress himself.  Whilst it could not  be  expected  that  he
    would be able to wash his clothes, there is nothing to suggest that the
    maternal grandparents are not habitually washing their own clothes  and
    so can do so for the Appellant.  Insofar as eating is concerned,  again
    it is not to be suggested that the Appellant would be in a position  to
    cook for himself but again, plainly  the  grandparents  are  habitually
    preparing meals for themselves and  no doubt for the Appellant  at  the
    same time.  It is suggested, and it is  not  disputed,  that  he  needs
    prompting to eat, but that is  not  something  that  the  grandparents'
    medical conditions - even with any recent  deterioration  as  suggested
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  -  would  suggest  is  beyond  their
    capabilities. Similarly so in respect of medication.



31.  With  regard  to  emotional  support,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the
    grandparents  have  been  looking  after  the  Appellant  for  a   very
    considerable period of time.  Although it is said that he has grown  to
    be a largely built adult, it is also to be noted that at or  about  the
    date of the application it was approximately five years  since  he  had
    reached technical adulthood. There  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  his
    physical development was inhibited or limited in the same  way  as  his
    mental  development.   Accordingly,  he  is  a  child  who  has   grown
    physically into an adult during a period when he has been  consistently
    looked after by his grandparents who will have  experienced  over  that
    period of time all of the facets of his emotional difficulties.



32.  In all such circumstances it seems to me that the Judge's  observations
    at paragraph 27 (quoted above) are rational  and  adequately  reasoned,
    and, as of the date of the decision before the First-tier  Tribunal,  a
    complete and sustainable answer to the question of whether or  not  the
    grandparents were able to continue to meet the  Appellant's  long  term
    care needs.



33.  Accordingly, notwithstanding the helpful and clear articulation of  the
    case by Ms Shaw - which perhaps went beyond the  strict  scope  of  the
    grounds of appeal, and had an element of rearguing the  merits  of  the
    appeal - I do not identify an error of law.



34.  For completeness I note that the Appellant has now filed  some  further
    evidence - but as discussed with Ms Shaw, such evidence post-dates  the
    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal and is not for the consideration of
    the Upper Tribunal at the 'error of law' stage.  The materials filed  -
    a short witness statement from the sponsor and a  short  document  from
    the Aden German International Hospital dated  3  February  2019  headed
    Medical Report - are to the effect that the Appellant's grandfather has
    had a stroke since  the  date  of  the  appeal  hearing.   The  sponsor
    expresses the view that the stroke has been triggered by  the  pressure
    of having to look after the Appellant.  This is not presently a  matter
    for the Tribunal; the Tribunal could only take  into  account  the  new
    evidence in the event that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lodge were to be set aside for error of law.  For the reasons  given  I
    do not consider that to be the case.  How the Appellant and the sponsor
    may now wish to make use of the new evidence and the  suggested  change
    of circumstance is essentially a matter  for  them,  and  not  for  the
    Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

35.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    accordingly stands.



36.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 2 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
