
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04104/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 May 2017                        |On 30 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   MISS AJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Willcox, Counsel instructed by Chancery
Solicitors


                     NOTICE OF ACCEPTANCE OF WITHDRAWAL


1.    The  appellant  (hereafter  the  Secretary  of  State)   was   granted
    permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge (FtTJ) R
    Callender Smith allowing the appeal of the  respondent  (hereafter  the
    claimant), a citizen of Bangladesh, against a decision made on 30  July
    2015 refusing to grant limited leave to remain.  However, before me, Mr
    Deller stated that the appellant no longer wished to pursue the  appeal
    and he and Mr Willcox jointly asked me to treat the appeal as withdrawn
    under Rule 17(2) Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and
    subject to a consent order under Rule 39 of the same Rules.  I annex  a
    copy of that consent order as signed before me by both representatives.

2.   As Mr Deller acknowledged there is some controversy as regards  whether
    following changes to the NIAA 202 it  is  any  longer  possible  for  a
    Tribunal Judge to "remit" a case to the SSHD, although  SF  and  Others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120  (IAC)  appears  to
    indicate that the powers the Upper Tribunal can be exercised in kindred
    ways; see also Greenwood (No 2) [2015] UKUT 629 (IAC) paragraph  21  on
    the "fourth option".  In my judgment, it is in the interests of justice
    that the SSHD has the ability to reconsider her decision in this  case,
    for it is accepted that the claimant's original application for ILR can
    be treated  as  still  outstanding,  giving  her  a  certain  time  and
    opportunity to pass the Life  in  the  UK  test,  which  was  the  only
    requirement of the Rules that she did not meet at  the  time  at  which
    that application was first considered.

3.   In any event, as a matter of logic, I am only entitled to entertain  an
    appeal if it is pursued by the parties, subject only to my agreement to
    treat its case as withdrawn.  In this case, I  have  no  hesitation  in
    acting under Rule 17 of the Procedure Rules and agreeing the withdrawal
    of the SSHD's case.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                                  Date: 26 May 2017
            [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




                                    ANNEX


IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL                                 Ref: HU/04104/2015
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

In the matter of

SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME                                Appellant
DEPARTMENT

                                     and

A B J
                          Respondent


Upon the Secretary of State undertaking to  allow  the  respondent  28  days
within which to lodge an application to vary her application  for  leave  to
remain.

                       CONSENT ORDER UNDER RULE 39(1)

Pursuant to Rule 39(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008, the parties consent to  the  disposal  of  the  above  appeal  on  the
following agreed basis:

1.   That with the Tribunal's consent under  Rule  17(2)  the  Secretary  of
    State withdraws her case that the First tier  Tribunal's  decision  was
    materially flawed ............ error of law;

2.   That the appeal is therefore summarily dismissed; and

3.   That the decision of the  First  tier  Tribunal  shall  stand  and  the
    matter shall return to the Secretary of State to make a lawful decision
    on the  outstanding  application  such  application  being  subject  to
    possible variation.





Signed:  PETER DELLER                            Signed: Peter Deller
(Specialist Appeals Team)
15-05-2012

For the Appellant                                     For the Respondent


Date:    15 May 2017                                  Date: 15 May 2017
