
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/04355/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 March 2019                         |On 20 March 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Muhammad [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Secretary of State :        Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For Mr [S]:            P Turner, Counsel, instructed by Milestone Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. This is a challenge by the Secretary of State against the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Zahed (the judge), promulgated on 30 November
    2018, by which he allowed the appeal of Mr [S] (the  Claimant)  against
    the Secretary of State's decision of 24 January  2018.   This  decision
    had in turn refused the Claimant's application for indefinite leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence in this country.

 2. The core point taken against the Claimant by  the  Secretary  of  State
    related to the now familiar issue connecting paragraph  322(5)  of  the
    Immigration Rules (the Rules) to the matters of tax  returns  submitted
    to HMRC and/or figures stated in application forms for limited leave to
    remain submitted over the course of time.



The judge's decision

 3. In this case it was said by the Secretary of State that dishonesty  was
    practised by the Claimant in two applications for  limited  leave:  the
    first in April 2011 and the second in May of 2013.

 4. Having considered the evidence as a whole, the  judge  found  that  the
    Claimant had not been dishonest in respect of information  set  out  in
    his application forms submitted to the Secretary of State, but had been
    dishonest in respect of an under declaration of income to HMRC.

 5. The judge correctly noted  that  paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Rules  was
    discretionary in nature.  Having this in mind, the  judge  went  on  to
    consider a number of other factors in  respect  of  that  discretionary
    element.  These factors included: the steps taken by  the  Claimant  to
    remedy the under declaration; the absence of  any  penalty  imposed  by
    HMRC; the Claimant's payment of outstanding tax liabilities;  and  also
    the Claimant's familial circumstances in this country,  which  included
    his relationship with a dual Polish/British national partner and  their
    two children (with the birth of a third child imminent at the  date  of
    the hearing).

 6. All-told, the judge concluded in effect that the discretionary  element
    of paragraph 322(5) should  be  exercised  in  the  Claimant's  favour.
    Therefore, this general ground of refusal did not apply and  given  the
    undisputed fact of the ten years' lawful residence and in  the  absence
    of any other adverse matters, the judge concluded that the Claimant had
    indeed satisfied the requirements of the relevant Rule upon  which  the
    latest application had been based, that being paragraph 276B.  On  this
    basis the appeal was allowed.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The Secretary of State lodged grounds of appeal which  are  essentially
    twofold.  The first on the face of it has a perversity element  to  it,
    suggesting that the finding of dishonesty in respect of the  Claimant's
    dealings with HMRC was "enough" for paragraph 322(5) of  the  Rules  to
    have applied.  An additional point under ground 1  is  that  the  judge
    allegedly placed "significant emphasis" on the fact that HMRC  had  not
    imposed a penalty or sought to prosecute the Claimant in respect of the
    incorrect tax returns.  The second ground is an out-and-out  perversity
    challenge.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies on
    12 December 2018.



The hearing before me

 9. Mr Bramble relied on the grounds of  appeal.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge had been wrong to have taken any material account of the  failure
    of HMRC to impose a penalty on the Claimant.  The judge had  also  been
    wrong to have taken the Claimant's family  circumstances  into  account
    when considering the discretionary element of  paragraph  322(5).   The
    family's circumstances,  it  was  said,  should  have  been  considered
    separately and in respect of Article 8 only.

10. Mr Turner relied on his skeleton argument and  submitted  that  because
    this was a human rights appeal, all factors were relevant.  These would
    have included the Claimant's familial circumstances  in  this  country,
    amongst others.  It was noted that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    challenged a number of the judge's findings contained in [41] and  [42]
    of the decision.  Whether the issue of the absence of an  HMRC  penalty
    was neutral or favourable to the Claimant, this  was  only  one  factor
    amongst others.

11. Mr Bramble made no reply.



Decision on error of law

12. I conclude that there are no material errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

13. The judge correctly directed himself to the uncontroversial  fact  that
    paragraph 322(5) is discretionary in nature.

14. To the extent that the grounds of appeal  suggest  that  a  finding  of
    dishonesty on  the  part  of  the  Claimant  was,  in  and  of  itself,
    sufficient for this general ground of refusal to  have  applied,  there
    are misconceived.  Clearly a finding of dishonesty is a serious  matter
    and counts against an individual.   The  judge  in  my  view  correctly
    recognised this starting point in [38], stating that in  light  of  his
    primary finding of fact there was a presumption that the Claimant would
    be subject to the application of this  general  ground.   However,  the
    judge was also  correct  to  have  then  gone  on  and  taken  what  he
    considered to be all relevant circumstances into account.

15. There may be a question mark as to  whether  the  failure  of  HMRC  to
    impose a penalty or to  have  taken  criminal  proceedings  against  an
    individual is relevant.  As  far  as  I  am  aware,  there  is  nothing
    authoritative to say that this is not the case.  However,  in  my  view
    this was only one factor amongst a number of others, and  there  is  no
    indication that he place particularly "significant weight" upon it.  If
    it were to be excised from the judge's reasoning the rest  of  what  he
    said is adequate and, is certainly in my view not perverse.

16. The judge was entitled to take account of  the  Claimant's  actions  in
    remedying the under declaration and paying  off  his  tax  liabilities.
    More importantly, the judge was entitled, indeed  was  bound,  to  have
    taken account of the Claimant's familial circumstances in this country.
      To  have  placed  these  into  an  entirely  separate   category   of
    considerations under Article 8 would have been artificial.   Mr  Turner
    was right to point out that this was a  human  rights  appeal  and  all
    relevant circumstances had to be factored in.  The  (or  at  least  an)
    appropriate stage for this to  have  been  done  was  when  considering
    paragraph 322(5) and the discretionary element thereof.

17. It is of note that the  Secretary  of  State  has  not  challenged  the
    findings set out in [41] and [42].  There  was  nothing  else  weighing
    against the Claimant other than the paragraph 322(5)  issue.  Once  the
    judge had concluded that this general ground of refusal did  not  apply
    it follows that he was then  entitled  to  conclude  that  all  of  the
    relevant elements of paragraph 276B were met (although  I  accept  that
    this particular provision is not stated in terms that was  clearly  the
    relevant Rule, and had  been  relied  upon  throughout  the  Claimant's
    application).  In turn, the satisfaction of  the  Rule  inevitably  (at
    least in this case) led to the judge's conclusion that  decision  under
    appeal was disproportionate and unlawful.

18.  It  is  well-established  that  challenges  involving  allegations  of
    perversity  must  reach  what  has  been  described  as  an   "elevated
    threshold".  On the facts of this case and in light of  what  some  may
    describe as fairly generous findings by the judge, this  threshold  has
    simply not been met.

19. Therefore the Secretary of State's challenge fails and the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        [pic]        Date:  18 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
