
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04586/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th October 2018                          |On 20th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                               mr nathan black
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTion not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Allison of Counsel, instructed by Turpin &
                    Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica born on 17th October 1995, appealed
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe promulgated on 4th
    July 2018 dismissing his appeal against a decision of the Secretary  of
    State dated 12th  February  2018  to  refuse  his  human  rights  claim
    following his notification of an automatic deportation order because of
    his conviction at Lewis Crown Court and sentence on 13th April 2017  to
    28 months' imprisonment.

 2.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  his/her  decision  recorded  the
    following:

      i) The appellant arrived in the country on  30th  November  2000  with
         valid entry clearance as a visitor until  May  2001.   He  remained
         without leave until January 2013 when he made  an  application  for
         leave to remain under the ten-year route.  On 16th January 2016  he
         was granted leave to remain until 16th  January  2016  but  on  9th
         August 2016 he was served with a notice of liability to removal.

     ii) On 13th April 2017 the appellant appeared at Lewis Crown Court  and
         was convicted of two offences of possession of Class A  drugs  with
         intent to supply.  He was sentenced to 28 months' imprisonment.  On
         18th August 2017  the  respondent  served  a  stage  1  deportation
         decision to which he responded, such that deportation would  engage
         his Article 8 rights.

    iii) The appellant was born in Jamaica and came to  the  United  Kingdom
         with his father's fianc�e when he was  5  years  old.   He  has  no
         contact with his mother and does not  know  if  she  was  still  in
         Jamaica or even alive.  He lived with his father for about  a  year
         but was then taken into care because his father was  violent.   His
         father formed a new  relationship  with  a  woman  called  [D]  who
         arranged for him to live with them but he often  stayed  away.   At
         the age of 16 he went to stay with  an  aunt.   He  took  GCSEs  at
         secondary school and went to college to do an  apprenticeship.   He
         could not continue with this because his lack of  status  meant  he
         could not work.  He maintained he first  learned  of  his  lack  of
         status when he was arrested in 2016.  He was issued with papers  in
         2014 and told he had Indefinite Leave to Remain.

     iv) The respondent then  considered  the  appellant's  deportation  was
         conducive to the public good and in accordance with  Section  32(5)
         of the 2007 Act.   His  immigration  history  and  his  convictions
         recorded in the Crown Court were material.  The appellant  did  not
         have children in the United Kingdom and provided no evidence  of  a
         partner.  He had been in the country for  17  years  but  only  two
         years and six months had been  lawful.   It  was  accepted  he  was
         socially  and  culturally  integrated,  but   the   offences   were
         particularly serious.  There was little  evidence  he  had  made  a
         positive contribution to society or that he  was  not  a  financial
         burden.  It was not accepted that there would be difficulties in re-
         establishing himself in Jamaica which could  be  said  to  be  very
         compelling circumstances.  There was no evidence of  an  Article  8
         claim  over  and  above  the  circumstances  provided  for  in  the
         Exceptions.

      v) The judge specifically recorded at paragraph 13

             "Mr Jagedesham accepted,  properly  and  helpfully,  that  the
             appellant could not satisfy the  requirements  of  the  Rules.
             The issue was whether there were very compelling circumstances
             outweighing the public interest in removal".

     vi) Mrs [DD] also gave evidence and described the appellant as her  son
         who had stayed with her.  He had no-one in Jamaica  and  she  would
         not be able to support him from this country.

 3. The judge also made this record at [16]

         "The appellant provided a report prepared by Mr Luke de Noronha who
         is in the third year of a DPhil in anthropology at  the  University
         of Oxford.  His research focuses on deportation from  this  country
         to Jamaica.  The report was general in  nature  and  contained  his
         opinion on the risks  faced  by  deportees  to  Jamaica.   He  also
         provided an  extract  from  a  document  entitled  Coming  Home  to
         Jamaica, listing 'dos and don'ts'  for  returning  residents.   The
         publisher is not identified."

 4. The judge made the following findings:

      i) At paragraph 21 the Rules emphasised the high  public  interest  in
         deporting foreign criminals and in a case to which  Rules  399  and
         399A did not apply, very compelling reasons  will  be  required  if
         they are to constitute "exceptional circumstances"  which  outweigh
         the public interest in deportation.

     ii) The judge set out paragraph 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

    iii) At paragraph 23 it was noted:

             "Paragraph 399 does not apply to the appellant because he does
             not have a child or partner in this country.   Paragraph  399A
             does not apply because he has not been  lawfully  resident  in
             this country for most of his life.   The  issue  therefore  is
             whether there are very  compelling  reasons  which  constitute
             'exceptional circumstances' which outweigh the public interest
             in deportation."

     iv) There was little  dispute  about  the  factual  background  to  the
         matter.  The appellant's immigration history  was  set  out  above.
         There was no dispute about his criminal record and  the  respondent
         accepted that the appellant had been in this country since he was 5
         and he was socially and culturally integrated.  The judge  accepted
         that the appellant had been educated in this country  and  that  he
         attempted to undertake an apprenticeship.

      v) The appellant was no longer  in  a  relationship  with  his  former
         partner and did  not  have  any  children.   The  judge  noted  the
         evidence regarding  that  of  Ms  [D]  and  the  history  of  their
         relationship and that her father was regarded  as  his  grandfather
         and concluded

             "I accept that family had been established  between  them  and
             with her children.  I note that he does not  live  with  them"
             [25].

     vi) The appellant had been convicted of possession of heroin and  crack
         cocaine with intent to supply  and  the  judge  had  given  careful
         consideration to the  judge's  sentencing  comments  and  that  the
         appellant travelled from London to Brighton to  supply  the  drugs.
         The judge sentencing noted in his comments the damage to those  who
         have used drugs and the effects on community generally.  The First-
         tier Tribunal Judge found the  nature  of  these  offences  weighed
         heavily in the balance.

             "I have had regard to the  expert's  report  provided  by  the
             appellant.  It is general in nature and does not  address  his
             particular circumstances.  The expert describes  the  problems
             that may be faced by deportees on return to Jamaica but  notes
             that individual cases  must  be  judged  on  their  particular
             facts" [27].

    vii) The judge had regard at [28] to AB (protection - criminal  gangs  -
         internal relocation) Jamaica CG [2007] UKAIT 0018 in which  it  was
         held that authorities in Jamaica were generally willing and able to
         provide effective protection.

   viii) The strongest element of the appellant's case  was  the  length  of
         time he  had  spent  in  the  country  and  as  a  consequence  the
         difficulties he has faced on  return  to  Jamaica.   There  was  no
         dispute he had socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
         Kingdom and he may have problems  "adjusting  to  life  in  Jamaica
         although there are organisations to assist people in his position".

     ix) The judge asked himself whether the circumstances amounted to "very
         compelling reasons" constituting "exceptional circumstances".

      x) He concluded the decision to deport the  appellant  was  justified.
         The appellant had not discharged the burden of proof and the appeal
         was dismissed.

 5. The application for permission to appeal there were two main grounds of
    challenge;

         Ground 1. The judge had undertaken a flawed  inadequate  assessment
         of very significant  obstacles  in  assessing  whether  there  were
         exceptional circumstances.  The judge should  have  had  regard  to
         matters falling within the  scope  of  circumstances  described  in
         Sections 117C(4)/(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
         2002 and paragraphs 399-339A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (see  NA
         (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
         Civ 662).  As set out in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813

             "The idea of integration calls for a broad evaluative judgment
             to be made as whether the individual  will  be  enough  of  an
             insider in terms of  understanding  how  life  in  that  other
             country is carried on and capacity to participate in it so  as
             to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there,  to  be
             able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society  and  to
             build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a  variety  of   human
             relationships to give substance to the individual's private or
             family life."

         (i)      First it was submitted that the judge failed to carry  out
             an  adequate  assessment  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
             integration in  Jamaica.   The  appellant  had  never  visited
             Jamaica since the age of 5 and had no contact with  anyone  in
             that country.

         (ii)     The judge failed to have regard to the report of  Luke  De
             Noronha "Deportees in  Jamaica  -  Expert  Report  2017".   At
             section 1 this report states:

                  "Some have no family members  to  return  to  and  end  up
                  homeless ... without family support, deported persons  who
                  have often forgotten how things operate  both  practically
                  and culturally in Jamaica tend to face myriad difficulties
                  on return".

             Section 2  recorded  that  deported  persons  "are  especially
             vulnerable to crime in Jamaica and  regularly  become  targets
             for  robberies  and  different  forms  of   extortion".    ...
             "numerous examples of newly  deported  persons  being  mugged,
             sometimes in  broad  daylight,  because  they  were  instantly
             recognisable  as   foreigners".    Section   3   reintegration
             "language, health, housing and employment" "put simply, if you
             are returning to the island poor,  it  is  important  to  know
             people".

             Such difficulties were  highly  relevant  to  the  appellant's
             appeal and Judge Broe did not  have  adequate  regard  to  the
             contents of the report merely referring  to  organisations  to
             assist people.

         (iii)    the judge failed to have any or  adequate  regard  to  the
             obstacles the appellant  would  face  on  return  as  per  the
             respondent's own guidance provided to Jamaicans which  advises
             Jamaicans to avoid the use of  overseas  non-Jamaican  accents
             which could  attract  unwanted  attention  and  returnees  are
             warned against discussing their personal situation they do not
             know.  Overall there was a concern about the language.

 6. In all the circumstances under this ground  the  judge  had  failed  to
    carry out an adequate assessment.

 7. Ground 2.  The judge failed to have regard to  relevant  considerations
    and there was a need to consider any other relevant factors.  The judge



      1) failed to consider the fact that the appellant posed a low risk  of
         harm; and

      2) failed to address or consider the impact of the appellant in forced
         separation from Mrs [D] and her family.

 8. The appellant himself spoke of the importance of his relationship  with
    Mrs [D] and  her  evidence  testified  to  the  family  life  would  be
    affected.  The judge erred in failing to address adequately or  at  all
    the impact on the family of his being deported.

 9. At the hearing Mr Allison submitted that albeit there was a  concession
    that the appellant did not meet the Rules, the judge needed to consider
    the very significant obstacles and any further  relevant  circumstances
    when coming to the decision. That was the basis of the consideration of
    any exceptional or compelling circumstances. The judge  had  failed  to
    address the expert's report in anything other than general  terms.   It
    was relevant that the appellant had had discretionary leave.   He  came
    here at the age of 5 and had eighteen months in local  authority  care.
    There was a lack of reasoning as to why there were no  very  compelling
    circumstances.

10. Mr Melvin submitted that there was no indication  that  the  concession
    was made solely in relation to the first limb of 399A and that was  the
    way that the judge pursued the appeal.   In  fact,  there  was  nothing
    which raised very  significant  obstacles  in  this  appellant's  case.
    There were no health issues, no language issues, the appellant had been
    raised in a Jamaican household and he was an educated  man  with  GCSEs
    and had commenced an apprenticeship.  His  "grandfather"  had  returned
    and died in Jamaica, in other words he did have connections, and  there
    were persons in the UK who could assist him when he arrived there.  The
    judge had formed a sufficient analysis and  there  was  nothing  to  be
    reargued.

11. In response Mr Allison stated that the scope of the concession  on  the
    immigration rules could be seen  from  the  skeleton  argument.   There
    should  have  been  an  overall  evaluation  and  engagement   with   a
    vulnerability of deportees.

Conclusions

12. It was asserted in the skeleton argument that as the  Court  of  Appeal
    explained in  the  case  of  NA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662  in
    considering whether a claim is very compelling a decision maker  should
    still have regard to the  matters  falling  within  the  scope  of  the
    circumstances described in Sections  117C(4)/(5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002/paragraphs  399-399A of the Immigration
    Rules (19) and (29-32) of NA.  Thus, in relation to a "medium offender"
    (sentence below four years) who does not meet all of the Exceptions the
    court explained that at 32

         "... in principle there may be cases in which such an offender  can
         say that features of his case of a kind described in  Exceptions  1
         and 2 have such great force for Article 8  purposes  that  they  do
         constitute such very  compelling  circumstances  whether  taken  by
         themselves or in conjunction with other factors relevant to Article
         8 but not falling within the factors described in Exceptions 1  and
         2.  The decisionmaker, be it the Secretary of State or a  Tribunal,
         must look at all the matters relied upon collectively, in order  to
         determine whether they are sufficient compelling  to  outweigh  the
         high public interest in deportation".

13. It is quite clear from the record  of  the  judge's  decision  at  both
    paragraph 13 and paragraph 18 that he understood  that  the  issue  was
    whether there were very compelling circumstances outweighing the public
    interest in removal. It is not evident that  he  failed  to  take  into
    account any assessment of the 'Exceptions'.   I  have  scrutinised  the
    skeleton  argument  submitted  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal   by   Mr
    Jagedesham and note that at paragraph 9 of the  skeleton  argument  the
    court was urged towards  the  correct  approach  to  deportation  cases
    "including the great weight to be attached to the  public  interest  in
    the deportation of foreign offenders  and  the  requirement  for  "very
    compelling reasons"  when  the  Immigration  Rules  are  not  met.   At
    paragraph 10 in considering whether a  claim  is  "very  compelling"  a
    decision maker should still have regard to the matters  falling  within
    the scope of the circumstances described at Section 117C(4) and (5) and
    paragraph 399 to 399A and what the court should  do  when  the  "medium
    offender did not meet all of the Exceptions and then  at  paragraph  20
    the skeleton argument records that

         "recalling what was said in Kamara and given that the appellant has
         no-one in Jamaica or any familiarity with that country having  left
         at the age of 5, it is submitted that there is  a  very  compelling
         basis on which it can be said that this appellant  will  face  very
         significant obstacles in integrating into Jamaica".

14. At paragraph 21 of the skeleton argument it was stated "it  is  further
    submitted that the above submissions, taken together with  those  below
    disclose a very compelling case against the appellant's deportation".

15. What was clearly relayed to the judge was that  the  Immigration  Rules
    had not been complied with in relation to very  significant  obstacles,
    but  the  case  was  put  on  the  basis  that  when  considering   the
    'Exceptions' the appellant's time in the  UK  fell  to  be  treated  as
    "special" and "very compelling".  Further the skeleton argument  argued
    that  he  was  integrated  and  finally  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles in reliance on the report of Mr Noronha.  I am not  persuaded
    that the judge failed to appreciate the force of the skeleton argument.



16. The Immigration Rules paragraph 399A sets out

         'This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if -

             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most
             of his life; and

             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

             (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his
             integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
             deported'.

17. The judge, as can be seen from above, clearly set  out  the  background
    for the appellant and was fully aware of his length of  residence.   He
    had not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his  life  further
    to paragraph 399(a) and indeed the judge was fully aware  that  he  was
    born in 1995, came to the UK in 2000 at the age as  a  minor  and  only
    obtained leave in 2014.  The appellant was an adult from  2013  onwards
    but had not resolved his status.  The fact is that this  appellant  had
    spent much of his life  in  the  UK  but  could  not  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules because he had not been here lawfully.  Much of  what
    was cited from NA (Pakistan) was in relation to someone who  had  lived
    in the UK lawfully, NA (Pakistan) paragraph 31.

18. Nonetheless the judge specifically accepted  that  the  respondent  had
    accepted the appellant was integrated but his time and circumstances in
    the United Kingdom did not disclose very compelling features.   As  the
    judge recorded the appellant had been schooled in  the  United  Kingdom
    but he did not live with any family in particular and was not working.

19. Turning to very significant obstacles as to the integration in Jamaica,
    the judge specifically  as  identified  above  addressed  the  'expert'
    report but found it to be "general in nature and contained his  opinion
    on the risks faced by deportees to Jamaica".  This is a report prepared
    by a third-year student of a DPhil in anthropology of the University of
    Oxford and does not approach identifying very significant obstacles  or
    even very compelling reasons for  the  appellant  not  to  relocate  to
    Jamaica.

20. Clearly the judge did not accept the expert's report and stated

         "It is general in  nature  and  does  not  address  his  particular
         circumstances.  The expert describes the problems that may be faced
         by deportees on return to Jamaica but notes that  individual  cases
         must be judged on their particular facts" (paragraph 27).

21. The judge assessed those facts.  The context, for the expert report, as
    drawn out  by  the  judge  in  relation  to  his  personal  and  family
    circumstances was  that  the  appellant  had  GCSE  education  and  had
    commenced an apprenticeship.  There was no evidence  that  he  had  any
    health difficulties, no evidence that he had language  difficulties  or
    had been brought up in anything other than a Jamaican household.   That
    he had little family  in  Jamaica  does  not  signal  very  significant
    obstacles or compelling reasons.  Indeed, the decision noted  that  Mrs
    [D]'s grandfather returned and died in Jamaica.  Suffice it to say  the
    appellant had not produced evidence  to  demonstrate  that  he  had  no
    connections.

22. Specifically, the judge noted that there were organisations  to  assist
    people in the appellant's position and in the face of the  evidence  in
    the round and as he states at paragraph 31  "on  the  totality  of  the
    evidence" the judge clearly found neither  very  significant  obstacles
    nor  enhanced  significant  obstacles  such  that  they   amounted   to
    compelling  circumstances.   The  judge  referred  to  AB  (Protections
    -criminal gangs -internal relocation) and was alert  to  the  difficult
    circumstances for  some  returnees  in  Jamaica  but  it  was  not  the
    appellant's  case  that  he  was  to  be  specifically  targeted.   The
    respondent's guidance for those  returning  to  Jamaica  is  just  that
    assistance on reintegration and the avoidance  of  unwanted  attention.
    It is not a confirmation that appellants may not return.

23. Turning to Ground 2, that the appellant is said to pose a low  risk  of
    reoffending does not mean there is no risk of reoffending.  It was open
    to the judge to find that the strongest element of the appellant's case
    was the length of time he had spent in the UK but that he would  merely
    have problems in adjusting to Jamaican life rather than  anything  more
    forceful. The judge did consider the contact that the  appellant  would
    have with the witness, [D], and her family but noted specifically  that
    they did not live together.  They are not related in any way.  They may
    have some family life but the  strength  of  that  connection  did  not
    reveal  very  compelling  circumstances  such  as  to   undermine   the
    deportation order and lent limited support to  the  assertion  of  very
    compelling circumstances.  The appellant no longer had  a  partner  and
    had no child in the United Kingdom as the judge noted at [25].

24. As reflected in the decision, there  was  a  broad  evaluation  as  per
    Kamara regarding  very  significant  obstacles.    The  appellant  came
    nowhere near to compliance with the Immigration Rules,  the  provisions
    of which are conjunctive.  There was adequate assessment  of  any  very
    significant obstacles and nothing in the evidence  which  pointed  with
    such force  to  very  compelling  circumstances  when  considering  the
    circumstances under the exceptions or overall cumulatively.

25. The conclusions were brief but open to the judge.  The fact is that the
    appellant could not comply with paragraph 399A because he had not  been
    lawfully resident in the UK for most  of  his  life.   On  reading  the
    decision carefully, there is no indication that  the  judge  merely  by
    reference to paragraph 30 to the Article 8 outside the Rules failed  to
    address the issue of very compelling circumstances or that he  did  not
    take into account all the relevant factors.  The judge  understood  the
    reasons that the appellant was not resident lawfully in the UK.   There
    is adequate reasoning for his conclusions, simply, no  very  compelling
    circumstances had been made out.

26. As such I find that the decision contains no error  of  law  and  shall
    stand.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made no material  error  of  law  and  his  decision
shall stand.



Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 15th November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


