

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/04049/2016

                                                      HU/04055/2016

                                                      HU/04053/2016

                                                      HU/04057/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28th March 2018                         | On 11th April 2018             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                   mrs salima khatun and three dependents
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Murphy (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge NMK Lawrence) ("FtT") promulgated on 10th January 2017 in  which
    he dismissed the appellants human rights appeals against the refusal of
    their applications for further leave to remain made by  the  respondent
    on 3rd February 2016.





Background

2.   The appellants who are citizens of Bangladesh are the parents  and  two
    children who have resided in the UK for over 7 years (since 2007).  The
    children were qualifying children  under  section  117B(6)  Nationality
    Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) at the date of the hearing.

First-tier decision

3.   In its decision and reasons the FtT considered  the  applications  with
    reference to the Immigration Rules family/private life (Appendix  FM  &
    paragraph 276ADE) and cited large extracts of case law relevant to  the
    best interests of  children.   It  was  accepted  that  the  two  adult
    appellants could not meet the Rules under the partner route [17].   The
    FtT considered the children in particular with reference to the desires
    of the children in mind [22] and found that none of the  children  were
    at any critical stage in their lives.  The FtT concluded that it  would
    not be unreasonable for them to return  to  Bangladesh  [25].  The  FtT
    found no compelling circumstances to justify consideration  outside  of
    the rules [36].

Grounds of appeal

4.   In grounds of appeal the  appellants  argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    failing to consider the appeal with reference to human  rights  outside
    of the rules  and  under  section  117B(6)  and/or  with  reference  to
    MA(Pakistan) & others 2016 EWCA Civ 705.  The length  of  residence  of
    the children, over 7 years, was a significant  factor to be  considered
    under the "reasonableness" issue where it applied to qualified children
    and where it was necessary to find powerful reasons to justify removal.
      The youngest child had lived in the UK for almost 13 years since  the
    age of two years. The FtT failed to  properly  assess  where  the  best
    interests of the children lay.  The eldest child met  the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE at the date of the hearing (ground  4).   This  was
    not a deportation appeal and Kamara did not apply. The FtT appeared  to
    hold against  the  children  the  poor  immigration  history  of  their
    parents, contrary to caselaw (ground 7). The decision showed a lack  of
    scrutiny and care, for example repetition of  identical  paragraphs  at
    [22][26][31].

Permission to appeal

5.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted  by  UTJ  C
    Lane on 20th December 2017.  In granting permission the UT Judge  found
    arguable grounds that there was an error of law by failure to  consider
    MA and section 117B(6).

Submisssions

6.   At the hearing before me Mr Murphy relied on the grounds of appeal.  Mr
    Bramble agreed that all grounds (save ground 7) were made out.  As  the
    eldest daughter had now been given leave to remain ground 4 was otiose.
     No submissions were made by Mr Bramble on the applicability of section
    117B(6) or reasonableness.

Discussion and conclusion

7.   I find that there were material errors  of  law  in  the  decision  and
    reason of the FtT and that the grounds are made out by the  appellants.
    The FtT erred in law by failing to consider MA(Pakistan )(paragraphs 46
    & 49) and to apply section 117B(6) 2002 Act as amended. I further  find
    that the assessment of where the best interests of the children lie was
    inadequately considered and expressed by the FtT in the  light  of  the
    fact that there were weighty factors in addition to the desires of  the
    children that were not taken in to account.  I set aside the decision.

Re making the decision

8.   At the date of the hearing before the FtT, the two  children  lived  in
    the UK for well over the 7  year  qualifying  period.   The  length  of
    residence amounts to compelling circumstances for consideration outside
    of the Rules and there is  private/family  life  in  the  UK.  I  apply
    section 117B(6) and am satisfied that it would be unreasonable for  the
    youngest child to return to Bangladesh given the length of residence in
    the UK where his sister has now been granted  leave  to  remain.  I  am
    satisfied that there are  no  powerful  reasons  to  outweigh  why  the
    children should not remain in the UK  and  be  returned  to  Bangladesh
    given their significant length of residence in the UK.   There  was  no
    evidence  of  any  criminal  activity  by  the  parents  or  very  poor
    immigration history.  The eldest child born in 1998 was now  nearly  20
    years old and has been granted leave to remain.  On the facts the  best
    interests of the younger child born in 2004, and who has lived  in  the
    UK since 2007 and for most of his life, lie in  remaining  in  the  UK.
    Accordingly the appeals of the parents are also allowed,  as  it  would
    not be reasonable for the child to live in the UK without  his  parents
    (PD & others (Article 8- conjoined family claim) Sri Lanka [2016]  UKUT
    00108).



Decision

9.   All appeals allowed on human rights grounds.


                               Signed                     Date 6.4.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





NO ANONYMITY ORDER

No Fee award.




                               Signed                     Date 6.4.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


