
`[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/04176/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 28 July 2017                       |         On 7 November 2017           |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                ASADUR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Miss S Anzani, of Counsel, instructed by Farid
                 Javid Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Mill ("FtTJ"), who in a decision promulgated on 31
      May 2017, dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a decision  of  the
      Secretary of State to refuse leave to remain on human rights  grounds.




2.    The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  15  January  1982.  He
    entered the UK on 10 July 2006 with entry clearance as  a  work  permit
    holder valid until 27 June 2007. Following the expiration of that leave
    he made successive attempts to regularise his status  on  human  rights
    grounds outside of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") on the basis  of
    his relationship with his wife - a British citizen.

3.     The  Respondent  refused  the  application  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules and nor  was  he
    entitled to remain on human rights  grounds.  Moreover,  the  Appellant
    could not fulfil the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules  and
    there were no grounds to  warrant  a  grant  of  leave  on  exceptional
    grounds. Essentially, while there was no dispute the Appellant and  his
    wife were in a genuine and subsisting relationship, the Respondent  was
    of the view that family life could reasonably continue overseas.

4.    After the refusal a child was born to the couple on [ ] 2016.

5.    The FtTJ heard evidence from the Appellant and his wife. He noted  the
    only claim that was before him was Article 8 outside of the Rules.  The
    FtTJ made primary findings of fact at [22]. He found, inter alia,  that
    the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  wife
    and a parental relationship with his daughter. He noted  the  wife  had
    lived in the UK since she was 4  years  old  and  that  both  wife  and
    daughter were British citizens.

6.    The FtTJ found that the Appellant's wife gave  up  her  employment  to
    care for her elderly parents who had significant health difficulties  -
    her father had dementia and ischaemic  heart  disease  and  her  mother
    Alzheimer's and osteoporosis. The FtTJ accepted  the  Appellant's  wife
    was the primary carer for her parents, her mother required 24-hour care
    and it was unlikely that the wife could continue to meet her care needs
    in the longer term.  While  the  FtTJ  accepted  the  Appellant  had  a
    relationship with and cared for his daughter, he found the  mother  was
    her primary carer. The FtTJ took  into  account  that  the  wife  is  a
    British citizen and had lived in the UK for most of her life, but noted
    that she was born in Bangladesh, retained ties with  that  country  and
    was familiar with the language, traditions and customs of that country.
    Similarly, the Appellant was familiar with his country of origin  where
    he worked as a teacher prior  to  his  arrival  in  the  UK.  The  FtTJ
    referred to his immigration history and to the  fact  that  he  had  no
    intention of leaving the UK.

7.    Without expressly saying  so,  the  FtTJ  clearly  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had established a family life in the UK, but  found  for  the
    purposes of Article 8 at [29], "I  am  not  convinced  that  there  are
    compelling reasons to consider such a  claim  outwith  the  Immigration
    Rules  which  comprise  protection  otherwise  for  the  Appellant   if
    applicable."

8.    Nevertheless, the FtTJ conducted a proportionality exercise and  found
    at [29] that it was not "unduly harsh for the Appellant to  be  removed
    from the United Kingdom. There are no matters which weigh in favour  of
    the Appellant which cancel out the need for immigration  control  which
    is the subject of clear rules." The FtTJ  noted  that  "little  weight"
    could be attached to the Appellant's family life  as  the  relationship
    was established and a child was born whilst his status was  precarious.
    It was not unreasonable to expect the Appellant, his wife and child  to
    live in Bangladesh where his wife had ties. The FtTJ found that it  was
    in the best interests of the child to remain residing with  her  mother
    either in the UK or Bangladesh. The child was young and could adapt  to
    life in Bangladesh with her parents should her parents decide that  she
    should leave the UK. The FtTJ  did  not  consider  at  [32]  "that  the
    provisions and protection which could be afforded to the  Appellant  in
    terms of Section 117B(6) are fulfilled."

9.    The FtTJ thus concluded the proportionality exercise in favour of  the
    Respondent and dismissed the appeal.


10.   The grounds of appeal in summary criticise the  FtTJ  for  failing  to
    give reasons, reaching unreasonable conclusions and failing  to  direct
    himself appropriately in law.

11.   In granting permission to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes
    observed the grounds were not well drafted, but  nonetheless  found  it
    arguable that the FtTJ failed to properly engage with the appeal before
    him. Judge Holmes identified a number of arguable errors,  albeit,  his
    observation that "there is no reference in the decision to  s117B  (6)"
    is incorrect.


12.   The Respondent in a short Rule 24 response opposed the appeal  stating
    that the FtTJ directed himself appropriately  and  made  findings  that
    were open to him.

13.   At the hearing Miss  Anzani  applied  to  amend  the  grounds  without
    objection. I permitted the amendment given that  the  original  grounds
    were poorly drafted and Mr Clarke indicated that the Respondent was not
    prejudiced in consequence.

14.   Miss Anzani relied on the grounds  and  referred  to  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions family migration: Appendix FM  Section  1.0(b)
    of August 2015 ("the policy") and the Tribunal's  decision  in  SF  and
    Others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).  Miss
    Anzani referred to the factual  matrix.  She  submitted  there  was  no
    dispute about the existence of family life. The FtTJ was in clear error
    in his self-direction at [29] and at [30]. Miss Anzani referred to [32]
    and stated the FtTJ's application of section 117B(6) was  unclear.  She
    submitted the evidence before the FtTJ was that the Appellant  assisted
    his wife to care for his father-in-law and daughter. She submitted that
    the FtTJ had no regard to SF or to  the  policy  which  indicated  that
    cases should be assessed on the basis that  it  would  unreasonable  to
    expect a British citizen child to leave the EU, and that, it  would  be
    appropriate to grant leave to a parent to enable them to remain in  the
    UK with  the  child  unless  there  was  criminality  or  a  very  poor
    immigration history. She thus submitted that the FtTJ's finding at [31]
    was incompatible with the policy.

15.   Mr Clarke acknowledged that the FtTJ's direction at [29] was  unclear,
    but he argued the Decision was sufficiently reasoned at [31]. Mr Clarke
    submitted that at [30] the FtTJ was referring to the wife and  not  the
    child. He submitted that the FtTJ  clearly  indicated  that  it  was  a
    matter for the Appellant and his wife as to whether she and  the  child
    should accompany the  Appellant  to  Bangladesh.  He  referred  to  the
    Appellant's immigration history; he had no leave since  2007  and  made
    repeated applications for a period of ten years.  The  FtTJ  noted  the
    Appellant had no intention of leaving the UK and created a family  life
    knowing he had no leave to remain in the UK. Mr Clarke  submitted  that
    these were all matters of weight which was for the FtTJ and that he had
    made findings consistent with the policy.

16.   In reply Miss Anzani submitted that the  FtTJ's  conclusions  did  not
    accord with the policy and that the FtTJ failed to take account of  all
    relevant factors.

Discussion

17.   I have considered the submissions made by the representatives  at  the
    hearing. While Mr Clarke made a valiant attempt to defend the Decision,
    I consider that the central submissions made on behalf of the Appellant
    are correct, and that this is a case in which it has been  demonstrated
    that the FtTJ erred in law such that his Decision must be set aside.

18.   First, I accept Mr Clarke's submission that the FtTJ was likely to  be
    referring to the relationship and not  the  child  in  stating  "little
    weight can be attached to the Appellant's family life" at [30]  because
    the FtTJ  was  concerned  here  with  the  marital  relationship  being
    established while the Appellant's status  in  the  UK  was  precarious.
    While the phraseology used could have been clearer, I am not  satisfied
    that the FtTJ misdirected himself accordingly. However, I am  satisfied
    that the FtTJ's Decision is founded upon a clear misdirection in law at
    [29]. The direction is confused and unclear and the application  of  an
    "unduly harsh" criterion and the need for factors that weigh in  favour
    of the Appellant to "cancel out the need for  immigration  control"  is
    plainly an erroneous  self-direction.  This  alone  I  find  stands  to
    vitiate the FtTJ's Decision.

19.   Second, I agree with Judge Holmes' view in  the  grant  of  permission
    that the  FtTJ's  starting  point  should  have  been  the  health  and
    immigration status of all family  members  most  of  whom  are  British
    citizens. Miss Anzani identified by reference to written testimony that
    the Appellant's evidence was that he assisted in caring for his father-
    in law's intimate care needs  and  food  preparation,  and  his  wife's
    evidence referred to the  strength  of  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his daughter and the dire consequences his absence  would
    have on the family unit. I agree with Miss  Anzani  that  the  Decision
    does not  properly  reflect  these  matters  or  that  they  have  been
    adequately factored into the assessment.

20.   Third, I also consider that Miss Anzani's complaint  that  the  FtTJ's
    conclusion at [31] that it would not  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant, his wife and child  to  reside  together  in  Bangladesh  is
    incompatible with the policy. The  issue  that  the  FtTJ  should  have
    regard to the policy is confirmed by the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in
    SF. In view of the terms of the policy, it is difficult to see how  the
    FtTJ's conclusion that the provisions of section 117B(6) could  not  be
    "fulfilled" can stand.

21.   I therefore set aside the Decision of the FtTJ.

22.   Both representatives were content for the Decision  to  be  remade  on
    the evidence before the Tribunal. Miss Anzani  relied  on  her  earlier
    submissions and Mr Clarke helpfully submitted  that  the  issue  boiled
    down to whether the Appellant's immigration history was  sufficient  to
    outweigh the best interests of the child.

23.   I must approach the issue of whether  a  breach  of  Art  8  has  been
    established in a structured way  applying  the  five-stage  test  in  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27. I also must consider the rights of  the
    whole family including the Appellant's child (see  Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 39).

24.   The FtTJ made primary findings of fact at [22]. There  is  no  dispute
    about the facts as found. The Appellant has an established family  life
    in the UK. He lives with his wife, child  and  in-laws  who  both  have
    health difficulties. In respect of the mother-in-law  the  difficulties
    are considerable and she requires 24-hour care. While  the  Appellant's
    wife is the primary carer for her parents and child, the evidence shows
    that the Appellant plays an integral role towards  the  functioning  of
    this family unit both in relation to the assistance he provides  caring
    for his father-in-law and the responsibilities he fulfils  towards  his
    daughter.

25.   I am satisfied that Art 8.1 is  engaged  as  the  Appellant's  removal
    will seriously interfere with  the  family  and  private  life  of  the
    Appellant, his wife and child and that of his in-laws if he is  removed
    from the family unit. I accept that the decision is in accordance  with
    the law. It was not  suggested  before  me  that  the  Appellant  could
    succeed under the Rules. Further, the Appellant's removal will  be  for
    the legitimate aim of effective immigration control.

26.   The crucial issue is that of proportionality. That  issue  requires  a
    fair balance to be struck between the public interest  and  the  rights
    and interests of the Appellant and others protected  by  Art  8.1  (see
    Razgar at [20]).  I must take into account the "best interests" of  the
    child as a primary, but it is not a determinative consideration (see ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013]  UKSC  74  at
    [10]).  In carrying out that balancing exercise and reaching a  finding
    on  proportionality,  the  Tribunal   must   "have   regard"   to   the
    considerations set out in s.117B of the NIA Act 2002.

27.   The public interest in this appeal, including that  reflected  in  the
    fact that the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the  Rules,  is
    entitled to "considerable weight" (see MM and others at [75]; and  also
    Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 at [46] et  seq  and  R  (Agyarko  and
    another) v  SSHD  at  [46]-[48]).   The  search  is  for  "sufficiently
    compelling" circumstances to outweigh the public interest.

28.   First,  the  public  interest  in  effective  immigration  control  is
    engaged (s.117B(1)).

29.   Second, I was not expressly addressed on  the  issue  of  whether  the
    Appellant speaks English, but I am content to assume that he is  likely
    to do so; he is a teacher by profession and entered the UK with a  work
    permit in 2006. I find that the public interest in s.117B  (2)  is  not
    engaged, but this does not provide a positive right to leave and is, at
    best, a neutral factor (see Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803 at [59]-
     [61]).

30.   Third, I take into account that he is not financially independent  for
    the purpose of s.117B (3).

31.   Fourth, I accept that  the  Appellant's  private  life  has  developed
    whilst he has either been in the UK unlawfully or whilst  his  presence
    was precarious and so is entitled to  "little  weight"  (s.117B(4)  and
    (5)).  However, the way the Appellant's claim was put was on the  basis
    of his family life rather than his private life in the UK.

32.   As regards section 117B(6), two propositions follow from the Court  of
    Appeal's decision in MA (Pakistan).  Firstly, if  the  Appellant  falls
    within the terms of s.117B(6) then his removal is  not  in  the  public
    interest and, as a result,  his  appeal  under  Art  8  would  succeed.
    Secondly, in determining whether it would "not be reasonable to expect"
    the child to leave the United Kingdom, not only her circumstances  must
    be taken into account, but also the public interest  must  be  factored
    in.

33.   It was accepted by Judge Mill that the Appellant has  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship" with his daughter who  is  a  British
    citizen, and so is a "qualifying child" by virtue of s.117D(1)  of  the
    NIA Act 2002.

34.   I find that it would not be reasonable to expect this child  to  leave
    the UK. I consider that that is self-evident  given  that  should  this
    child leave the UK her mother would not  be  able  to  follow  and  the
    child, who is British, would not be able to benefit  from  her  British
    nationality and would be  separated  from  her  main  carer.  The  term
    "reasonable" is a term that qualifies the expectation  that  the  child
    could leave the United Kingdom. It is not a  term  that  qualifies  the
    issue of the removal or the expectation  that  the  non-British  parent
    should leave. I acknowledge that the Appellant has had no  leave  since
    2007, but this does not in my view outweigh the child's best  interests
    nor does it conclusively dispose of the public interest  considerations
    applicable in this appeal.


35.   I am fortified in my conclusion when  I  consider  the  terms  of  the
    policy and, in particular, Section 11.2.3. That Section is set  out  in
    the decision in SF. It is clear from the policy as  indeed  interpreted
    by the Tribunal in that case that where  there  is  a  British  citizen
    child  the  person  exercising  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
    relationship is someone for whom the public interest does  not  require
    their removal.  That is the case here. The  public  interest  does  not
    require the removal of the Appellant and it follows from that that this
    appeal should be allowed.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the Appellant's  appeal  under
Art 8 involved the making of an error of law.  That decision is  set  aside.


I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal under Art 8.
No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                       Date 25 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered making a fee  award.  I  have
decided to make no fee award of any fee that is paid  or  is  payable:  this
appeal has been allowed on the basis of post-decision  events  and  evidence
not before the Respondent at the date of refusal.

Signed


Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bagral                             Dated  25
October 2017


