
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/04538/2017
                                                               HU/04536/2017
                                                               HU/04540/2017
                                                               HU/04542/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 October 2018                     |On 24 October 2018              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMED [A]
                                 MAHMUDA [B]
                                    [A M]
                                    [M A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T J Shah of Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of the Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Paul  promulgated  on  23  May  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellants' appeals.

Background


3. The Appellant are all members of the same family; the  third  and  fourth
appellants are the children of the first and  second  appellants.  They  are
all Bangladeshi nationals. The first appellant was born on  09/10/1974.  The
second appellant was born on 10/12/1984. The third  appellant  was  born  on
25/06/2011. The fourth appellant was born on 25/06/2011.


4. The first appellant says that he entered the UK in 1996  (The  respondent
disagrees). In 2007 he submitted an application for leave  to  remain.  That
application was refused. The first  appellant  appealed  unsuccessfully.  In
2009 the second appellant entered the UK as a student. The third and  fourth
appellants  were  born  in  the  UK.  On  29/12/2011  the  second  appellant
submitted an application for leave  to  remain  with  the  first  and  third
appellants listed as her dependents. That application was refused on  8  May
2013. The  second  appellant  initially  appealed,  but  then  withdrew  her
appeal.

5.  On 11/11/2015 the appellants applied for leave to remain in  the  UK  on
article 8 ECHR grounds. On 01/03/2017 the Secretary of State  refused  their
application.

The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge N M Paul ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 15/08/2018 Judge Landes  gave
permission to appeal stating


      1. These are in time  applications  by  the  appellants,  citizens  of
      Bangladesh, parents and their UK born  children  (dates  of  birth  26
      February 2014 and 25 June 2011) for permission to appeal  against  the
      decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Paul  promulgated  on  23
      May  2018  which  dismissed  the  appellants'  appeals   against   the
      respondent's decision to refuse their human rights claim.


      2. It is arguable that the Judge should  have  made  findings  on  the
      witness evidence. There were four witnesses  who  gave  evidence  that
      they had met the first appellant in or around 1996 (see [16]  -  [19])
      but the Judge does not  come  to  any  explicit  conclusions  on  that
      evidence at all (see para 15 grounds).


      3. It is also arguable  that  the  Judge  should  have  made  explicit
      findings on the best  interests  of  the  children,  although  if  the
      Judge's other findings stand and in the absence of  specific  evidence
      to conclude that it would be detrimental to the children's welfare  to
      go to Bangladesh with their parents it would be difficult to  see  how
      as at the date of hearing the appellant could have  succeeded  on  the
      basis that it might just be in the interests of  the  older  child  to
      remain in the UK because of his continuing education in the UK.


      4. Whilst I do not restrict the grounds which may be argued I consider
      the  other  grounds  amount  to  mere  argument   with   the   Judge's
      conclusions;  when  considering  the  first  appellant's  ability   to
      integrate into Bangladesh it should be noted that the first  appellant
      would be returning with his wife, who had left Bangladesh on any  view
      much more recently.

The Hearing

7. For the appellant, Mr Shah told me that the Judge's decision  is  tainted
by material errors of law. He told me that the first and  second  appellants
gave evidence, and so did four other  witnesses,  but  the  Judge  does  not
analyse the evidence  of  those  witnesses  nor  does  the  Judge  make  any
findings of fact on the basis of that evidence.

8. Ms Kiss interjected and told me that  the  respondent  accepts  that  the
Judge has failed to  make  findings  of  fact  and  failed  to  analyse  the
evidence of witnesses. Although between [16]  and  [19]  the  Judge  records
that those witnesses gave evidence,  the  Judge  goes  on  to  (effectively)
ignore that evidence. Ms Kiss told me that  it  is  now  conceded  that  the
failure to deal with the evidence provided is a material error of  law.  She
urged me to set the decision aside.

Analysis

9. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

10. The Judge's decision does  not  contain  an  analysis  of  the  evidence
provided by the appellant's witnesses. Between [16] and [19] the Judge  says
that he heard evidence from three particular witnesses. I am now  told  that
the  Judge  heard  from  4  additional  witnesses.  The  Judge  reasoning  &
conclusions lie between [20] and [28] of the decision, but  the  Judge  does
not  say  anything  about  the  evidence  he  heard  from  the   appellant's
witnesses. The Judge neither accepts nor rejects evidence which  goes  to  a
central issue in the appeal. The Judge does not say what  weight  is  placed
on the oral evidence. The Judge does not balance the oral  evidence  against
the evidence that he discusses between [21] and [24] of the decision.

11. The decision is incomplete and creates the  impression  that  the  Judge
ignores the oral evidence of the appellant's witnesses. That is  a  material
error of law. I set the decision aside.

12. Mr Shah told me that the  first  and  second  appellants  together  with
three witnesses are  present  today,  but  that  a  Bengali  interpreter  is
necessary and no request for an interpreter had been made. He told  me  that
one of the child appellants has now been in the UK for seven years and is  a
qualifying child, but no updated evidence  in  relation  to  the  two  child
appellants is available today.

13. Ms Kiss told me that she wanted an opportunity to consider the  evidence
of the appellant's witnesses and to make enquiry about their status  in  the
UK.

14. The net effect is that neither the appellant nor the respondent  are  in
a position to deal with a further fact-finding exercise today. Mr  Shah  and
Ms Kiss joined in asking me to remit this case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a further fact-finding exercise.

15. I consider whether I can substitute my own  decision  but  find  that  I
cannot because further fact-finding is necessary.



Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

16. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or




    (b)    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


17. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

18. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Taylor  House
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge N M Paul.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law.

I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 23 May 2018. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Signed
                       Date 19 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


