
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/04228/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Piccadilly Exchange, Manchester  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24th January 2018                      |On 26th January 2018             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                            TAUSEEF MUMRAIZ KHAN
                                     Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ell instructed by Mamoon solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal  a  decision
      of First-tier Tribunal judge  Thorne  who  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal against the refusal of his human rights claim;  the  respondent
      maintained the decision to deport him pursuant to s3(5)(a) Immigration
      Act 1971 and paragraph 396 Immigration Rules.


   2. In granting permission to appeal UTJ Gleeson said:

             The appellant challenges that decision  [the  deportation]  on
             the basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred by  failing
             to  give  anxious  scrutiny  to  this  appeal.   The   matters
             challenged are the weight  to  be  given  to  the  independent
             social worker evidence, and two findings of  fact,  the  first
             that the appellant gave evidence in Bengali, not Urdu, and the
             second that his wife is dependent on public funds,  which  the
             appellant says is not the case. The file contains  the  record
             of proceedings for a different appeal, in in  which  that  was
             the factual matrix.
             The reasoning in this decision contains  extensive  quotations
             from and summaries of relevant  cases,  but  there  is  little
             reasoning on its application to the facts. In particular,  the
             Judge has not  directed  his  mind  to  section  117B  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended).
             That is an arguably material error of law.


   3. The front sheet of the Record of Proceedings  does  refer  to  another
      case both by name and by  appeal  number,  both  of  which  have  been
      crossed out and replaced with this appellant's name and appeal number.
      The interpreter remains recorded as Bengali rather than Urdu.  I  note
      that the hearing took place on 3rd July  2017  and  the  decision  was
      promulgated on 28th July 2017. It is of concern  that  the  Record  of
      Proceedings appears to be for a  different  case,  particularly  where
      nearly a month has elapsed before the decision is finalised.  However,
      I have looked through the handwritten notes of hearing and  identified
      references to page numbers of the  bundle  filed  on  behalf  of  this
      appellant. Although Mr Ell did not  have  a  copy  of  the  Record  of
      Proceedings from the appellant's previous representative, Mr Bates was
      able to confirm that the references  appeared  to  coincide  with  the
      minute of the hearing made by the presenting officer before the First-
      tier Tribunal. I have also looked further at the  note  taken  by  the
      judge and am satisfied  that  it  reflects  this  appellant's  hearing
      rather than a different appellant. There is no error  of  law  and  no
      perceived   unfairness   arising   which   appears,   after    further
      consideration, to be no more than the utilisation of a different cover
      sheet to the Record of Proceedings.


        Background

   4. On 1 September  2016,  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  two  sexual
      assaults on 2 females and sentenced  to  6  months  imprisonment.  The
      respondent decided to make a deportation order against  the  appellant
      under s5(1) Immigration Act 1971 because "[his] presence in the UK  is
      not conducive to the public good." The respondent accepts that at  the
      time of the decision he had family life with his wife and  one  child,
      born 29 August 2015. Since then he  and  his  wife  have  had  another
      child, born 10 March 2017. All are British Citizens. The  judge  found
      that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  wife  and
      two children. He found it to be in the children's  best  interests  to
      remain in the UK with all the advantages of education and health  care
      that accrue through being British Citizens. He also found that  it  is
      in the best interest of the children to remain in the family  unit  of
      both parents.


   5. The judge found that the offences of which the appellant was convicted
      caused serious harm and that  his  deportation  is  conducive  to  the
      public good. He is thus a foreign criminal, as defined in s117D(2)(c).



   6. The judge concluded

              ...because the immigration history of A is so bad and  he  has
             committed two serious criminal offences  that,  although  C1-2
             [the two children] may be caused some short-term  hardship  in
             adjusting to life  in  Pakistan,  none  the  less  their  best
             interest in staying in the UK to enjoy the  benefits  of  life
             here are outweighed by  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
             effective immigration control, preventing and deterring  crime
             and protecting the economic interests of the UK. In  addition,
             I conclude  that  the  children  would  not  be  caused  undue
             hardship by living in Pakistan with A  or  living  in  the  UK
             without him.  I  consider  there  is  inadequate  evidence  to
             establish that the  children  would  be  caused  long  lasting
             psychological damage by living in Pakistan or living in the UK
             without A.


         Error of law


   7. The decision sets out numerous quotes from case law.  Interspersed  in
      those quotes  are  findings  but  the  general  impression  is  of  an
      unstructured decision with little in the way of reasoned analysis


   8. There grounds seeking permission to appeal can be identified  under  5
      heads although there is inevitably an overlap between them (other than
      the 'mistaken identity which I have dealt with above).


        Ground 1: It is submitted that the judge erred in  law  in  finding
        the appellant had not been trafficked to the UK as he claimed.

   9. There has been no Competent Authority decision on his  claim  to  have
      been trafficked and the respondent in the reasons for decision  letter
      does not refer to the trafficking claim.  The  appellant  raised  this
      issue in his grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  very
      clearly in his witness statement and it does not appear  that  he  was
      cross examined on this issue. It is not clear to what extent this  was
      pursued before the First-tier Tribunal or to what extent this formed a
      significant part of his claim and whether it was an issue that was  or
      should be treated by the respondent as an asylum claim. There  was  no
      background evidence about trafficking in Pakistan and risks associated
      with that submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  It is of  course  for
      the appellant to prove his case. But  in  the  absence  of  any  cross
      examination by the presenting officer and no questions being raised by
      the judge, there appear to be no reasons given by the  judge  why  his
      account has  been  disbelieved.  A  mere  statement  of  disbelief  is
      insufficient. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law  in  reaching
      that finding without providing reasons.


        Ground 2: It is submitted the judge erred in failing  to  carefully
        consider the  report  by  the  Independent  Social  Worker  and  in
        particular failed to factor in the views of the social worker.


  10. The judge  has  not  recorded  the  social  worker's  views  that  the
      appellant is the primary carer for the two children, that there is  no
      evidence to suggest that he is a risk to children under the age of  16
      years; that neither he nor  his  wife  has  family  to  return  to  in
      Pakistan. The judge records that the  social  worker  report  says  he
      "still forms a medium risk of harm to adult children".  It  does  not.
      The judge does not provide any reasons why it would  be  proportionate
      for the primary carer of British Citizen children to be  removed  from
      the UK and the consequences to them of losing their primary  carer  if
      they were to remain in the UK. Although  the  judge  records  that  it
      would not be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without
      the appellant or to travel to Pakistan with him  and  that  there  are
      adequate medical and educational facilities in Pakistan,  he  provides
      no reasons why it is not unduly harsh for the children to be  deprived
      of access to such services as British Citizens given that the evidence
      was that he was the primary carer. The judge finds that the children's
      mother can remain in the UK to look after the children, yet  does  not
      make findings on this in the context  of  them  losing  their  primary
      carer or the consequences of them being looked after by someone who is
      not their primary carer.

        Ground 3: it is submitted that the judge erred in  law  in  finding
        that he did not accept that the appellant's  wife's  family  wished
        her harm or would be able to track her down.

  11. The evidence was that the appellant's wife had obtained her indefinite
      leave to remain because of domestic  violence  at  the  hands  of  her
      former spouse; that was accepted by the respondent. Her  evidence  was
      that she had been disowned by her family following  her  divorce  from
      her former husband because she was accused of bringing shame upon  her
      family. Her witness statement refers to her fear that her family  will
      find her and kill her. The record of proceedings does not  record  any
      significant questioning of that assertion but I also note  that  there
      was no significant background material submitted in connection with so-
      called "honour killing" or  the  availability  of  protection  by  the
      authorities. There does not  appear  to  have  been  any  evidence  to
      contradict the wife's evidence that  she  had  been  disowned  or  was
      perceived to have brought shame upon her family. Although  it  may  be
      that her family would not be able to 'track her down' and that finding
      may have been justified given the lack of evidence filed on her behalf
      to substantiate such a claim, there were no reasons provided  for  the
      finding that her family would not wish her harm. No finding  was  made
      on whether the  wife's  family  had  disowned  her  and  the  possible
      consequnces of that


        Ground 4: it is submitted that the judge erred in law  finding  the
        children would have family in Pakistan when the wife's evidence was
        that she had been disowned by her  family  when  she  divorced  her
        former husband and the husband's evidence  was  that  he  had  been
        trafficked and had no family.

  12. The wife's witness statement refers to the violence she sustained  and
      that she was disowned by her family because of  the  divorce  and  the
      reasons for that. The presenting officer did not cross examine her  on
      that element of her evidence. The judge asked a  few  questions  about
      where her family lived. His finding, in the absence of evidence to the
      contrary and any relevant cross examination and in the absence of  any
      reasoning  that  the  children  would  have  family  in  Pakistan,  is
      perverse.


        Ground 5: the judge erred in referring to the wife's evidence  that
        the family was reliant on public funds.

  13.  The evidence was that the wife had been working full  time  prior  to
      the birth of the most recent child and was currently receiving  public
      funds. She is a British Citizen and the children are British Citizens.
      They are entitled to those funds and tax  credits.  Her  evidence  was
      that she would return to work albeit not full time.  It  was  accepted
      the appellant had  been  working  previously,  albeit  illegally.  The
      judge's finding that the appellant would be unable  to  be  maintained
      economically in the UK was unreasoned, and perverse, in the  light  of
      that fact that he had previously worked.

        Conclusion

  14. Drawing all these matters together I am satisfied that the  judge  has
      erred in making perverse findings on some maters as set out above  and
      failing to give adequate reasons for others.


    15. I set aside the decision to be remade.

    16. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
        assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper  Tribunal.
        In this case findings of fact are required to enable a  proper  and
        full decision to be made. I conclude that the  decision  should  be
        remitted to a First-tier Tribunal judge to determine the appeal.




    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
    remade, no  findings  preserved  save  that  there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his  wife   and
    children.







[pic]

                                    Date 25th January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
