
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
HU/04607/2018

                                             HU/09797/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd April 2019                             |On 24th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                        mr Syed Muhammad Imran Abbas
                             mrs Mehwish Bukhari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Pipe of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1.  The  Appellants  born  on  2nd  July  1985  and  12th  November   1983
    respectively are  both  citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  Appellants  were
    represented by Mr Pipe of Counsel.  The Respondent was  represented  by
    Mr Cunha a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellants have made application for leave to remain in the  UK  on
    the basis of Article 8 of the ECHR and their appeals  were  refused  by
    the Respondent on 30th January 2018 and 7th  April  2018  respectively.
    The Appellants had appealed that decision and their  appeals  had  been
    heard together at Birmingham on 23rd November 2018 before Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Fox.  The judge had dismissed their appeal.

 3. Application for permission to appeal had been made and such application
    had been granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 5th February  2019.   It
    was said the decision arguably did not properly  address  the  shifting
    burden and standard of proof in  these  types  of  cases  and  arguably
    failed to address certain relevant material evidence.  Directions  were
    issued for the Upper Tribunal firstly  to  decide  whether  a  material
    error of law had been made or not and the  matter  came  before  me  in
    accordance with those directions.

Decision

 4. Following submissions made by Mr Pipe  of  Counsel  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants it was properly conceded by the Presenting  Officer  that  a
    material error of law had been made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in
    this case.

 5. That material error was  essentially  a  combination  of  two  factors.
    Firstly there was a less than clear or accurate approach to the  burden
    and standard of proof in these types of cases where such a  burden  and
    standard operates in what has been described  as  a  boomerang  manner.
    Secondly there were some not insignificant factual errors  or  findings
    that form part of the assessment of the  Appellants'  explanation  such
    that those errors contributed towards the adverse credibility  findings
    made by the judge in respect of the  Appellants'  explanation.   It  is
    possible that some or all of those adverse findings may not  have  been
    made if the errors had themselves not been made  or  identified.   That
    may have affected the overall conclusion reached by the judge  in  this
    case.

 6. Accordingly by agreement it was found that a material error of law  was
    made such that a fresh decision needed to be  made  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 7. A material error of law  was  made  by  the  judge  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal needs to  be
    set aside and the matter remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    fresh decision.


    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



