
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/04385/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|by Skype for Business                |On 13 August 2020                    |
|On 5 August 2020                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 ANUM ASHRAF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr B Price, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 27 February 2019.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Handley, promulgated on 18 February 2020.



     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 16 March 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 1 May 2020.

 2. I conducted the hearing from George  House.   Representatives  attended
    remotely.  No member of  the  public  attended,  either  in  person  or
    remotely.  No  significant  technical  issues  were  encountered.   The
    technology enabled a full and fair hearing.  Having heard  submissions,
    I reserved my decision.

 3. Ground 1 is that the FtT failed to apply Goudey [2012] UKUT  00041  and
    Naz [2012] UKUT 00040, copies  of  which  were  among  the  appellant's
    documents, which required him to start from the point that where  there
    was a legally recognised marriage and parties wished to live  together,
    little  else  was  required  to  prove   a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship; and that even if the witness evidence was confused,  that
    was not necessarily enough to find the  relationship  not  genuine  and
    subsisting.

 4. Mr Price said that the judge went wrong  by  not  stating  or  applying
    those principles, but beginning his consideration at  [18]  by  finding
    the appellant's evidence unclear and inconsistent.

 5. There is no requirement  to  recite  case  law.   This  matter  can  be
    resolved only by looking at the  strength  of  the  reasons  given  for
    dismissing the appeal: should the evidence have been taken as providing
    the "little else" required, and were the adverse findings based on more
    than mere confusion?

 6. Mr Price took grounds 2 and 3 together, based on errors of artificially
    separating out part of the evidence, noting only negative aspects,  and
    ignoring the positives.  Mr Price accepted that the judge did not  have
    to recite all the evidence, but submitted  that  the  decision  focused
    unduly on the  negatives,  without  balancing  those  against  evidence
    tending the other way.

 7. This point also can  only  be  answered  by  looking  at  the  specific
    reasoning  in  the  decision;  and  I  was  not  referred  to  anything
    strikingly positive which the judge failed to mention.

 8. Mr Price ran grounds 4 and 5 together.  These submit that it was unfair
    to found on the appellant not knowing the sponsor's city of birth, when
    that was not raised at any stage for  the  respondent;  and  unfair  to
    found upon the sponsor making few visits to  the  appellant,  for  like
    reasons, and because it failed to take account of the period of  almost
    a year when the respondent withheld his passport.

 9. Summing up, Mr Price said there were errors which together  required  a
    remit to the FtT.  When replying to Mrs Aboni, he said that the  points
    in grounds 4 and 5 were not, as she had suggested, among the reasons in
    the ECO's decision.

10. The judge was entitled to consider the evidence before him, and to take
    the point in ground 4.  Fairness did not require him to invite  further
    evidence  and  submissions.   In  any  event,  the  appellant  has  not
    suggested that there is anything else to be said on the matter.

11. Ground 5 is well taken.  There was at least a  partial  answer  to  the
    judge's finding, perhaps not easily locatable among the  papers  before
    him, but it was there; if the matter had been put, the  sponsor  had  a
    sensible response.

12. I turn then to consider which parts of the specific  reasoning  survive
    scrutiny, by reference to the "starting point" suggested  by  the  case
    law.

13. At [18] the judge says that he found aspects of the sponsor's  evidence
    unclear and inconsistent.  He had the unique  advantage  of  appraising
    that evidence directly, and he went on to explain why.

14. At [19], the judge thought the appellant would have known the year  and
    the place of the sponsor's birth (if the relationship was  genuine  and
    subsisting).  That would not be much of a justification for  dismissing
    the appeal, but  it  is  a  finding  within  reason,  not  said  to  be
    conclusive, which must be viewed in context.

15. At [20] the judge found a  discrepancy  damaging  to  credibility:  the
    appellant said that she and the sponsor were cousins, but he said  they
    were unrelated.  The explanation that the sponsor  did  not  understand
    the question was rightly found to be lame.  It is hard to see how  this
    could arise from parties  to  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    giving honest answers, so this is a strong reason.

16. At [21], the judge founded on the appellant not knowing the company the
    sponsor worked for, his job, his employment history,  and  his  musical
    tastes; and on the  sponsor  not  knowing  that  the  appellant  played
    sports.  Those are all observations within reason, of the  same  nature
    as at [19].

17. At [22] the judge founded upon the  sponsor  giving  a  very  different
    account about a girlfriend to the tribunal from the account noted by  a
    solicitor appointed by the court to prepare a report in proceedings  in
    which the sponsor was involved.  The judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    solicitor would have failed accurately to record  what  he  said.   The
    judge found this  to  "cast  further  doubts  on  the  credibility  and
    reliability of the sponsor's evidence".  His grounds of appeal do  not,
    and could not, challenge that finding.  The court proceedings  did  not
    go to the substantive issues  before  the  tribunal,  but  the  general
    credibility and reliability of the sponsor were pertinent.

18. Some reasons given by the judge are much stronger than others; that  is
    usual.  Only one of the reasons is directly undermined (ground 5).

19. Taking the reasons together, the judge was entitled to  find  that  the
    evidence, as a whole, did not amount to the "little else"  required  to
    prove a genuine and subsisting relationship; that does not require  the
    negatives to be  overlooked.   The  witness  evidence  was  not  merely
    confused, it gave the judge good cause to  think  that  the  underlying
    reality was not as portrayed.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


    [pic]


    7 August 2020
    UT Judge Macleman







                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

