
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04081/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House - London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 18 January 2019                    |On: 20 February 2019              |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR JEWEL CHOWDHURY
                          (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay
For the Respondent:    Mr M Biggs

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which  it  sent  to  the
parties on  8 November 2018.   In  making  its  decision  it  allowed  the
claimant's   appeal   from   the   Secretary   of   State's   decision    of
24 January 2018,  refusing  to  grant  leave   to   remain   under   the
Immigration Rules as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

2.    The claimant, who  was  born  on  30 June 1983,  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh.  He has resided in the United Kingdom  (UK)  for  a  number  of
years, having first been granted leave to enter on 17 January 2008 for the
purposes of study.  On 11 October 2010 he was granted further leave  as  a
post-study work migrant, such leave extending until  11 October 2012.   On
21 February 2012 the claimant undertook  speaking  and  writing  tests  in
English.  As I understand it he passed the speaking element but  failed  the
writing element.  Thereafter, on 20 March 2012, he says he  undertook  the
two tests again and, on  that  occasion,  was  successful  with  both.   The
Secretary of State, though, believes that for the purposes of that  test  he
used a proxy test taker.  However, that allegation was not  raised  at  the
time and on 12 July 2012 the claimant made his application for leave as  a
Tier 1 Entrepreneur Migrant.  He  provided  some  supporting  documentation
relating to finance.  On 17 April 2013 the Secretary of State refused  the
application on the  basis  that  the  claimant  had  not  submitted  certain
documentation he was required to submit.   An  appeal  was  lodged  and  the
Secretary  of  State  withdrew  the   decision   of   17 April 2013   on
1 November 2013.  Matters rumbled on and on 11 March 2015 the claimant was
served with notices indicating that he was liable to be removed from the  UK
because he had  used  deception  in  seeking  leave  to  remain  (the  proxy
test taker allegation).  There was an application for judicial review which
led, on 7 July 2017, to the making of a Consent Order under the terms  of
which the Secretary  of  State  agreed  to  reconsider  the  application  of
12 July 2012.  The Secretary of State did that but, on 24 January 2018 as
noted above, he refused it.  So, the claimant appealed to the tribunal.

3.    The tribunal heard oral  evidence  from  the  claimant.   It  received
submissions from representatives for each party.  In making its decision  it
considered, first of all, the proxy test taker  allegation.   It  noted  at
paragraph 17 of its written reasons what might be termed  generic  evidence
relied upon by the Secretary of State in  addition  to  an  "official  score
report and look-up tool" which  related  to  the  claimant.   It  noted  the
evidence to the effect that there had been a problem  of  some  significance
with respect to deception deployed by  applicants  in  relation  to  English
language testing.

4.    It then turned to other evidence which related to the  claimant's  own
position.  It noted that he had asserted he  had  taken  the  relevant  test
personally (paragraph 21 of the written reasons). It observed that  he  had
sought to rely upon the fact that he had worked "in various customer  facing
roles on a full-time basis" which suggested he might have a good command  of
the English  language  (paragraph 22  of  the  written  reasons)  and  that
although he had  used  a  test  centre  for  the  relevant  test  which  was
different to the one he  had  used  earlier,  he  had  offered  a  plausible
explanation as to why  he  had  done  that  (paragraph 25  of  the  written
reasons).  The tribunal also accepted that he had  an  incentive  to  use  a
proxy test taker given that  he  had  failed  an  earlier  test  but  that,
nevertheless, he had successfully passed one element of that  test  so  that
the incentive was less than it might otherwise have been  (paragraph 23  of
the written reasons).  Having considered all of those matters  the  tribunal
went on to say this:

      "27.  I accept the matters are reasonably finally balanced in relation
      to the issue of deception.  There is evidence  to  suggest  that  this
      appellant may well  have  used  a  proxy  to  undertake  the  test  at
      Queensway College that he claims he sat personally on 20 March 2012.
      However, given the information  provided  by  the  appellant,  and  in
      particular the relatively low incentive he had  to  arrange  a  proxy,
      having passed the speaking test only one month before,  combined  with
      the fact that the appellant had not been provided with a recording  of
      the test undertaken by him in order that he can arrange  for  his  own
      analysis  to  be  done,  I  am  not  satisfied  on  the   balance   of
      probabilities that the appellant used a proxy to undertake the test."

5.    So, the proxy test taker issue  was  resolved  in  his  favour.   The
tribunal  then  turned  to  the  other  requirements  contained  within  the
Immigration Rules which he had to meet in order to obtain the leave he  was
seeking.

6.    As to that, the tribunal noted that  it  had  been  indicated  in  the
Secretary of State's written reasons for his decision of  24 January 2018,
that he had failed to provide a  letter  to  confirm  the  amount  of  money
available to  him  from  a  third-party  source.   The  tribunal  said  that
appeared to relate to a requirement confirmed within  paragraph 41-SD(b)(i)
of the Immigration Rules but  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  himself
referred to his having received a declaration  provided  by  third  parties.
So, the tribunal saw no failure to comply  with  the  Immigration Rules  in
that regard (paragraph 33 of the written reasons).  The tribunal then noted
that the Secretary of State's written reasons contained  an  assertion  that
bank statements provided by the claimant were  not  acceptable  because  the
relevant account was not in the claimant's  name.   But  the  tribunal  said
that such an argument ignored the terms of rule 41-SD(b)(i) which,  it  was
said, permitted third party funds.  So, again, the tribunal did  not  detect
any failure to comply with  the  Immigration Rules  (paragraph 34  of  the
written reasons).

7.    In light of the above the appeal was allowed.  That was  not  the  end
of the matter however  because  the  Secretary  of  State  applied  for  and
obtained permission to appeal to  the  Upper Tribunal.   The  bulk  of  the
points made in the Secretary of State's grounds related  to  the  tribunal's
decision concerning the proxy  test taker  issue.   However,  it  was  also
asserted that the tribunal had erred in its consideration of the  "financial
aspect" of the case by effectively substituting his  own  interpretation  as
to what specific evidence would  be  acceptable  rather  than  applying  the
content of the Immigration Rules, with respect to  a  requirement  to  show
evidence of third party funds  in  his  own  bank  account.   Permission  to
appeal was granted by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal who  thought  that
the ground relating  to  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration Rules  was
arguable.  As to the ground relating to  the  proxy  test taker  issue  she
thought  what  was  said  appeared  to  be  a  mere  disagreement  with  the
tribunal's findings but said that, since she was granting permission on  the
other ground, she would not shut it out.

8.    Permission having been granted the matter was  listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that consideration could be  given
to the question of whether or not the tribunal had erred in law and,  if  it
had, what should flow from that.  Representation  at  that  hearing  was  as
stated above and I am grateful to each representative.  I  have  taken  into
account what they have had to say in my decision.

9.    In short, with respect to the ground concerning the proxy  test taker
issue, I agree with the granting judge that this  does  not  go  beyond  re-
argument with the tribunal's findings.  What the tribunal  was  required  to
do with respect to this issue was to consider the  evidence,  weigh  it  up,
analyse it rationally, reach findings open to it, reach an  outcome  on  the
appeal which was not perverse, and adequately explain  how  it  had  reached
the findings and the outcome on the appeal which it did.

10.   It is, in my judgment, readily apparent from what the tribunal had  to
say from paragraphs 16-27 of its written reasons, that that is exactly what
it did.  It identified relevant matters which appear to weigh in  favour  of
the claimant and relevant matters which did not.  It reached  a  view  which
it clearly explained that the claimant had not used a proxy test taker.  It
was entitled to say  that  he  had  a  low  incentive  to  arrange  a  proxy
test taker and to take that  matter  into  account.   It  understood  that,
ultimately, it was for the Secretary of  State  to  show  to  a  balance  of
probabilities that the claimant had committed deception and it decided  that
the Secretary of State had not achieved  that.   Accordingly,  the  tribunal
did not err in law in the manner in which it is suggested, in  the  grounds,
that it did.

11.   As to the Immigration Rules point, there was much argument before  me
as  to  whether  or  not  the  tribunal  had  had  regard   to   the   wrong
Immigration Rules or to a version of those Rules  which  had  been  amended
prior to its deciding the appeal.  But I  cannot  see,  in  looking  at  the
tribunal file, that the Secretary  of  State's  representative  provided  it
with a copy of whatever Immigration Rules were said to be in force  at  the
time and which were said to be  applicable  to  the  circumstances  of  this
case.  Whilst it might be said that the tribunal should  be  assumed  to  be
aware of the content of each and every Immigration Rule,  it  seems  to  me
that that  is  an  unsustainable  argument  given  the  current  length  and
complexity of those Rules.  It does not appear that the  representative  for
the Secretary of State drew attention to any  amendments  that  there  might
have been to the Rules or drew specific attention  to  the  content  of  any
particular Rules said to be applicable. Nor is it asserted  in  the  grounds
that such was done.  In  these  circumstances  I  have  concluded  that  the
tribunal was entitled to simply base its decision upon what  had  been  said
in the Secretary of State's written decision.   It  addressed  those  points
and, on the material before it and the arguments put to it,  it  was  in  my
judgment entitled to do so in the way that it did.   So,  I  have  concluded
that the Immigration Rules ground is not made out either.

12.   In the circumstances I have decided that the tribunal's  decision  did
not involve the making of an  error  of  law.   Accordingly,  that  decision
shall stand and this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the tribunal did not involve the making of an error of  law.
 Accordingly, that decision shall stand.  It follows that the  Secretary  of
State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not grant anonymity.  I was not asked to  grant
anonymity.  I can see no reason why I should do so.  Accordingly, I  do  not
do so.


Signed:                      Date: 19 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

