

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04918/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th February 2018              |                On 22nd February 2018|
|                                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     DC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Adams Counsel instructed by Irvine Thanvi Nata
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bolivia. The appellant is the mother of a
    British citizen child. As these proceedings concern the interests of  a
    child, I consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge NMK Lawrence.  By decision promulgated on 12th July 2017
    Judge Lawrence dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of
    the respondent to refuse her further leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of her and her family's human rights under Article
    8 of the ECHR.

 3. By decision dated 29 December 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    granted permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  granting
    permission reference was made to the case of SF &  others  (Guidance  -
    post 2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC). The case  gives  guidance
    as to the approach to be taken where one is considering the removal  or
    refusal of leave to remain in respect of a person that is a parent  and
    primary carer of a British citizen child. [The case makes reference  to
    the Zambrano ECJ [2011] EUECJ- C 34/09]

    Factual background

 4. The appellant had entered Ireland as a visitor. Thereafter  it  appears
    that the appellant entered the United Kingdom arriving on or  about  21
    March 2007. The appellant had no leave to enter the United Kingdom  and
    appears never to have had any lawful leave to be in the United Kingdom.

 5. In August 2008 she met FS a Venezuelan national. FS has and had at  the
    time of meeting settled status in the United Kingdom. On the 15  August
    2013 the parties married. In 2016 the appellant  gave  birth  to  their
    child, who as a result of his father, FS, having  settled  status,  was
    entitled under the British Nationality Act 1981 to British citizenship.
    It is accepted that the  child  is  a  British  Citizen.  The  evidence
    established that the appellant was the main or primary  carer  for  the
    child.

 6. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing it was pointed out that  the  status
    of the child had not been brought to the attention  of  the  respondent
    prior to the respondent making the decision  under  appeal.  Consistent
    with the requirements of section 85 (5) of the 2002 Act as  the  status
    of the child would  have  been  a  new  issue  not  considered  by  the
    respondent,  the  consent  of  the  respondent  to  raising  such   was
    necessary. As is evident from paragraph 7 of the decision, the  consent
    of the respondent was sought  to  raising  the  issue  in  the  appeal.
    Consent was given by the respondent.

 7. As identified in paragraph 9 of the decision the appellant's  case  was
    based upon the fact that it would not be reasonable to expect a British
    citizen child to leave the United Kingdom.

 8. It is in that respect that the guidance in the case of SF is  material.
    In paragraph 7 of SF attention is drawn to the respondent's guidance in
    Immigration  Directorates  Instructions-Family  Migration-Appendix  FM,
    Section 1.0(B). The relevant edition is the  August  2015  edition.  At
    paragraph 11.2.3 of that guidance the question is posed whether or  not
    it would be reasonable to expect a British citizen child to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. Having set out at length the guidance and  referred  to
    the basis for that guidance as being the ECJ judgment in  the  case  of
    Zambrano, the policy concludes that any decision which forces a British
    citizen child to leave the UK would not be reasonable unless there were
    other factors justifying separation of the family. In the  SF  case  an
    assessment was made thereafter as to what other factors  could  justify
    removing a parent, who was the primary carer.

 9. In paragraph 8 of SF factors which may justify removal even where there
    was a British Citizen child included whether or not there was any issue
    with regard to criminality; whether there was any conduct of the mother
    or of the other children or other family members such as to give weight
    to justifying separation; or  whether  proper  consideration  had  been
    given to the child remaining in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the  other
    parent or an alternative primary carer.

10. The case involved a mother and several children of whom only one was  a
    British citizen. The result of the immigration decision would have been
    the separation of the youngest child from not only his mother  but  his
    siblings. The family save the father had entered illegally in 2012  and
    had remained in the UK. The father appears to have had settled  status.
    The mother had given birth to a  British  citizen  child  and  was  the
    primary carer for that child. As set out in paragraph 8  there  was  no
    criminality or other factor justifying separation and whilst there were
    possible other carers, it was accepted that the mother was the  primary
    carer and the refusal of leave would result in the  separation  of  the
    child from his primary carer. The respondent had not in the case  given
    any consideration to any other potential carer given the circumstances.



11. In the present case there is clearly a father in the United Kingdom and
    arguably the child could stay with the father.  The  problem  would  be
    that the father working would have limited time either to work or  look
    after the child. There would also be separation from  the  mother,  the
    current primary carer.

12. As identified in the case the policy guidance represents  an  important
    source of what the Secretary of State's view of what is  reasonable  in
    the circumstances. Where the Secretary of State has given  guidance  in
    that form setting out clearly what  is  and  what  is  not  reasonable,
    clearly that is a significant factor in assessing whether  or  not  the
    decision itself is proportionately justified

13. The conclusion in SF was that expecting the  mother  and  some  of  the
    children to  leave  the  youngest  child  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    effectively separating them was not in the circumstances reasonable and
    was not consistent with the policy identified. The result of failing to
    grant the mother leave would be to force the child  to  leave  the  UK.
    There were no other factors in the case which justified separation.

14. Central to the policies is the fact that it is not reasonable to  force
    a British child to leave the United Kingdom. Judge Lawrence in reliance
    upon section 117 (B) (6) of the 2002 Act sets out that it  is  for  the
    respondent to demonstrate that it would be reasonable for the child  to
    go with the mother to Bolivia or Venezuela. That approach runs  counter
    to the approach in the policy and in the cases of Zambrano and  SF.  It
    is forcing the child to go with the mother. Whilst the judge refers  to
    the clear wording of the Section 117(B) (6) the judge clearly  has  not
    taken account of the policy and case  law.  The  judge  has  failed  to
    consider the policy and failed to include  that  consideration  in  the
    assessment of proportionality. That failure to consider the  policy  is
    in the circumstances a clear error of law.

15.  For the reasons set out I find that there is a material error  of  law
    in the original decision and I set the decision aside. I determined  in
    the circumstances to remake the decision.

16. In remaking the decision I take account of the  provisions  of  section
    117 (B) (6). I also take account of Section 55 of the 2009 Act and  the
    need to protect and promote the welfare of the child.

17. Clearly the appellant and her child have a family relationship and  the
    decision would significantly interfere with that family relationship. I
    am satisfied however that the decision is in accordance  with  the  law
    and for the purposes of maintaining immigration control as an aspect of
    the economic well-being of the country.

18. As a final matter I have to determine whether or not  the  decision  is
    proportionately justified taking into account the matters set out above
    and the policy guidance referred to within the case law.

19.  I find that the appellant is the main  carer  for  a  British  citizen
    child and that the effect of removing the appellant  from  or  refusing
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom would be  to  force  the  British
    citizen child to leave the UK to be with his mother. I find that  there
    is no element of criminality or other factor of such  weight  as  would
    justify separation. Whilst I take account of the circumstances in which
    the appellant entered the UK, given that she is the main carer for  the
    child, I find  that  the  decision  is  not  proportionately  justified
    applying the guidance and the case law. I therefore allow the appeal on
    Article 8 grounds.

    Notice of Decision

20. I set the original decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside.

21. I substitute the following decision "The appeal is allowed on Article 8
    family life grounds.

22. I make no order for costs



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Dated 15th February 2018





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed                                             Date 15th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure





