
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/04890/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated:                 |
|On 24 November 2017                           |On 6 December 2017           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                          MRS ZARGHOONA MIR DARWISH

                       (I MAKE NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFO

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan  (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen  (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (Judge M A Khan hereinafter "the Judge") whereupon he
dismissed her appeal against a decision of the entry  clearance  officer  of
21 January 2016 refusing to grant her  entry  clearance  to  come  to  the
United Kingdom, with a view to settlement, as a spouse.

2.    The application had been refused because the entry  clearance  officer
thought that the claimant had submitted false information  with  respect  to
her UK based sponsor's income and employment.  The entry clearance  officer,
in that context, relied upon paragraph S-EC.2.2.(a) of Appendix FM to  the
Immigration Rules.  That was the key issue and the basis for the refusal of
the application.

3.    The particular concern was said to be that  whilst  the  claimant  had
submitted a letter from a firm called M and F Mini Market as evidence of
her sponsor's employment and income (the letter being dated 16 October 2015
and suggesting  that  he  was  at  that  time  a  current  employee)  checks
conducted with Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs (HMRC) had, it  was  said,
shown that his employment with that firm had ended on 30 September 2015.

4.    The claimant appealed.  Her UK based  sponsor  attended  the  hearing.
At the hearing  the  Presenting Officer  acting  on  behalf  of  the  Entry
Clearance Officer produced a "document verification report" which  was  said
to support the allegation. The Judge did not find the document verification
report nor the information contained within it to be persuasive.  So he  did
not dismiss the appeal  on  quite  the  same  basis  upon  which  the  Entry
Clearance Officer had  refused  the  application  (or  so  it  seems).   But
nevertheless he does appear to have come to the  view,  notwithstanding  his
rejection of the document verification report as being  unreliable  evidence
that false information had been given because the  claimant  had  failed  to
demonstrate  before   him   that   his   employment   had   not   ended   on
30 September 2015.  That, of itself, seems a little confusing.   But  even
more  confusingly  the Judge,  in  the  penultimate   paragraph   of   his
determination, appears to have found  both  that  the  requirements  of  the
Immigration Rules  regarding   financial   matters   are   not   met   and
simultaneously that they are.

5.    When the matter came before me  Mrs Pettersen,  unsurprisingly,  said
she accepted that the Judge's decision ought to be  set  aside.   She  also
accepted, Ms Khan having produced some documentary evidence from HMRC, that
the employment had not ended in September 2015.

6.    In the circumstances, given that the sole point raised  by  the  entry
clearance officer has been answered I conclude that it  is  appropriate  for
me to set aside the Judge's decision and to re-make the decision myself  in
the claimant's favour.   Accordingly,  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
Entry Clearance Officer's decision of 21 January 2016 is allowed.

Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law and is set aside.
In remaking the decision I allow the claimant's  appeal  against  the  entry
clearance  officer's  decision  of  21 January 2016  refusing  her  entry
clearance to come to the UK, with a view to settlement, as a spouse.

I make no anonymity direction.




Signed:                      Date: 6 December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

To The Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award. None was sought before me.



Signed                                                  Date:   6   December
2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

