
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
  Appeal Numbers:  HU/04468/2016
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                    HU/04474/2016

                                                      HU/04481/2016
                                                               HU/12617/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 15th October 2018                            |On 19th October 2018       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                                     SN
                                    SSMK
                                     SSK
                                    SSAK
                         [Anonymity direction made]

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellants:    Mr H Semega-Janneh, instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellants'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Durance  promulgated  6.2.18,  dismissing  their  linked
    appeals against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  3.5.16,
    to refuse their human rights claim for leave to remain in the  UK.  The
    appellants comprise two parents, born in 1981, and two children born in
    2008 and 2011 respectively.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    5.6.18.

 3. Although Judge Durance did not anonymise the decision, given that minor
    children are involved I consider it appropriate to do so, in the  usual
    terms.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons set out briefly below, I found that there was an  error
    of law in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as
    to require the decision  to be set aside  and  remade.  Having  reached
    that decision, both parties agreed that the matter could be dealt  with
    on the basis of submissions only without the need to take  any  further
    evidence.

 5. Judge Bird's reasons for granting permission to appeal are not entirely
    clear as the wording is somewhat garbled. However, the  primary  ground
    of appeal relates to the failure of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  take
    account of the fact that one of the two children had crossed the seven-
    year threshold under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and thus
    the parents met the requirements of section 117B(6) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Whilst the judge  addressed  the  best
    interests of the children, there was no assessment of reasonableness of
    expecting the children to leave the UK or  how  that  test  has  to  be
    approached in the light of MA (Pakistan) and Others  v  Upper  Tribunal
    (IAC) and Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

Voice Recordings

 6. Judge Bird also considered it arguable that there was a failure to have
    regard to R (Ahsan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009,  and  there  may  have
    been a denial of a fair opportunity for the  appellant  to  obtain  the
    voice recording of his ETS-TOIEC English  language  test.  The  grounds
    complain that the issue of obtaining a copy of the voice recording  was
    simply ignored by the judge. However, on this  issue  Mr  Semega-Janneh
    was unable to demonstrate that any such issue had  been  raised  during
    the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing. Mr McVeety pointed out that the
    recordings are held by ETS and not the respondent. It is not clear that
    any voice recording was ever requested or adjournment sought to  obtain
    it. In the circumstances, I found that this ground of  appeal  was  not
    made out.

 7. Mr McVeety accepted that the decision contains no reference to  section
    117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  or  the
    reasonableness test under 276ADE, nor was he able to point to where the
    appropriate consideration might be inferred.  Fairly,  neither  did  he
    advance that such consideration can be demonstrated to be immaterial to
    the outcome of the appeal.

 8. In the circumstances, I found the omission  a  material  error  of  law
    requiring the decision to be set aside and remade. However, I  preserve
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the ETS and  the
    other issues summarised at [42]  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Relevant Considerations

 9. It is not necessary to repeat the entire history and to recite all  the
    facts of the case set out in Judge  Durance's  decision.  However,  the
    relevant  factors  include  the  following  considerations,   including
    findings preserved from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The adult male, Mr K, came to the UK in 2004 with leave as  a  student,
    subsequently extended to 2013. In  2012  his  leave  was  curtained  to
    9.11.12. Two subsequent applications as  a  Tier  1  entrepreneur  were
    refused. This appeal relates to an application made in January 2015 for
    indefinite leave to remain.

11. The female adult, Ms N, first entered the UK in  2006  on  a  dependent
    student visa and was subsequent granted further leave as the spouse  of
    Mr K. Her dependent leave was also curtailed in 2012.

12. The two children were born in  the  UK.  They  and  their  parents  are
    Pakistani nationals. The  significant  change  in  circumstances  since
    Judge Durance's decision is that the second child has now reached the 7-
    year  threshold,  which  strengthens  the  collective  case   for   the
    appellants to remain in the  UK  and  I  have  taken  that  fully  into
    account.

13. In summary, I preserve the following findings in relation to  the  male
    adult appellant:

      a) That he used deception in his ETS English  language  assessment  by
         using a proxy;

      b) In the circumstances, the curtailment of his leave was lawful;

      c) He has been working illegally at Manchester Airport, in  breach  of
         his leave and thus this is another act of deception on his part;

      d) He also falls for refusal under paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration
         Rules given that he made false representations in order  to  obtain
         further leave to remain in the UK. He also falls for refusal  under
         paragraph 322(5) for refusing/failing to attend the interview.  His
         excuses for not doing so were rejected by the First-tier Tribunal;

14. I also preserve the findings that neither adult appellant was  able  to
    demonstrate very significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  Pakistan.
    Neither adult appellant can qualify under Appendix FM, on the basis  of
    10 years' lawful residence in the UK. No health  grounds  argument  was
    raised on behalf of the parents at the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In respect of the children, I preserve the following findings:

      a) Although each child was born in the UK, they  both  speak  Urdu  as
         well as English. They enjoy family life with their parents  in  the
         UK;

      b) There are no health  concerns  sufficient  to  engage  the  N  high
         threshold;

      c) That the best interests of each  child  is  to  remain  with  their
         parents and to return with them to Pakistan.

16. At the present date, the children have been living in the UK for 10 and
    7 years respectively. They have never  visited  Pakistan  and  have  no
    first-hand knowledge of life there.

The Reasonableness Test

17. Each child appellant has reached the 7-year threshold  under  paragraph
    276ADE so that it is necessary for the tribunal to consider whether  it
    is reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK. This  is  the  same
    test outside the Rules pursuant to section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in  relation  to  whether  the  public
    interest requires the removal of the parent appellants who each have  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with their two  children.  However,
    following MA (Pakistan) and Others v  Upper  Tribunal  (IAC)  and  Anor
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705, this reasonableness test requires consideration of
    the wider public interest. However, where the 7-year threshold has been
    crossed, strong or powerful reasons are required  to  justify  removing
    them from the UK.

18. Also relevant under s117B in an outside the Rules consideration is that
    immigration control is in the public interest and that little weight is
    to be given to a relationship established whilst immigration status  is
    unlawful and that  little  weight  is  to  be  given  to  private  life
    developed whilst immigration status is either unlawful  or  precarious.
    As continued presence in the UK depended on leave, it is clear that the
    immigration status of each appellant was at least always precarious but
    latterly was unlawful.

19. In making the reasonableness assessment it is necessary to consider the
    best interests of each  child,  relevant  to  both  the  reasonableness
    assessment and consideration of proportionality outside the Rules.  The
    younger child has only recently crossed the 7-year threshold,  but  the
    elder child has lived in the UK for some 10 years since birth and  this
    means that there is a significant degree of integration in the UK  that
    should not be undervalued.

Best Interests

20. Judge Durance made a comprehensive best interests  assessment  pursuant
    to  Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.
    Following the guidance of EV (Philippines), the judge took into account
    the ages, length of residence, state of education, and that  they  have
    never lived in Pakistan. The judge noted that as both spoke Urdu  there
    would be no linguistic difficulties  in  integrating  in  Pakistan.  Mr
    Semega-Janneh pointed me to the ongoing medical treatment for the son's
    eye  squint  (A36)  but  I  am  satisfied  that  they  have  no  health
    difficulties that cannot be treated in Pakistan.

21. Their family life would continue with their parents in the same  family
    unit and they would have the assistance of their parents in integrating
    in Pakistan. The judge concluded at  [41(n)]  that  neither  child  had
    become so attuned to life in the UK that their integration in  Pakistan
    is contrary to their best interests. That may not be the correct  test,
    which is to assess what is in the best interests  of  each  child,  not
    merely would would not be contrary to their best interests. However, on
    an assessment of the evidence as a whole I am satisfied that  the  same
    conclusion would be reached that their best interests are to  accompany
    their parents to Pakistan.

22. I note from [62] onwards that  the  judge  took  full  account  of  the
    children's schooling and Mr Semega-Janneh  drew  my  attention  to  the
    school reports showing excellent performance in school  and  that  they
    are well-settled there, as is clear from the  headteacher's  letter  at
    A18. They have developed friendship groups with peers. The  headteacher
    was of the view that if either  child  were  to  experience  any  major
    change to schooling this would  be  detrimental  to  their  person  and
    academic development. However, such a strident view  has  to  be  taken
    into account against the background that many children move schools  as
    parents change jobs,  move  homes,  relocate  to  other  parts  of  the
    country, and even move abroad for work or other reasons.  Children  are
    adaptable and as each child is still in primary school  they  have  not
    reached any crucial stage  in  their  education.  It  also  has  to  be
    recalled that neither  child  has  any  entitlement  to  be  raised  or
    educated in the UK, as they are not British, have  no  settled  status,
    and are without immigration leave to remain.

23. As Judge Durance did in the best interests assessment, I also take into
    account  the  relative  youth  of  the  children.  They  are  Pakistani
    nationals and will have the support of their parents in integrating  in
    Pakistan,  the  country  of  their  nationality,  culture  and   ethnic
    background. They will be familiar with the culture given that they have
    been raised within a Pakistani family speaking Urdu in the home. I find
    that they will be able to readily adapt to a new life in  Pakistan  and
    that their significant stay and life in the UK  will  mean  that  there
    will be challenges in adapting to  life  in  Pakistan,  but  I  am  not
    satisfied that these would amount  to  very  significant  obstacles  to
    their integration in Pakistan.

24. Without needing to recite all the same evidence and considerations, for
    the same reasons I reach same conclusion as Judge Durance at [80]  that
    the best interests of the children are to remain with their parents and
    to relocate with their parents to Pakistan.

25. Even if the best interests of the children or either of  them  were  to
    remain in the UK given their life here  to  date  and  the  significant
    degree of  integration,  the  reasonableness  assessment  requires  the
    tribunal to take into account the wider  public  interest.  Whilst  the
    children are not to be blamed for the transgressions of their  parents,
    the fact remains that  the  wider  public  interest  must  include  the
    immigration history of their parents. Not only were  they  here  on  an
    entirely temporary basis, supposedly for the duration of  the  father's
    studies, but that leave was curtailed in 2012 so that they should  have
    returned to Pakistan at that time, when the children were quite  young.
    More significantly, the extension of leave to 2012 was only obtained by
    the deception of the father, perpetrating a fraud on the  Secretary  of
    State by tendering a dishonestly obtained English language certificate.
    The father also worked illegally in the UK. This behaviour is not to be
    condoned  and  suggests  a  disregard  or  contempt   for   immigration
    authorities. I conclude that there  is  a  strong  public  interest  in
    removing the adult appellants from the UK.

26. Considering the evidence overall, and for the reasons set out above,  I
    find that there are strong and powerful reasons that in my view make it
    reasonable in all the circumstances to expect the children as  well  as
    the adults to leave the UK to go to Pakistan, even  though  the  7-year
    threshold has been passed, and even though it is now 10 years that  the
    eldest child has  been  in  the  UK.  In  the  circumstances,  applying
    paragraph 276ADE I am satisfied that it is reasonable  to  expect  each
    child to leave the UK. It follows that the Immigration Rules cannot  be
    met and under consideration of  s117B(6)  in  respect  of  the  parents
    results in the same conclusion on the reasonableness test  outside  the
    Rules.

27. Applying the R (Razgar) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2004]  UKHKL  27  stepped  approach,  taking  into  account  the  best
    interests assessment, the reasonableness assessment under s117B(6), the
    immigration history and public interest in removing the appellants from
    the UK, and in conducting the  proportionality  balancing  exercise,  I
    find that the public interest in removing the children along with their
    parents significantly outweighs their article 8 rights to  respect  for
    family and private life, so that the decision of the Secretary of State
    was entirely proportionate and not disproportionate to  the  rights  of
    each of the appellants individually as well  as  collectively.  On  the
    facts of this case I find that the decision is not unduly harsh on  any
    of the appellants, giving particular consideration to the circumstances
    of each child. Although they at present know only life in  the  UK  and
    are settled and doing well at school, and will have a cohort of friends
    and associates outside the immediate family  unit  so  that  they  have
    roots in the UK, they are still  young  enough  to  adapt  to  life  in
    Pakistan  with  their  parents.  Schooling  and  further  education  is
    available in English there, but in any event they speak Urdu. They will
    have the opportunity to make new friends and to enjoy  a  full  private
    and social life. They will have the time to integrate before  going  on
    to secondary  and  further  education.  There  is  no  reason  why  any
    appropriate medical treatment would not be available and no reason  why
    they would not be able to look forward to a full and rewarding life  in
    Pakistan.

28. It follows that the appeal of each appellant on  human  rights  grounds
    must fail.

Decision

29. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the appeals by dismissing  the
                    appeal of each appellant.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. However, given that children are involved, I  consider
it appropriate to make an anonymity order.
Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  each  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify that appellant or any member  of  his/her  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make a no fee award.

Reasons: the appeal of each appellant has been dismissed so there can be  no
fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

