
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU044802015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 26 April 2017                    |On Thursday 5 May 2017       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                            MS VINUS OLARTE AZON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O A Ogunbiyi, Counsel instructed by Auleys
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Jessica Pacey promulgated on 8 November 2016 ("the Decision"). By  the
Decision  the  Judge  dismissed   the   Appellant's   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision dated 23 June 2015 refusing her application for  leave
to remain on human rights grounds as the mother of a British citizen  child.


2.    The facts of the Appellant's case  are  not  in  dispute.   She  is  a
national of the Philippines.   She  has  a  daughter  (S)  from  a  previous
relationship.  S was born on 9 May 1999 and will therefore soon be  eighteen
years old.  S is a British national based on her father's  nationality.   He
is a British national but resident in Hong Kong and she has  little  contact
with him.  The Appellant is in an unmarried relationship with Mr  Ewing  who
is a US citizen working in the UK.  They met about ten  years  ago  in  Hong
Kong where he was working before being posted to the  UK.   Whilst  in  Hong
Kong and since, Mr Ewing has apparently supported the Appellant and  S.   Mr
Ewing has a visa to remain in the UK until 27 July 2017.   It  appears  that
he intends to remain working in the UK after that  date  but  that  will  of
course depend on his employment.  He regularly travels  for  his  work.  The
Appellant and Mr Ewing apparently  intend  to  marry  once  the  Appellant's
divorce is finalised.

3.    Mr Ewing was posted to the UK in his job in 2014.  On 15 August  2014,
the Appellant arrived in the UK as a visitor on a  multi  visit  visa  valid
until 2 July 2019.  She was accompanied by S who as a British  citizen  does
not require a visa.  The Appellant left  the  UK  on  18  January  2015  and
returned to Hong Kong leaving S with her stepfather.  She  returned  to  the
UK on 30 January 2015 again as a visitor.  She was interviewed  at  port  on
arrival and was refused leave to enter.  It appears  this  was  based  on  a
change of circumstances since it appears  that  the  multi  visit  visa  was
granted on the understanding that the Appellant was resident  in  Hong  Kong
with her British husband and daughter whereas she was in fact already  in  a
relationship by  then  with  Mr  Ewing.  The  Appellant  was  however  given
temporary admission.

4.    The Appellant submitted  a  statement  of  additional  grounds  on  12
February 2015 seeking to remain based  on  her  relationship  with  S.    In
response to a request for further information,  the  Appellant's  solicitors
informed the Respondent that one of the reasons for  seeking  to  remain  in
the UK was  that  she  would  prefer  her  daughter  to  continue  with  her
education in the UK and that university fees would be higher if  S  had  not
been resident here for three  years  prior  to  going  to  university.   The
Appellant indicated that although she did not initially intend to settle  in
the UK, her circumstances changed when her daughter "demanded  her  presence
at home".

5.    The Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal finding that  it  would  be
reasonable to expect S to leave the UK and return with her  mother  to  Hong
Kong even though she  is  a  British  citizen.   In  so  finding  the  Judge
considered the human  rights  claim  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
Rules") applying section 117B(6) Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002 ("section 117B").

6.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb  on
3 March 2017.  The grant is in the following terms:-

      "[2]  The grounds, which were in time, complain that the  judge  erred
      in:   (1)   unreasonably/irrationally   taking   into   account   some
      speculations as to future events but not others; (2) not giving proper
      consideration to the  best  interests  of  a  British  child  and  the
      difficulties of the child  living  apart  from  her  mother;  and  (3)
      failing to consider whether the appellant  met  the  requirements  for
      family life as the parent of a child in the UK in Appendix FM.

      [3]   The first 2 grounds appear to me to have little merit,  in  that
      they fall within the area of a disagreement  with  the  outcome  of  a
      balancing exercise by the judge, rather than  raising  arguable  legal
      points. The third ground, however, does appear arguable (although  the
      reference to 'insurmountable obstacles' in the grounds should  be  one
      to 'reasonable').  The  judge  at  [22]  based  her  decision  not  to
      consider the Rules on a concession by the appellant's counsel, but the
      judge's record  of  proceedings  records  counsel  as  indicating  'no
      instructions to concede on any point' at the start, and asking for the
      appeal to be allowed under EX1 in closing submissions.

      [4]   Although there is no separate ground under  the  Rules  in  this
      appeal an ability or not to meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM  to
      HC395 is still of great relevance to a  consideration  of  Article  8.
      Under the Rules both the issues of 'sole parental responsibility'  and
      that of 'reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK' required  the
      judge's consideration, and it is arguable that the judge erred in  law
      by not doing so. The first issue is not entirely clear cut in that the
      Rules could be said to focus only on parents (and here the father  was
      in Hong Kong and not involved),  rather  than  step-parents;  and  the
      second may be impacted by the 'reasonable misapprehension' issue  (see
      [53] of the SC judgment in Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11).   Although  the
      appellant would do well to temper any hope these  points,  along  with
      the  importance  of  all  relevant   issues   being   given   judicial
      consideration, suggest that the  same  outcome  might  not  have  been
      inevitable without the arguable error."

7.    The appeal comes before me to determine whether there is an  error  of
law in the Decision and if so to either re-make the  decision  or  remit  to
the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

Discussion and conclusions

8.    I begin with the main reason why permission was granted although  this
was not the way in which the case was presented to me  by  Mr  Ogunbiyi.   I
can deal with the point there made relatively shortly.

9.    Mr Duffy submitted that Judge Gibb has in fact misconstrued the  Rules
as EX.1 has no relevance if a person is present on  a  visit  visa.   Having
looked again at the chronology, though, it appears that,  contrary  to  what
Mr Duffy perceived the position to be, the Appellant was in fact in  the  UK
on temporary admission at the time she made the  claim.   As  such,  it  may
have been possible for her to succeed  under  the  Rules  if  EX.1  applies.
EX.1  reads as follows:-

      EX.1. This paragraph applies if
   a) (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
      with a child who -
        (aa) is under the age of 18 years...;
        (bb) is in the UK;
        (cc) is a British citizen ...; and
        (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK
      or
      (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
      partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen........and there are
      insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner continuing
      outside the UK.
      EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
      obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
      faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
      life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would
      entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

10.   It is not suggested that the Appellant can succeed  on  the  basis  of
her relationship with Mr Ewing as he is not a British citizen or settled  in
the UK.  Notwithstanding Mr Ogunbiyi's submission at  the  outset  that  the
Judge had wrongly focussed on the relationship between the Appellant and  Mr
Ewing as the basis on which she sought to stay, it is readily apparent  from
reading the Decision that this is not the case and Mr Ogunbiyi  appeared  to
accept later in his submissions that this assertion was unsustainable.

11.   I accept that Mr  Duffy  may  have  been  wrong  to  submit  that  the
Appellant is precluded from relying on EX.1  because  she  had  leave  as  a
visitor at the time of her application. It appears from what I  say  at  [3]
above that she was in fact  in  the  UK  on  temporary  admission.  However,
section 117B(6) was considered by  the  Judge.   Section  117B(6)  reads  as
follows:-


      "In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the  public
      interest does not require the person's removal where -
   a) The person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
      qualifying child, and
   b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom."

There can be no dispute that S is a qualifying child  for  the  purposes  of
that section at least at the date of  hearing  which  led  to  the  Decision
(October 2016) and at the date of the hearing before me.  As such, the  same
qualification criteria apply when considering  s117B(6)(a)  and  EX.1(a)(i).
The Judge has therefore considered precisely the  same  question  as  arises
under EX.1 when looking at Section 117B(6) and  has  determined  the  appeal
against the Appellant squarely on the basis that it would be  reasonable  to
expect S to return to Hong Kong with her mother. Any error  in  that  regard
is therefore immaterial and I decline to set  aside  the  Decision  on  that
basis.

12.   Turning then to the issue of "sole parental  responsibility",  it  may
be that Judge Gibb  had in mind the case of Zambrano  and  the  Respondent's
policy of not removing  a  parent  where  that  would  have  the  effect  of
obliging  a  British  citizen  child  to  leave  the  UK.   There  are   two
difficulties which stand in the way of the Appellant  on  this  point.   The
first is that the Judge took into account Zambrano when considering  whether
the impact of removal of  the  Appellant  would  be  to  deprive  S  of  the
enjoyment of her rights as an EU  citizen  ([57]  and  following).   Second,
although I note that Mr Ewing says in his statement  that  he  considers  it
"morally wrong" to have S live  with  him  without  the  Appellant,  in  the
information  provided  to  the  Respondent  by  the  Appellant's  solicitors
following the claim, it was said that "[Mr Ewing]  is  extensively  involved
in both their lives.  He pays for everything they enjoy  as  a  family  unit
including the education of the daughter when she was in Hong Kong since  her
father has abdicated his role as a parent... it could be said  that  he  has
assumed parental role for the child ever since her parents separated."

13.   Judge Gibbs makes the point when granting permission  that  the  Rules
in relation to "sole parental responsibility"  may  focus  only  on  natural
parents and not step-parents.  It appears from what is there said  that  the
Judge may have misquoted  from  EX.1  as  that  refers  to  a  "genuine  and
subsisting parental relationship" and  not  "sole  parental  responsibility"
which is an entirely  different  rule.   That  latter  rule  could  have  no
relevance to this case as it concerns the ability of a child to settle  with
a parent  who  is  entitled  to  stay  if  that  parent  has  sole  parental
responsibility which is not this case.  Whichever rule  Judge  Gibb  had  in
mind, however, the issue of whether there is parental responsibility  is  in
my judgement one of fact.   Although in the interpretation  section  of  the
Rules a parent is defined as including a step-father only if the  biological
father is dead, the issue of whether a person  has  parental  responsibility
is a wider one as confirmed by the case of R (on the application  of  RK)  v
Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home   Department   (s.117B(6);   "parental
relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC), the headnote to which  reads  as
follows:-


      "[1]  It  is  not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  "parental
           responsibility"  in  law  for  there   to   exist   a   parental
           relationship.

      [2]   Whether a person  who  is  not  a  biological  parent  is  in  a
           "parental  relationship"  with  a  child  for  the  purposes  of
           s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
           depends on the individual circumstances  and  whether  the  role
           that individual plays establishes he or she  has  "stepped  into
           the shoes" of a parent. "

14.    "Sole  parental  responsibility"  and  whether  S  has   a   parental
relationship with Mr Ewing is though nothing to the point.  The question  is
the relationship enjoyed between the Appellant and S.   That  the  Appellant
is in a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  S  is  not  in
doubt.  What the Judge decided is that it would not be  unreasonable  for  S
to leave the UK with the Appellant.  Unless the Appellant can show that  the
Judge failed lawfully to consider the issue whether it would  be  reasonable
to expect S to leave the UK with the Appellant if the Appellant is  removed,
she cannot succeed.  For the foregoing reasons,  any  error  in  failing  to
consider that issue applying EX.1 is not material; the Judge considered  the
same issue applying section 117B(6).

15.   That then disposes of the ground which Judge  Gibb  considered  to  be
arguable in the grant of permission.  However, the grant of  permission  was
not  limited  and  I  permitted  Mr  Ogunbiyi  to  argue  all  the   grounds
notwithstanding what is  said  at  [3]  of  the  grant  of  permission.  His
submissions were formulated as a challenge to the Judge's reasoning  on  the
central issue of reasonableness of S leaving the UK with her mother.

16.   The first of the grounds relates to what is said to  be  impermissible
speculation by the Judge.  The example  given  in  the  grounds  relates  to
whether the Appellant intends to marry Mr  Ewing  and  may  be  expected  to
leave the UK at some point in the future depending on his work  commitments.
 That relates to what is said at [33] and [34] of the Decision. It  is  said
at [1] of the grounds that there is no evidence that they will  ever  marry.
That is simply factually incorrect since, although  it  is  not  covered  in
their witness statements, the Appellant indicated at interview that this  is
their intention ([Q44]). However, this submission  as  developed  orally  is
directed at what is said to be the Judge's  speculation  as  to  S's  future
education.  That challenge is focussed on [53] and [55] of the Decision.   I
do not need to  set  those  paragraphs  out  because  in  my  judgement,  Mr
Ogunbiyi is wrong in his submission that the  Judge  has  there  speculated.
Indeed, particularly as appears at  [55]  of  the  Decision,  she  expressly
declined to do so.

17.   The real basis of the Appellant's complaint in  this  regard  is  that
the Judge did not find that the need for S to remain in  the  UK  for  three
years in order to qualify for home tuition fees renders it  unreasonable  to
expect her to leave the UK with her mother.  However, as the Judge notes  at
[54] of the Decision, she had  to  determine  this  issue  on  the  evidence
before her.  The Judge has  simply  made  findings  based  on  the  evidence
before her as to whether S intends to go to university which was one of  the
principle  reasons  why  the  Appellant  asserted  that  it  would  not   be
reasonable for S to leave the UK now.  The Judge had no evidence from  S  to
show that she either wished or intended to go to university and  whilst  the
evidence as to S's educational achievements in her short time here  suggests
that she is doing reasonably well, there is no evidence from  teachers  that
she is bound to go on to further education.

18.   Mr Ogunbiyi also developed his submission on this ground by  reference
to what is said in the Decision about the case of EV  (Philippines)  v  SSHD
[2014] EWCA Civ 784.  He made the point (correctly)  that  EV  (Philippines)
concerns a foreign national child  whereas  S,  as  a  British  citizen,  is
entitled to receive education  in  the  UK.   That  is  of  course  correct.
However, the facts of this case are highly unusual as S  has  lived  outside
the UK with her mother until  2014  and  has  never  in  fact  received  the
education to which she is entitled other than in the past few years.

19.   Mr Duffy submitted and I accept that the principles set  out  at  [37]
to [39] of the Decision apply equally to  S  because  the  consideration  is
what is in her best interests and  whether,  having  determined  what  those
best interests require, it is reasonable for her to leave the  UK  with  her
mother.  She cannot of course be removed in the same way  as  she  could  if
she were a foreign child and, for so long as Mr Ewing remains in the UK,  he
and the Appellant may choose for S to stay with him (or indeed  on  her  own
once she turns eighteen).  As Mr Duffy pointed out,  though,  the  reference
to EV (Philippines) is really the "flip side" to  the  principle  enunciated
in that case which is cited at [39] of the Decision.  Whereas it  might  not
be in the best interests of a foreign child to  go  to  another  country  if
that child has been in education in the UK for a long  period  and  is  well
integrated here, it is equally  the  case  that  the  best  interests  of  a
British citizen child  are  not  necessarily  to  be  educated  in  the  UK,
particularly where, as here, that child has been  brought  up  and  educated
outside the UK for most of her childhood.  The Judge recognised at  [45]  of
the Decision that EV (Philippines) is not directly on point since that  case
did not involve a British citizen. However, as the Judge noted  at  [62]  of
the Decision, the period which S  has  spent  in  education  in  the  UK  as
compared with her education  abroad  is  a  factor  relevant  to  the  issue
whether she can reasonably be expected to leave the UK.

20.   For those reasons, ground  one  is  simply  a  disagreement  with  the
Judge's  findings  about  S's  future  intentions  and  the  impact  on  her
education if the Appellant is removed.  There is no  error  of  law  in  the
Judge's reasoning on those issues when looking at the  reasonableness  of  S
leaving the UK.

21.   Turning then to ground two, the focus of that  ground  as  pleaded  is
the impact on S's family  life  and  private  life  outside  the  Rules  and
whether removal of the Appellant is disproportionate for  that  reason.   Mr
Ogunbiyi submitted that, just because S  will  be  eighteen  soon  does  not
affect the fact that she has a strong family life with her mother  and  that
it would be disproportionate to remove the Appellant and separate  her  from
S.   I accept the proposition that eighteen is not  a  "magic  number"  when
analysing family life between parent and child.

22.   The issue for me at this stage is whether the Judge made an  error  of
law as at the date of the hearing before her at which date S  was  seventeen
and a half and was not as close as she is now to  her  eighteenth  birthday.
As I have already observed, whether S goes with her mother is  a  matter  of
choice for the Appellant, Mr Ewing and S.  It is at least possible for S  to
remain in the UK with Mr Ewing and even to remain here on her own  once  she
is eighteen.  However, the basis on which the Judge  decided  the  issue  is
that it would not be disproportionate for S to leave the UK  notwithstanding
her British citizenship.  The Judge gave reasons at  [35]  to  [63]  of  the
Decision for that conclusion. She took into account as she was  required  to
do  S's  best  interests  as  a  child.   She  gave  those  best   interests
appropriate weight.  The findings made were open to the Judge,  particularly
given the lack of evidence concerning the intentions of  S  in  relation  to
her future education and the fact that S has only been in the UK for  a  few
years.    Given the expectation of the Judge  that  S  would  accompany  the
Appellant if she left, there would be no interference with the  family  life
between the Appellant and S.  The  impact  on  S's  private  life  is  amply
considered by the Judge on the evidence before her.

23.   As Mr Duffy submitted, the outcome of this appeal might not have  been
the same before all Judges but that is not the test for  me.   The  question
for me is whether there is an error of law in the Decision.  As observed  by
Judge Gibb when granting permission,  grounds  one  and  two  are  really  a
disagreement with the outcome of the balancing exercise by  the  Judge.  The
Judge has given sufficient reasons for her conclusions which  were  open  to
her on the evidence.  It cannot be said that the Decision  is  perverse.   I
have explained at [9] to [14] above why any error of law based on  the  main
ground in relation to which permission was granted cannot be material.

24.   For those reasons, I am satisfied that the Decision does  not  contain
a material error of law.  I therefore uphold the Decision with  the  outcome
that the Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law. I therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  of
Judge Pacey promulgated on 8 November 2016 with  the  consequence  that  the
Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Signed           [pic] Dated:  3 May 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
