
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/04328/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |               Decision & Reasons       |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 24 July 2017                    |               On 02 August 2017        |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                              THI MY NGAN HUYNH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Sowerby, Counsel, instructed by The Chancery
                    Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Birk (FtJ), promulgated on 19 January 2017, dismissing the
        Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of 30  January
        2015 refusing her application for Indefinite Leave to Remain  (ILR)
        on the basis of her lawful residence for a continuous period of  10
        years.







   Factual Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of the Vietnam, date of birth 13  March
        1986. She entered the United Kingdom  on  19  September  2005  with
        entry clearance as a student. She was subsequently granted  further
        periods of leave to remain.


     3. On 2 February 2013 the Appellant made an in-time  application  (her
        leave to remain was to expire on the 24 February 2013) for leave to
        remain as a Tier 1 (General)  migrant.  On  28  February  2013  the
        Respondent purportedly rejected this  application  as  having  been
        invalidly made. The Respondent contended that the Appellant had not
        completed  the  relevant  payment  page  of  her  application.  The
        Appellant maintained that she had completed the  payment  page  and
        that she had indeed attached  a  cheque  to  the  application.  The
        Appellant nevertheless attempted to resubmit the application  on  5
        March 2013. On the 28 March 2013 the application  was  returned  to
        the Appellant marked as being invalid. The Respondent  stated  that
        there were insufficient decision rejecting this second  application
        as invalid was received by the Appellant on 5 April 2013.  On  that
        day she approached the Sales and Service Manager of  her  bank  who
        provided a letter confirming  that  the  Appellant  had  maintained
        sufficient funds in the account to cover the fee on the  date  that
        the Respondent attempted to take payment. The letter confirmed that
        the cheque was unpaid due to a bank error.  On  8  April  2013  the
        Appellant once again resubmitted her application.  Her  application
        for leave to remain was granted on 7 May 2013, valid  until  3  May
        2016.

The Respondent's decision of 4 September 2015

     4. In September 2015 the Appellant applied for ILR  in  the  UK  under
        paragraph  276B  of  the  immigration  rules  (which  contains  the
        requirements for ILR  on  the  grounds  of  long  residence).  This
        application was refused on 4 September 2015. In  her  decision  the
        Respondent set out the history as described above.  The  Respondent
        considered that the Appellant's lawful leave expired on 28 February
        2013 (it  had  been  extended  by  virtue  of  section  3C  of  the
        Immigration Act 1971) and that she was not again granted  leave  to
        remain until 3 May 2013, 64 days later. Paragraph 276B requires  an
        applicant for ILR to not have remained  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
        immigration laws except that any period of overstaying for a period
        of 28 days or less will be disregarded. As the  Appellant  remained
        in breach of the immigration laws in excess of 28 days in 2013  she
        could not achieve at least 10 years  continuous  lawful  residence.
        The Respondent went on to consider whether the  Appellant  met  the
        requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of   the   immigration   rules
        (containing the requirements to be  met  by  an  applicant  seeking
        leave to remain on the grounds of private life) but concluded  that
        those requirements were not met. The Respondent  finally  concluded
        that there were no circumstances that were sufficiently  compelling
        or compassionate in nature sufficient to warrant a grant  of  leave
        to remain outside of the immigration rules and in  accordance  with
        article 8.


     5. It is important to note at this  stage  that  the  refusal  of  the
        Appellant's application bestowed upon her a right of appeal.  Under
        the section of the decision headed "right of appeal" the Respondent
        noted that the right of  appeal  arose  under  section  82  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as the Respondent  had
        refused the Appellant's "human rights claim."

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     6. The Appellant sought an appeal 'on the papers'. Consequently  there
        was no tribunal hearing. The detailed  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
        First-tier Tribunal, which were supported by  a  witness  statement
        from the Appellant, essentially contended that  the  Appellant  had
        fully completed the payment section  of  her  application  dated  2
        February 2013 and that a cheque had been stapled to the  form,  and
        that the Respondent made a mistake in  claiming  that  the  payment
        section had not been completed. The grounds additionally  contended
        that, in  failing  to  take  proper  account  of  the  bank  letter
        confirming that the inability to draw funds following  the  renewed
        application of 5th of March 2013 was  due  to  a  bank  error,  the
        Respondent failed to apply her own guidance  when  determining  the
        existence of exceptional reasons.


     7. After setting out the immigration history  and  the  basis  of  the
        Respondent's refusal, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Birk  noted,
        at [8] that  the  only  ground  of  appeal  now  available  to  the
        Appellant was that based on her human  rights.  The  judge  stated,
        "The Appellant and her grounds  of  appeal  and  also  her  witness
        statement has only  addressed  the  issue  of  the  chronology  and
        failures that she alleges of the Respondent  in  dealing  with  her
        applications." At [9] the judge noted that the Appellant had family
        in Vietnam and that she appeared to have none in the UK,  and  that
        she failed to set out or argue that  she  meets  "...  any  of  the
        immigration rules in respect of her family and  private  life."  At
        [10] the judge stated that the Appellant had not  argued  that  the
        immigration rules for leave to remain were met and  concluded  that
        there were no compelling  circumstances  justifying  an  assessment
        outside of the immigration rules. The appeal was dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the decision of the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

     8. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal asserted that the judge
        failed to make any findings in relation to whether the  immigration
        rules (paragraph 276B) were met and failed to refer to any  of  the
        evidence and the submissions made on her behalf in  writing  as  to
        her compliance with paragraph 276B. In granting permission judge of
        the first-tier Tribunal Scott Baker stated that  the  determination
        was succinct and there was little reference to any of the  evidence
        submitted by the Appellant or any analysis  of  the  same  and  few
        findings of fact. Permission was granted on all grounds.


     9. The matter came before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Mailer  on  19
        April 2017. The Deputy Upper Tribunal judge set out in some  detail
        the basis of the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  recorded  the
        submissions of the representatives, including those of Mr  Sowerby.
        At [29], seemingly in reliance on the submissions made to him by Mr
        Clarke, the Presenting Officer, the judge focused on the absence of
        any evidence provided by the Appellant indicating that she would be
        adversely affected by the decision under challenge. There was  said
        to be no evidence of any relationship entered into by the Appellant
        and no evidence of her engagement in society. There was no evidence
        relating to any social  ties  which  could  not  be  replicated  in
        Vietnam. "There was in fact no reference to the development of  any
        close, personal or social ties which developed over time." At  [30]
        the Deputy Judge  referred  to  the  Appellant's  appeal  as  being
        limited to "human rights grounds" and stated that  the  "First-tier
        Tribunal was thus bound to consider the  grounds  of  appeal  which
        contended that the  Respondent's  decision  was  incompatible  with
        human rights under the Convention." The Deputy Judge concluded that
        the First-tier Tribunal had considered the matters  raised  by  the
        Appellant  but  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  there  were   no
        compelling circumstances outside of the rules sufficient to warrant
        a grant of leave to remain.


    10. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  this  decision  to  the
        Court of Appeal. The grounds contended that the Deputy Judge failed
        to properly  consider  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to
        compelling circumstances and failed to address or engage  with  her
        submissions  relating  to  paragraph  276B.  Nor  was   there   any
        assessment with  the  submission  that  the  Respondent  failed  to
        lawfully exercise her discretion when assessing the validity of the
        applications made by her in 2013.


    11. In a decision issued on 2 June 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan set
        aside the decision of the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  pursuant  to
        rule 43 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
        Judge Jordan, whilst accepting that the appeal  before  the  First-
        tier Tribunal was limited to a human rights claim, noted that  such
        a claim  was  arguably  linked  to  the  requirements  set  out  in
        paragraph 276B as an applicant who had achieved 10 years continuous
        lawful resident met the requirements for ILR,  and  that  this  was
        considered to be a human rights claim. Judge Jordan noted  that  if
        an applicant meets the requirements of paragraph 276B but has  been
        refused ILR and  is  liable  to  removal  that  must  amount  to  a
        violation of the persons protected private and family  life.  Judge
        Jordan noted that the First-tier Tribunal judge  misunderstood  the
        nature of the appeal and that the Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  did
        not detect the arguable error in the First-tier  judge's  approach.
        Having set aside the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  the  matter  was
        relisted with directions, inter alia, that the Appellant  file  and
        serve a skeleton argument setting out what evidence was before  the
        First-tier Tribunal judge in respect of the Appellant's  allegation
        than the bank and or the Respondent was at  fault  in  holding  her
        2013 applications as invalid and that the Appellant was to  provide
        the contents of each of the two sets of grounds of  appeal  to  the
        Upper Tribunal.


The error of law hearing


    12.  There  was  significant  agreement  between  the  parties  at  the
        commencement  of  the  hearing  before  me.  Both   representatives
        accepted that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to  consider  or
        make any findings in respect of the submissions before her relating
        to the Appellant's alleged overstaying in  2013.  It  was  accepted
        that this was a material error of law given  that  the  application
        under paragraph 276B was itself a human rights claim. Mr Kotas,  on
        behalf of the Respondent, accepted that the Appellant had  in  fact
        completed the payments page in respect of both of her  applications
        made on 2 February 2013 and 5 March 2013. Mr Kotas produced General
        Case Information Database (GCID) notes indicating that  the  cheque
        submitted in respect of the application dated 2 February  2013  was
        'rejected', which was inconsistent with the Respondent's claim that
        the payment page had not  been  completed.  Mr  Kotas  additionally
        accepted that the Appellant had fully completed her  payments  page
        of her Tier 1 application.

Discussion

    13. Both parties accept that the First-tier judge materially  erred  in
        law by failing to engage  with  the  detailed  written  submissions
        before her relating to the Appellant's  compliance  with  paragraph
        276B. Both the First-tier judge and the Deputy Upper Tribunal judge
        concentrated only on whether the Appellant could  demonstrate  that
        she had established a  family  or  private  life  in  the  UK  with
        reference to paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules, Appendix FM
        of the immigration rules, and whether  there  were  any  compelling
        circumstances outside of the rules capable of justifying a grant of
        leave to remain on the basis of article 8. Neither judge appears to
        have appreciated that an application  under  paragraph  276B  is  a
        human rights claim. This was not disputed by either  representative
        and is quite clear from the Home  Office  guidance  in  respect  of
        rights of appeal.  Through  various  immigration  rules,  including
        paragraph 276B, the Respondent has set out  certain  criteria  that
        must be met in order for an  individual  to  be  granted  leave  to
        remain on the basis of the private life they have  established  for
        themselves in the UK. As such it was incumbent  on  the  First-tier
        judge to have considered whether the Appellant did in fact meet the
        requirements  of  paragraph  276B  as  her  compliance  with   this
        paragraph would mean that she met the requirements  for  ILR  on  a
        human rights claim. The grounds made it clear  that  the  Appellant
        disputed that her application dated 2 February  2013  was  invalid.
        The judge was required to  engage  with  the  submission  and  make
        appropriate findings of fact.


    14. Having found a material error of law I considered  it  appropriate,
        in light of  the  submissions  made  by  both  representatives,  to
        proceed to remake the decision. I am in no doubt that Mr Kotas  was
        right to accept on behalf of the Respondent that she made a mistake
        in refusing to accept that the application of 2 February  2013  was
        validly made. It is abundantly clear from  her  decision  dated  28
        February 2013 that the application was refused on  the  basis  that
        the Appellant had not made a payment  and  had  not  completed  the
        payment page of her application form. The Appellant retained a copy
        of that application form. The copy, which was not challenged in any
        way by the Presenting Officer, was fully completed and indeed had a
        cheque attached to it. I am further reinforced in finding that  the
        application form was  completed  by  reference  to  the  GCI  notes
        provided by Mr Kotas at the hearing. The relevant  GCI  note,  with
        reference to the decision of 28 February 2013, noted "app rejected.
        Check rejected." As Mr Kotas pointed out  a  cheque  could  not  be
        rejected if it was not attached to the form and the  form  was  not
        fully completed. No details were provided as to why the cheque  was
        allegedly rejected. I have additionally taken into account the  low
        likelihood that the Appellant, a  clearly  intelligent  woman  with
        impressive academic achievements, would have failed to complete one
        of the most vital aspects of  her  application.  Having  cumulative
        regard to these factors I am left in no doubt whatsoever  that  the
        Appellant made a valid application on 2 February 2013 and that  the
        Respondent mistakenly rejected  the  application  as  invalid.  The
        Appellant therefore did make a valid application on 2 February 2013
        and this application was pending  until  she  was  granted  further
        leave to remain on 3 May 2013.


    15. The above finding of fact means that the Appellant spent no time as
        an over stayer in 2013. This was effectively accepted by Mr  Kotas.
        As the Appellant lawfully entered the UK on 19 September  2005,  by
        19 September 2015 she  had  remained  lawfully  in  the  UK  for  a
        continuous period of at least 10 years.


    16.  In  refusing  the  Appellant's  human  rights  claim  pursuant  to
        paragraph 276B the Respondent  made  a  significant  factual  error
        which  affected  her  ultimate  conclusion.  By  characterising  an
        application pursuant to paragraph 276B as a human rights claim  the
        Respondent has set out the requirements which, in her view, satisfy
        the requirements of article 8 ECHR. By making a material  error  in
        her assessment as to whether the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B
        have been met  the  Respondent  has  acted  in  a  manner  that  is
        disproportionate under article  8.  The  Respondent's  decision  is
        consequently unlawful under section 6 of the human rights act  1998
        as it breaches the Appellant's right to  respect  for  her  private
        life.


    17. The appeal is consequently allowed on human  rights  grounds,  i.e.
        the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
        1998.


    18. The consequence of  this  appeal  is  that  the  Appellant  has  an
        outstanding claim before the Respondent under paragraph  267B.  The
        Respondent must now  consider  that  application  in  light  of  my
        factual finding that the Appellant has remained in  the  UK  for  a
        continuous lawful period of 10 years. Under paragraph 276B(ii)  the
        Respondent must have regard to the public interest when determining
        whether it would be undesirable for the Appellant to be given  ILR.
        It is  appropriate  for  the  Respondent  to  consider  the  public
        interest factors  at  first  instance.  The  application  therefore
        remains outstanding before the Respondent to consider the  relevant
        public interest factors in light of my findings of  fact  that  the
        Appellant has remained in the UK for a continuous lawful period  of
        10 years.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a material error of law.
The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.
The Respondent is to determine the Appellant's pending application  for  ILR
under paragraph 276B on the basis that the Appellant  has  lawfully  resided
in the UK for a continuous period of at least 10 years.



[pic]                               1 August 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



