

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/05844/2015
                                                               HU/09086/2015
                                                               HU/09089/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 22 November 2017                           |On 28 November 2017          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NEW DELHI)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   1) S R
                                  2) M K R
                                   3) N R
                             (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar, counsel
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of convenience, I refer to the parties as they were in the
    First-tier Tribunal, namely with the Entry  Clearance  Officer  as  the
    respondent.

 2.  The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Nepal  who  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decisions to refuse them  entry  clearance  as  the  adult
    dependents of a retired  Gurkha  soldier.  The  appeals  against  those
    decisions were allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M  R  Oliver
    ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 15 February 2017.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal but given my
    findings  as  regards  the  appellants'  and  their  parents'  personal
    circumstances, they are entitled to anonymity in these proceedings.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers
    in the First-tier Tribunal on 5 September 2017 in the following terms:

         "... In my assessment, the grounds are arguable. In particular,  it
         seems to me arguable that:

             - as per the respondent's ground 2, the judge may not have had
               a sufficient evidential foundation for at least some of  the
               findings that seem to have led him to allow these appeals.

             - As per the respondent's ground 1, it is  arguable  that  the
               judge should  have  given  (further)  consideration  to  the
               "public interest  criteria"  set  out  in  Part  5A  of  the
               Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

      Hence the matter came before me.

Submissions

 5. For the respondent, Ms Ahmad relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
    submitted that, in conducting a proportionality  assessment,  the  FTTJ
    had had no regard to the public interest considerations under s117B  of
    the 2002 Act. Further, the finding that the delay could be explained by
    lengthy preparations was unreasoned and speculative. Findings about the
    quality of family life between the sponsor and adult children were also
    speculative. Inadequate reasons had been given  for  the  finding  that
    family life existed between the appellants, who were in their  mid-  to
    late-twenties, and the sponsor. It was not clear why the  provision  of
    funds and electronic  communications  were  sufficient  to  demonstrate
    family life. Ms Ahmad relied  on  Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)
    [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) and ECO, Sierra Leone v Kopoi [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1511. She submitted the FTTJ had had a duty to address the conflicts in
    the evidence and to give reasons.

 6. Mr Jafar, for the appellant, made lengthy submission. He relied on  the
    guidance in Jitendra Rai v ECO, New Delhi   [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320.  He
    noted that Kopoi concerned adult cousins who  were  not  dependent.  Of
    more  relevance  was  the  guidance  in   Rai   and   Ghising   &   Ors
    (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).  There
    were no conflicts in the evidence  for  resolution  by  the  FTTJ.  The
    decision on family life was a legal one.  The FTTJ was not required  to
    repeat all the evidence given it was not in dispute. This was an appeal
    allowed on  human  rights  grounds.  The  FTTJ  considered  the  public
    interest factors at [18], albeit s117B was not cited  specifically.  In
    any event, pursuant to Rai at [55]-[58] a failure to be alive to  s117A
    and 117B did not amount to a material error of law. The respondent  had
    not  pointed  to  any  public  interest  factors  over  and  above  the
    maintenance of immigration control, paragraph 41  of  Gurung  referred:
    the  historic  injustice  required  that  the  decision  was   in   the
    appellants' favour. The sole issue for the FTTJ had been the  existence
    of family life. He gave good reasons for finding as much. Evidence  had
    been adduced to explain the delayed applications; the delay was not  of
    the appellants' making. There  was  no  material  error  of  law.   The
    appellants could not meet the criteria in the Rules but the  issue  was
    whether they met  the  policy  criteria;  they  did.  Thus  the  public
    interest factors were of little relevance.

 7. In reply, Ms Ahmad observed that the immateriality of the error in  Rai
    arose from the Court of  Appeal's  concluding  that  the  decision  had
    already been vitiated by  error  of  law.  These  appellants  were  not
    assisted by Rai. It was accepted there were no inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence before the FTTJ; however, the respondent had not accepted  the
    existence of family life. It was a matter  of  law.  The  evidence  was
    insufficient for such a finding.

Discussion

 8. Ms Ahmad conceded in her reply to  Mr  Jafar's  oral  submissions  that
    there had been no dispute between the parties as regards the  evidence;
    the FTTJ was therefore  justified  in  adopting  the  evidence  of  the
    parties  for  his  findings  of  fact.  That  evidence  was  that   the
    appellants' father, the sponsor, had settled in the  UK  in  2010;  his
    wife had been granted similar status in that year but had  remained  in
    Nepal with the appellants, entering the UK the following year  to  join
    her husband.  At [6] the FTTJ refers to various  visits:  between  2011
    and 2016 the sponsor's wife  had  made  "5  lengthy  return  visits  to
    Nepal"; the sponsor had himself visited on one occasion for  just  over
    two months. All the appellants were unmarried, not leading  independent
    lives and were totally dependent financially on  the  sponsor  and  his
    wife.  At [7] the FTTJ refers to the evidence that the sponsor  allowed
    his daughter, one of the appellants, to draw on his pension;  she  then
    paid the bills and gave money to her brothers. The sponsor spoke to his
    children on the telephone every day. All the witnesses  "explained  why
    their applications had  not  been  made  earlier"  [8].   This  is  not
    evidence challenged by the respondent before the FTTJ.

 9. The FTTJ has correctly cited the relevant authorities; he refers to the
    respondent's  policy,  Annex  K  to  Chapter  15  Section  2A  of   the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions of 22 January 2015, and  sets  out
    the criteria to be met by the appellants at [16].

10. The FTTJ next considers at [17] whether family life exists between  the
    appellant and sponsor. He notes the submission of the  respondent  that
    the parties had chosen to live apart,  but  finds  against  it  on  the
    grounds that the "parents either did not envisage that it would take so
    long and be so difficult to bring their children to join them  or  that
    they were making a judgment that it was better in their children's long-
    term interests to undergo some current hardship for  the  benefit  when
    eventually they were able to come".  This is speculative and  based  on
    conjecture.

11. However, the undisputed evidence of the appellants, their  sponsor  and
    their mother was sufficient for a finding that family life existed  for
    the following reasons: the sponsor entered the UK in 2010; his wife was
    granted leave to enter at the same time but chose to remain  in  Nepal;
    she would have lost her leave to enter if she did not settle in the  UK
    when she did; the witnesses explained the  reason  for  the  four  year
    delay before the appellants applied for entry clearance: there  was  no
    provision in the Immigration Rules for the grant  of  leave  to  Gurkha
    children such as they were; the appellants applied within six months of
    the introduction  of  the  respondent's  policy.   In  the  intervening
    period, between the departure of the appellants' mother from  Nepal  in
    August 2011 and  their  applications  in  June  2015,  the  appellants'
    parents visited Nepal on a regular basis and for prolonged  periods  of
    about two months at a time. These visits were  approximately  annually.
    The appellants have been financially dependent on their parents for the
    whole of their lives; they live in the family home in Nepal;  they  are
    not employed. None are married.  The  sponsor's  evidence  is  that  he
    telephoned the appellants from the UK each day.  Thus, irrespective, of
    the fact the FTTJ's finding as to the  existence  of  family  life  was
    based on speculation, it is a  finding  which  is  sustainable  on  the
    evidence before the FTTJ. His error is not therefore material.

12. While the FTTJ has not considered specifically whether  the  appellants
    fulfil the criteria in the respondent's policy, the evidence is such as
    to justify a conclusion that they do. The only  questionable  issue  is
    whether the "applicant has ... been separated  from  their  father  for
    more than 2 years at the date of application".  In this  case  personal
    contact has been maintained throughout  the  family's  separation  with
    both parents (albeit not with the father solely). That  separation  has
    been explained by the witnesses as arising from the  inability  of  the
    appellants to meet the criteria in the Rules until the inception of the
    respondent's policy.

13. The FTTJ's comments at [17] to the effect that "it can also  be  argued
    that the parents either did not envisage that it would take so long and
    be so difficult to bring their children to join them or that they  were
    making a judgment that it was better  in  their  children's  long  term
    interests to  undergo  some  current  hardship  for  the  benefit  when
    eventually they were able to come" is wholly speculative and  based  on
    conjecture. It is not grounded in the evidence. However, there is clear
    evidence as to the reason for the applications  not  being  made  until
    June 2015 and that evidence is not disputed. Thus there is no  material
    error of law in the FTTJ's erroneous finding as regards the explanation
    for the delay.

14. The FTTJ refers at [18] to there being a gap of

       "just under 4 years before the children applied to join  them.  There
       must have been quite some preparation required  when  organising  the
       reception of three rather than one. The  three  must  have  developed
       more than normal adult siblings ties with each other as three singles
       with a common purpose. The emotional  ties  between  them  and  their
       parents are demonstrated by the frequency and length of the  parental
       visits and must have been strengthened as  a  result  of  the  recent
       earthquake."

15. Much of this is speculation, particularly the reference  to  "a  common
    purpose" and the  emotional ties being strengthened as a result of  the
    recent  earthquake.   It  is  entirely  unsupported  by  the  evidence.
    However, the evidence before the FTTJ is sufficient for  a  finding  of
    family life  between  the  appellants  and  their  sponsor  and  mother
    notwithstanding their living in different countries: that  family  life
    existed when the family were living together  in  the  family  home  in
    Nepal and continued, notwithstanding the departure first of the sponsor
    and then, a year later, the appellants' mother. I refer to the evidence
    cited above which is not challenged. I do not accept that Kopoi  is  of
    relevance in this appeal: that case is not analogous to this.

16. While the FTTJ's assessment of the evidence is  erroneous  in  that  he
    draws on matters which are speculative, that assessment does not amount
    to a material error because the evidence is sufficient  for  a  finding
    that family life exists between the appellants and the sponsor and  his
    wife.

17. With the exception of one criteria in  the  respondent's  policy  (that
    relating to separation of the appellants from their father for a period
    of more than two years), the appellants fulfil those criteria  (as  set
    out at [p16] of the FTTJ's  decision).  The  respondent  noted  in  the
    refusal notices that the appellants had been separated from family  for
    more than  three  years  but,  as  the  sponsor  says  in  his  witness
    statement, "after arriving in the UK on 07/08/2011, my wife  went  back
    to Nepal visit them [sic] on 17/12/2012 and came  back  to  the  UK  on
    2/02/2013. She went second time to Nepal on 08/12/2014 and return  back
    to the UK on 21/01/2015. ... She went to Nepal again on 09/07/2015  and
    came back to UK  on  05/09/2015".  In  addition,  the  sponsor  himself
    visited his children in Nepal on 8 July 2014, returning to the UK on 16
    September 2014.  Thus, while there was a gap of over two years  between
    the sponsor's visits to Nepal, there have been annual visits by  either
    the sponsor or his wife since the sponsor's settlement in the UK. It is
    also relevant that the sponsor and his wife have staggered their visits
    to  Nepal.  This  suggests  an  endeavour  to  minimise  the  time  the
    appellants spend apart from their parents.  Overall,  the  evidence  is
    consistent with a very close relationship between the parents and adult
    children.

18. I was referred to the respondent's submission before the FTTJ that  the
    appellants' parents had  chosen  to  leave  their  children  in  Nepal.
    Paragraphs 38 and 39 of Rai make it clear  that  concentrating  on  the
    parents' decision to leave Nepal and settle in the UK, without focusing
    on the practical and financial realities entailed in that decision, was
    "a mistaken approach".  In the present  case,  it  is  clear  from  the
    evidence that the appellants lived in the family home at  the  date  of
    their mother's departure and that they were dependent on their  parents
    at that time. This state of affairs has continued, notwithstanding  the
    settlement of both parents in the UK. The evidence  suggests  that  the
    close relationship between the appellants and their parents has endured
    beyond the departures of their parents from Nepal to settle in the UK.

19. In the circumstances, and given the low threshold  for  engagement  (AG
    (Eritrea v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 801), the FTTJ  was  entitled  to  find
    that Article 8 was engaged, albeit his reasoning was inadequate.

20. Insofar as the proportionality assessment  is  concerned,  the  sponsor
    explains why he had  been  unable  to  make  a  settlement  application
    earlier and why no earlier applications were made by the appellants.

21. The FTTJ had summarised at [15] the guidance in Ghising &  Ors  to  the
    effect that "where family or private life is shown to  exist  and,  but
    for the historic wrong, the appellant would have settled in the UK long
    ago, it would, ordinarily, be for the respondent  to  show  that  there
    were matters over and above the public interest in maintaining  a  firm
    immigration policy, such as  a  bad  immigration  history  or  criminal
    behaviour, which could shift the balance against the appellant". In the
    present cases, there was no suggestion that the ECO relied on any other
    facet of the public interest in the appeal before the FTTJ (such  as  a
    poor immigration history or criminal record).

22. In AP (India) v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  89  it  was  held  that,  when
    considering  whether  the  historic  injustice  was  the  cause  of  an
    appellant's inability to gain entry sooner, "the courts should  not  in
    this context be unduly rigorous in the  application  of  the  causation
    test,  given  that  its  significance  is  to  redress  this   historic
    injustice".  The evidence before the FTTJ was sufficient to demonstrate
    that, but for the historic injustice, the appellant's father would have
    applied to settle in the UK.  By analogy, as was said by the  Court  of
    Appeal in AP (India), if the sponsor in that  case  had  given  express
    evidence to the effect that he would have come to the UK earlier if  he
    had been  entitled  to  do  so  then  it  would  have  been  enough  to
    demonstrate that the causal link had been established. That is the case
    here: the sponsor states as much in his witness statement. The FTTJ did
    not do so, but would have  been  entitled  to  rely  on  the  sponsor's
    evidence to find there was a historic injustice and that this  rendered
    disproportionate  the  degree  of  interference  with  the  appellants'
    protected rights.

23. As regards the proportionality assessment, again  the  FTTJ's  findings
    were  poorly  reasoned,  being  based  in  part  on   speculation   and
    conjecture. Whilst the FTTJ failed to refer specifically  to  s117A  or
    s117B of the 2002 Act, he referred  to  the  relevant  public  interest
    factors at [18]. He also had in mind the criteria in  the  respondent's
    policy at  [16].   Thus  the  relevant  public  interest  factors  were
    addressed albeit there was no specific reference to the 2002 Act  (Dube
    (ss117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC).

24. For these reasons, there is no material error  of  law  in  the  FTTJ's
    decision and reasons.

Decision

25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

26. I do not set aside the decision.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  24 November 2017


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  24 November 2017


















