
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/05120/2015
                                                               HU/05119/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On May 28, 2019                             |On June 04, 2019              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                            mr keshab sing gurung
                            mr kamal sing gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Khalid, Counsel instructed by Goulds Green
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are Nepalese nationals and are now 33 and  34  years  of
    age respectively.  They lodged applications to join  their  father  and
    sponsor, Sarsing Gurung, as adult dependants.  The  respondent  refused
    their applications on August 13, 2015 finding  they  neither  satisfied
    the Immigration Rules nor did they fall within the  2009  discretionary
    arrangements for family members of former Gurkhas.

 2. The appellants appealed those decisions  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  their   appeals
    originally came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Sullivan  who
    allowed their appeals in a decision promulgated on January 25, 2017.

 3. The respondent appealed those decisions and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Black set the decisions aside and remade the decision  without  further
    evidence and dismissed the appeals in a decision promulgated on October
    10, 2017.

 4. The appellants appealed that decision seeking leave to appeal from  the
    Court of Appeal but Upper Tribunal Judge Coker, on  February  9,  2018,
    found there had been a procedural irregularity in the way Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Black had dealt with the matter and under Rule 43 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  she  set  aside  that
    decision to the extent that she remitted the appeal back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for findings to be made.

 5. The appeals were reheard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hussain,
    hereinafter referred to as "the Judge", who in a  decision  promulgated
    on 22 March 2019, dismissed the appeals finding  there  was  no  family
    life for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR or, even if  there  was  family
    life, it was not disproportionate to refuse them entry.

 6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gumsley granted permission  to  appeal
    on May 2, 2019 finding it was arguable that the Judge had erred in  his
    approach to the evidence.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 8. Mr Tarlow conceded that the phraseology used by the Judge in  paragraph
    23 of the decision gave the impression of a predetermined view  on  the
    matter and this amounted to an error in law.

 9. I raised with both Mr Khalid and Mr Tarlow whether this was a case that
    should be returned, once again, to the First-tier Tribunal  or  whether
    it was a case that could be retained in this Tribunal  and  dealt  with
    today by further submissions.  Both representatives agreed this  latter
    option was their preferred approach and in light of the history of this
    matter and the actual issues in the case, I agreed  to  deal  with  the
    matter.

10. I preserved the following findings:

      a) The appellants were financially dependent on their father based  on
         the Judge's findings in paragraphs 23 and 25 of his decision.

      b) The appellants could not satisfy the  requirements  of  either  the
         Immigration Rules or  any  discretionary  policy  that  applied  to
         former Gurkha family members.

11. Mr Khalid indicated he would still be inviting the Tribunal to consider
    whether historic injustice was a factor that tipped the scales in their
    favour despite the fact it had  previously  been  conceded  before  the
    First-tier Judge that this was a stand-alone Article 8 appeal.

    FINDING ON ERROR IN LAW

12. I find there was an error of law for the reason conceded by Mr  Tarlow,
    namely that the Judge gave the impression, unfairly, that "young men of
    the Indian subcontinent can become very choosy about the types  of  job
    they will do to support themselves".

13. Having established the error of law I  invited  submissions  from  both
    representatives.

    SUBMISSIONS

14. Mr Tarlow submitted that the appeal should be dismissed because neither
    Article 8 was engaged for the  purposes  of  family  life  nor  was  it
    disproportionate to refuse their applications because their decision to
    rely on  their  father  financially  was  through  choice  rather  than
    necessity.  There  was  no  evidence  that  either  appellant  had  any
    disability which would prevent either of them from  seeking  employment
    and that they had simply chosen not to work.   He  submitted  that  the
    principles of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 applied and this  was  not  a
    case  where  historic  injustice  played  any  role  for  the   reasons
    previously conceded at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

15. Mr Khalid invited the Tribunal to find that Kugathas was the applicable
    law and that if the Tribunal found that family  life  existed  then  he
    submitted that due to  the  historic  injustice,  suffered  by  Ghurkha
    family members, the scales were tipped in their favour and they  should
    be granted admission to the United Kingdom.  The appellants chose to be
    supported by their father out of necessity,  rather  than  choice,  and
    that their  father's  financial  support  was  effective  support  that
    enabled them to survive in Nepal.  There was  an  emotional  attachment
    that went beyond normal emotional attachments and, in particular, their
    culture dictated that parents supported family until they were married.
     He invited the Tribunal to allow their appeals.

    FINDINGS

16. The two appellants are the sponsor's children  and  from  the  evidence
    presented it seems that their elder brother is serving with the British
    Army and their sister was a doctor.  Both  appeared  to  have  obtained
    employment and careers outside of the support of their  father.   Their
    father had previously served for the British Army between 1973 and 1988
    and had been granted indefinite leave to live in  the  United  Kingdom,
    although that leave was not through any discretionary policy applied by
    the United Kingdom but for other reasons.

17. This matter came before the First-tier Tribunal  and  Counsel  for  the
    appellants accepted that neither the Immigration Rules nor the  various
    policies applicable to family reunion  of  former  Gurkhas  applied  to
    these appellants.  That finding, which is not challenged, was  set  out
    at paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Judge's decision.

18. At today's hearing Mr Khalid sought to go behind the  concession  based
    on the witness statements provided by both appellants.

19. There is no dispute that the sponsor sent money to both appellants  and
    Mr Tarlow did not suggest that the appellants were not in contact  with
    their father.  The issue was whether article  8  was  engaged  for  the
    purposes of article 8 ECHR.

20. The Court of Appeal, in Kugathas, stated that  in  order  to  establish
    family life it was necessary to show that there is a real, committed or
    effective support or relationship between the family members  and  that
    normal emotional ties between  a  parent  and  adult  child  would  not
    without  more  be  enough  but  each  case  required  a  fact-sensitive
    approach.  There has been subsequent case law including Ghising (family
    life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160, Pun & Anor (Nepal)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2016  and
    Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630, to mention but a few.

21. These appellants are in their early thirties and they claim  that  they
    rely on their father for their day-to-day living expenses.   The  Court
    of Appeal, in JB (India) & Ors v ECO [2009] EWCA Civ  234,  made  clear
    that  financial  dependence  to  some  extent  on  a  parent  did   not
    demonstrate the existence of strong family ties between adult  children
    and a parent, nor did weekly telephone  calls  evidence  anything  more
    than the normal ties of affection between a parent and adult children.

22. Case law suggests the appellants must demonstrate further  elements  of
    dependency which go beyond normal emotional ties and whilst money  sent
    to them, by their father, raised an element  of  dependency,  it  would
    not, on its own, be sufficient because  the  provision  of  such  money
    could be as much an insulation against family life as evidence of it.

23. Refusing their appeals did not mean the appellants would  not  continue
    to receive payments from their father and such payments would  maintain
    the status quo and would not interfere with their current family  life.



24. The appellants' witness statements refer to the  fact  that  they  have
    tried to find jobs but  without  success  due  to  the  fact  that  job
    opportunities are very few and far between in Nepal.  They both  failed
    to be granted admission to the British Army.

25. Ultimately, this is an appeal  about  whether  Article  8  was  engaged
    between adult dependants who are in  their  early  thirties  and  their
    father, who has resided in the United Kingdom for over thirteen  years.



26. The Court of Appeal in Vikas and Manesh Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630  made
    clear  that  the  factors  to  be   examined   in   order   to   assess
    proportionality were the same regardless of whether private  or  family
    life was engaged.  Unless the appellants could demonstrate evidence  of
    anything beyond the normal  bonds  of  affection  then  such  financial
    support that they received could not lead to a finding of family  life.



27. Mr Khalid further  argued  that  the  historic  injustice  suffered  by
    Ghurkha family members was a factor that should tip the scales  in  the
    appellants' favour.  I accept that the appellants' father was a  Gurkha
    but it was not argued that he had been granted entry clearance based on
    any discretionary policy relating to Ghurkhas.

28. Whilst I take on board the fact that the appellants remain  financially
    dependent on their father, I accept Mr Tarlow's  submission  that  this
    was primarily out of choice.  There was a lack of evidence of any steps
    taken by the appellants to obtain work.  To suggest that  all  Nepalese
    men, in their  early  thirties,  are  unable  to  obtain  work  has  no
    evidential basis.

29.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellants  have  made  a  transition  to
    independent living notwithstanding the degree of financial  dependence.
    The fact the appellants' father was a Gurkha is not a  factor,  on  the
    facts of these appeals, that tips the scales in the appellants' favour.



30. I therefore find that whilst there is  a  reliance  upon  their  father
    financially, this is through choice and not out of necessity.  I am not
    satisfied that the  emotional  bond  demonstrated  by  the  father  and
    appellants go beyond the mere emotional bonds of a  father/adult  child
    relationship.  Article 8 ECHR is therefore not engaged, but even  if  I
    accepted that Article 8  was  engaged,  on  the  basis  that  they  are
    connected by virtue of being father and sons, I am  satisfied  that  on
    the facts of these  appeals  refusing  entry  clearance  would  not  be
    disproportionate.  The family life that they have had since the  father
    went to the United Kingdom can continue in much the same way as it  has
    done since 2006.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

31. I find there was an  error  in  law,  and  I  set  aside  the  original
    decision.

32. I have remade the  decision  but  have  dismissed  the  appeals  having
    reassessed the evidence submitted.



Signed                              Date         30/5/2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made because the appeals are dismissed.



Signed                              Date         30/5/2019


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




