
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05795/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th June 2019                    |On 28th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                   Thu [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - bangkok
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Vokes, Counsel instructed by Warwick Vesey
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a minor  whose  date  of  birth  is  recorded  as  9th
    February 2003.  On 15th September 2016  application  was  made  on  her
    behalf to enter the United Kingdom in order that  she  might  join  her
    mother and father.  Although her father has no  leave  her  mother  was
    granted  discretionary  leave  until  7th  August  2021.   The   infant
    Appellant's application was  refused  on  11th  January  2017  and  she
    appealed.

 2. On 7th February 2019 the appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Row sitting at North Shields.  It was common ground  that  the
    appeal could not succeed by reference to the Immigration Rules but  was
    pursued by reference to the wider  application  of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. Evidence was led at the hearing from the Appellant's mother who was the
    only person to give live evidence,  though  there  was  other  evidence
    including statements said to be from the  Appellant  and  Mrs  Le,  the
    guardian of the Appellant.  From Vietnam there was also a  letter  from
    the Appellant's head teacher and other medical  evidence  all  set  out
    within the Appellant's bundle.  Judge Row dismissed the appeal.

 4. Not content with that decision, by Notice  dated  8th  March  2019  the
    Appellant sought and obtained permission to appeal  to  this  Tribunal.
    By reference to those grounds Mr Vokes invited  me  to  find  that  the
    judge had erred in taking as a starting point the Appellant's  mother's
    immigration history to justify his finding that the Appellant's  mother
    was in essence an unreliable witness.

 5. Further, at paragraph 25 of the Decision and Reasons, Judge Row, whilst
    taking account of the  witness  statements  to  which  I  have  already
    referred, being those from the Appellant and Mrs Le, stated that  those
    statements "... could have been prepared by  anyone",  and  put  little
    weight on them for that reason.

 6. Mr Vokes submitted that the approach to such evidence by Judge Row  was
    inconsistent given what appears at paragraph 23  of  the  Decision  and
    Reasons where it appears to have been accepted that a representative of
    the Respondent had made contact with the Appellant's guardian  with  it
    being accepted that initially that representative had been told by  the
    man spoken to that he was the Appellant's uncle, but  in  a  subsequent
    interview had said that he, that person spoken to in Vietnam,  was  not
    related by blood.  It was further part of the Sponsor's  evidence  laid
    before the Tribunal that there were some problems  with  money  lenders
    which  explains  why  at  paragraph  23  reference  is  made   to   the
    representative of the Respondent having said that there was no  mention
    of any issue with debt in his conversation with that guardian.

 7. It was common ground that the Appellant had been diagnosed as a  person
    suffering from  bipolar  affective  disorder.   There  was  psychiatric
    evidence which recorded the  Appellant  as  being  severely  depressed,
    though I note also that the judge recorded the Sponsor as  having  said
    that the Appellant  was  at  the  time  of  the  hearing  receiving  no
    treatment for any mental health problems in Vietnam.   What  the  judge
    did take  into  account,  which  is  material  to  any  proportionality
    assessment, was that there was treatment  available  evidenced  by  the
    medical evidence produced at the hearing.

 8. In relation to Section 117B of the 2002 Act it was submitted  that  the
    judge unreasonably held against  the  infant  Appellant  that  she  was
    neither financially independent nor spoke English.

 9. I note that McCombe LJ in the case of VW (Sri Lanka)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    522 said at paragraph 12:

         "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration  cases
         when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given  a  judgment  explaining
         why he has reached a particular decision of seeking to  burrow  out
         industriously areas of evidence that have  been  less  fully  dealt
         with than others and then to use these as a basis  for  saying  the
         judge's decision is legally flawed because it did not deal  with  a
         particular matter more fully.  In my judgment, with  respect,  that
         is no basis on which to sustain a proper  challenge  to  a  judge's
         finding of fact."

10. The issue for me ultimately is whether the findings made by this  judge
    were ones that were open to him.  Was the finding, I ask  rhetorically,
    against the weight of the evidence? Was the decision perverse? Was  the
    decision irrational?

11. Although the first submission was premised on the basis that the  judge
    had erred by having regard to the immigration history  of  the  Sponsor
    and taking that as a starting point, Mr McVeety  pointed  out  that  in
    fact that was not how the judge approached the immigration history.  It
    was not, for example, that  the  Sponsor  had  simply  overstayed,  but
    rather that the  Sponsor  had  misstated  the  facts  relevant  to  her
    obtaining the eventual status which she obtained.  She had at one  time
    in her witness statement made reference to having been recognised as  a
    refugee, though in fairness she had in a supplementary statement  which
    appears to be wrongly dated  2018  but  probably  2019  (otherwise  the
    supplementary statement predates the original statement), said that she
    currently had discretionary leave putting right the fact that she could
    not have been recognised as a refugee, but what she had hidden from the
    Secretary of State, and no issue was taken on this by Mr Vokes  in  his
    submissions to me, was that she had concealed the fact that she  had  a
    husband when making her application.

12. There was clearly a proper basis open to the judge  to  find  that  the
    Sponsor was unreliable, and the judge was entitled, that being the only
    live evidence, to consider the effect of what he reasonably  determined
    to be a misstament of the  facts  on  the  overall  assessment  of  the
    evidence. Whether that which is set out at paragraph 23 of the Decision
    and Reasons could properly be characterised as evidence is not a  point
    that was taken in the grounds, nor is it suggested that  any  objection
    was taken to that "evidence" in the hearing before Judge Row, but it is
    open to a judge to give less weight to evidence not made available  for
    cross-examination.  It has not been tested.

13. In approaching a human rights case the starting point naturally has  to
    be a determination of whether or not there is family life at  all.   Mr
    Vokes submitted that the judge had erred in  saying  that  he  was  not
    satisfied on the evidence  that  there  was  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and Sponsor when the  relationship  was  one  of  mother  and
    child.  There would be merit in that were it not for  paragraph  37  of
    the Decision and Reasons in which the judge went on  then  to  consider
    what the circumstances were if in fact family life did exist.  Although
    the judge did not spell it out in terms, the judge  did  find  his  way
    through to the  proportionality  assessment.   It  is  also  the  case,
    contrary to the submissions made to me, that the judge did have  regard
    to the welfare of the Appellant and although he did not use  the  words
    "primary consideration", the judge did say the welfare of the Appellant
    is best served by remaining where she is having considered the evidence
    as a whole.  It was open to the judge to find that her  best  interests
    were where she was given the leave which the Sponsor had  was  limited,
    that the Appellant was in school, was being treated, or  at  least  had
    medical treatment  available  to  her  as  the  need  arose,  and  more
    particularly the judge clearly  in  my  view  did  not  find  that  the
    Appellant  had  established  the  burden  being  upon  her   that   the
    circumstances in Vietnam were as contended for by the  Sponsor  on  the
    Appellant's behalf.  The fact  that  the  Appellant  is  the  child  of
    persons in the United Kingdom is not in law the end of the matter.   If
    it  were  there  would  be  statutory  provision  making  that   clear.
    Ultimately it is a question for the judge in assessing the evidence and
    assessing the proportionality, and whilst another judge may  have  come
    to a different view, that is not the test for me.  The test for  me  is
    whether the decision of that judge was one that was open to him on  the
    evidence that was led.

14. In any event had I found error I would it have found it material. It is
    trite law that the best interests of a child to be with  both  parents.
    However, in this case one parent has no  right  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the other only a limited right. Her status  is  precarious.
    No sufficient reason was advanced as to why the family could not  enjoy
    family life in Vietnam. The Appellant's mother had not established that
    she was a  refugee  and  the  notion  that  there  were  problems  with
    moneylenders had been rejected being a finding open to the judge.

Notice of Decision

15. In the circumstances I find that there was no material error of law and
    it follows  from  that  that  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

16. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 26 June 2019







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
