
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
HU/05693/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |       Decision & Reasons          |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On 5 April 2019                    |       On 12 April 2019            |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                ANUM UL KHAIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Sheffield
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Ms P Solanki (counsel) instructed by Kingwright
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.  I have considered whether any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Row promulgated on  9  November  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 9 February 1996 and is a national of  Pakistan.
On 23 October 2017 the Appellant applied for entry  clearance  to  join  her
father, who has been granted refugee status, in the UK. On 22  January  2018
the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Row ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  2  January  2019  Judge  Neville
granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      2. The second ground asserts that  the  Judge  erred  at  para  16  in
      treating a "special degree of dependency" as a necessary component  of
      family life capable of being afforded protection under article 8.  The
      appellant is arguably correct that this runs  contrary  to  Ghising  v
      SSHD [2012] UKUT 160, as discussed in PT (Sri lanka) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
      612 at 23-25. This is arguably material, as being inseverable from the
      other reasons given by the Judge at para 15.


      3.   The   other   grounds   are   makeweights,   but   given    their
      interrelationship they may all be argued.

The Hearing

6. (a) For the appellant, Ms  Solanki  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
adopted the terms of her skeleton  argument  and  told  me  that  the  Judge
applied the wrong test when considering whether  or  not  article  8  family
life exists between parents and  a  22-year-old  daughter  (who  had  always
lived with her parents).  Ms  Solanki  reminded  me  that  the  sponsor  was
granted refugee status in August 2017. In October 2017  this  appellant  and
her mother apply for entry clearance to be  reunited  with  the  appellant's
father (the sponsor). The appellant's mother's application  was  successful.
The appellant's application was refused by the respondent's  decision  dated
22 January 2018.

(b) Ms Solanki told me that the only part of paragraph  352D  of  the  rules
the appellant cannot meet is 352D(ii), which says

      352D. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter or
      remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or remain with the
      parent who currently has refugee status are that the applicant:
           (i) is the child of a parent who currently has refugee status
           granted under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and
           (ii) is under the age of 18; and....
Because the appellant was 21 years old at the date of decision the case can
only succeed on article 8 outside the rules.
(c)  Ms Solanki took me to [16] the decision. In the first sentence of [16]
the Judge searches for
      some special degree of dependency
in doing so (counsel for the appellant told me) the Judge applies the wrong
test.
(d) Ms Solanki told me that, to reach his  decision,  the  Judge  must  have
ignored the fact that  the  appellant's  mother  entered  the  UK  and  then
returned to Pakistan to be with the appellant throughout May and June  2018.
She told me that the Judge's finding in the final  sentence  of  15  ignores
evidence of the appellant's  mother's  reluctance  to  leave  the  appellant
alone in Pakistan.  Ms Solanki told me that the Judge did not  take  account
of cultural and traditional standards in Pakistan and  did  not  acknowledge
that the appellant is an unmarried young lady who has only ever  lived  with
her parents,  and  who  cannot  be  regarded  as  independent  in  Pakistani
society. She told me that the Judge's findings  at  [17]  to  [19]  are  not
sustainable in the light of Mansoor v SSHD [2011] EWHC 832 Admin
(e) Ms Solanki urged me to set the decision aside.
7. For the respondent, Mr Walker told  me  that  the  appeal  is  no  longer
resisted. He told me that the decision is  tainted  by  material  errors  of
law; that the wrong test had been applied in trying to determine whether  or
not article 8 family life exists, and that the  Judge  had  made  inadequate
and inconsistent findings of fact. He said that he would have  no  objection
if I set the decision aside and substitute my own decision.
Analysis
8. At the date of decision the appellant was 21  years  old.  It  is  beyond
dispute that the sponsor is the  appellant's  father  and  the  sponsor  was
granted refugee status in  the  UK  in  August  2017.  Before  fleeing  from
Pakistan, the sponsor lived with the appellant and  the  appellant's  mother
in Pakistan. The appellant is unmarried and dependent upon her parents.
9. In Ghising (family life - adults  -  Gurkha  policy)  [2012]  UKUT  00160
(IAC) the Tribunal said that a review of the  jurisprudence  discloses  that
there is no general proposition that Article 8 can  never  be  engaged  when
the family life it is sought to establish is between adult  siblings  living
together.  Rather  than  applying  a  blanket  rule  with  regard  to  adult
children, each case should be analysed on its own facts, to  decide  whether
or not family life exists, within the meaning of Article 8(1).  Whilst some
generalisations are possible, each case is fact-sensitive.
10. In the first sentence of [16] of  the  decision  the  Judge  misdirected
himself in law. The Judge says
      family life does not ordinarily extend to the relationship between an
      adult child and her parents in the absence of some special degree of
      dependency.
11. That sentence misinterprets the guidance given in Ghising  (family  life
- adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC); PT (Sri  Lanka)  v  Entry
Clearance Officer, Chennai [2016] EWCA Civ 612 and  Singh  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
630. What the Judge should have looked for  was  evidence  of  a  degree  of
dependency extending beyond the normal  emotional  ties.  The  Judge  should
have considered the factual position of a  young  lady  who  has  only  ever
lived with her parents and has not established an independent life.
12. The decision is tainted by material error of law. I set it aside.  There
is sufficient material available to allow me to substitute my own decision.
Findings of fact
13. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on  9  February  1996.  The
appellant has two sisters and brother. All of her siblings are  married  and
pursue independent lives with their new families.  The  appellant  is  still
single. The appellant lived with both of her parents until her  father  (the
sponsor) left Pakistan on 3 March 2015.
14. The appellant's father left Pakistan for the UK and on  21st  of  August
2017 was granted refugee status. The appellant  remained  in  Pakistan  with
her mother, remaining in the same household that she had been brought up  in
and had always lived  in.  The  appellant  has  never  established  her  own
independent life, and has always been dependent upon her parents.
15. On 23 October 2017 the  appellant  and  her  mother  applied  for  entry
clearance so that they could be reunited with the sponsor.  The  appellant's
mother's application was successful. The respondent refused the  appellant's
application on 22 January  2018.  It  is  against  that  decision  that  the
appellant appeals.
16. On 24 February 2018 the appellant's mother entered the UK.  In  February
2018 the sponsor was  diagnosed  with  prostate  cancer.  In  May  2018  the
appellant's mother return to Pakistan to look after the  appellant  and  did
not re-enter the UK until June 2018.
17. The appellant's  only  brother  has  now  left  Pakistan  and  lives  in
Nigeria. One of the appellant's sisters lives with her husband  in  Germany.
The appellant's remaining sister is married and lives in a separate city  in
Pakistan.
18. The appellant now lives alone in Pakistan. Her parents  sent  her  money
regularly  and  she  is  entirely  dependent  upon  their  money   for   her
maintenance. The appellant has never pursued an independent life  and  still
relies on her parents.

The Immigration Rules

19. The only reason the  appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules is that she celebrated her 18th birthday three years ago.



Article 8 ECHR

20. In Hesham Ali (Iraq)  v SSHD   [2016] UKSC 60 it  was  made  clear  that
(even in a deportation case) the Rules are not a complete  code.  Lord  Reed
at paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach  to  proportionality
(to be found in Razgar) and  said  "what  has  now  become  the  established
method of analysis can therefore continue to be followed..."

21. In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, Lord Reed (when explaining  how  a  court  or
tribunal  should  consider  whether  a  refusal  of  leave  to  remain   was
compatible with Article 8) made clear that the critical issue was  generally
whether, giving due weight  to  the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in
removal, the article 8 claim was sufficiently strong to outweigh it.   There
is no suggestion of any threshold to be overcome before proportionality  can
be fully considered.

22. I have to determine the following separate questions:

     (i) Does family life,  private  life,  home  or  correspondence  exist
    within the meaning of Article 8
    (ii) If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with
    (iii) If so, was the interference in accordance with the law
    (iv) If so, was the interference in pursuit of one  of  the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and
    (v) If so, is the interference proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?

23. Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that  immigration  control  is  in
the public interest. In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

24. To succeed, the appellants would have  to  establish  that  family  life
within the meaning of article 8 exists between the  appellant  and  sponsor.
It is argued that there is more than mere emotional ties and that  there  is
a relationship of dependency between  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant.  In
simple terms, is the father/daughter relationship the same as  it  was  when
this appellant was 17 years and 364 days old?

25. In Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170 the Court of Appeal  said  that,  in
order to establish family life, it is necessary to show  that  there  is  a
real committed or effective support  or  relationship  between  the  family
members and the normal emotional ties between a mother  and  an  adult  son
would not, without more, be enough. In PT (Sri  Lanka)  v  Entry  Clearance
Officer, Chennai [2016] EWCA Civ  612  it  was  held  that  some  tribunals
appeared to have read Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR  170  as  establishing  a
rebuttable presumption against any relationship between an adult child  and
his parents or siblings being sufficient to engage Article 8. That was  not
correct.  Kugathas  required  a  fact-sensitive  approach,  and  should  be
understood in the light of the subsequent case law  summarised  in  Ghising
(family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012]  UKUT  160  (IAC)  and  Singh
[2015] EWCA Civ 630.  There is no legal or factual presumption  as  to  the
existence or absence of family life for the purposes of Article  8  nor  is
there any requirement of exceptionality. It all depends on the  facts.  The
love and affection between an adult and his parents or siblings do  not  of
itself justify a finding of a family life. There has to be something  more.
A young adult living with his parents or siblings  would  normally  have  a
family life to be respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a family life
with his parents does not suddenly cease to have a family life at  midnight
as he turned 18 years of age. On the  other  hand,  a  young  adult  living
independently of his parents might well not have  a  family  life  for  the
purposes of Article 8.

26.  It  is  beyond  dispute  that  the  appellant  has  never  pursued   an
independent life. The unchallenged evidence  is  that  the  appellant  lived
with the sponsor and her mother from  birth  until  March  2015,  and  still
lived with her mother (whilst in regular contact with the  sponsor)  at  the
date of decision. The reliable evidence  tells  me  that  the  appellant  is
still dependent on her parents

27. On the facts as I find them to be, the appellant's mother has  travelled
back  to  Pakistan  to  make  arrangements   for   the   appellant's   care,
accommodation and maintenance. On the facts  as  I  find  them  to  be,  the
appellant and sponsor are in daily contact. On the facts as I find  them  to
be, there is more than just emotional ties between  the  appellant  and  the
sponsor. Throughout her life the  appellant  has  been  dependent  upon  the
sponsor. On those facts, I find that article 8 family  life  exists  between
the appellant and sponsor.

28.  The impact  of  the  respondent's  decision  is  that  the  appellant's
circumstances are uncertain. The respondent's decision  creates  uncertainty
for the appellant and sponsor; the respondent's  decision  creates  division
where it did not previously exist; the respondent's decision stands  in  the
way of the established way of life  for  this  family,  it  interferes  with
family life.

29.   In Chengjie Miao v SSHD 2006 EWCA Civ 75 the Court  of  Appeal  noted
that the onus lies upon the Respondent to show  that  the  interference  or
lack of respect is "necessary in a  democratic  society"  for  one  of  the
stated interests.  As the Court of Appeal  said  at  paragraph  12  of  the
determination "To do this the State must show not only  that  the  proposed
step is lawful but that it is sufficiently important to justify limiting  a
basic right; that it is sensibly directed to that objective;  and  that  it
does not impair the right more  than  is  necessary.   The  last  of  these
criteria commonly requires an appraisal of the relative importance  of  the
State's objective and the impact of the measure on  the  individual.   When
you have answered such questions you have struck the balance".

30.  I find that the respondent relies solely on a  statutory  presumption.
Against that statutory presumption I weigh the quality of family life which
the appellant enjoys. The  facts  and  circumstances  of  this  case  raise
exceptional circumstances which indicate that preventing the appellant from
reunification with her parents, who provide for her and who  have  provided
for her throughout her life, would be unjustifiably  harsh.  The  appellant
has not established an independent life, even though she has been separated
for the sponsor  since  March  2015.  On  those  facts,  I  find  that  the
respondent's  decision  is  a  disproportionate   interference   with   the
appellant's article 8 rights.

31.   When I weigh all of these matters, I can only come to  the  conclusion
that the public interest in immigration control is outweighed by the  impact
that the respondent's decision has on the  appellant.    I  find  that  this
appeal succeeds on article 8 ECHR grounds.

CONCLUSION

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 9  November  2018
is tainted by a material error of law.  I set it aside.

33. I substitute my own decision.

34. The appeal is allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.






Signed
         Date 11 April 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


