
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/05729/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 1st June 2017                       |       On 16th June 2017            |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                asia basharat
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Hussain of Equity Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born  1st  January  1984.
    She appeals against the decision of Judge J Austin  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 25th June 2016.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 4th  January  2011  as  the
    spouse of a person settled here.  She had a  visa  valid  between  14th
    December 2010 and 14th March 2013.

 3. The Appellant overstayed, and made an application for leave  to  remain
    on 22nd June 2015.  The application was  based  upon  her  private  and
    family life with her spouse.

 4. The application was refused  on  9th  September  2015.   The  Appellant
    appealed to the FtT and the hearing took place on 21st June 2016.   The
    FtT dismissed the appeal.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    It was contended that the FtT had erred in law by failing  to  consider
    the Appellant's reasons for overstaying, had made a mistake of fact  as
    to the dates of documents showing that the couple  had  cohabited,  had
    taken the wrong approach when considering insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing abroad, and had not  properly  assessed  whether
    the marriage was subsisting.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Gibb of the FtT and I set out
    below, in part, the grant of permission;

         3.   Although the grounds have done a poor job of identifying them,
             having read the determination I have decided that there are  a
             number of error of law points that are  arguable  and  require
             further consideration.  The conclusion at  the  end  of  [23],
             that at [24] and that  at  [29]  arguably  indicate  that  the
             Article 8 proportionality assessment has  not  been  conducted
             within  the  correct  legal  framework.    The   determination
             arguably contains no clear finding as to  whether  the  couple
             were in a subsisting marriage or not, but if they were then  a
             finding of  family  life  would  have  followed  automatically
             without any concern about Kugathas dependency.  It is arguable
             that the lack of clear findings  and  these  points  create  a
             level  of  confusion  in  which  it  is  arguable   that   the
             proportionality assessment involved errors of law.

         4.   The document date error point may be arguable, but that can be
             given consideration at the error of law  hearing.   The  other
             points, and indeed most of the grounds, amount to a re-stating
             of the case.

 7. On 6th March 2017 the Respondent submitted a response pursuant to  rule
    24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  contending,
    in summary,  that  the  FtT  directed  itself  appropriately.   It  was
    submitted that the FtT had made a clear finding at  paragraph  18  that
    the relationship was not subsisting, and given cogent reasons for  this
    finding.  As Article 8 was not engaged a proportionality assessment was
    not necessary, but in any event  the  FtT  had  considered  it  in  the
    alternative at paragraph  29,  concluding  that  any  interference  was
    proportionate.

 8. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. Mr Hussain relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal.

10. It was contended that the FtT had erred by failing to take into account
    the Appellant's explanation for the delay in making an application  for
    leave to remain.  The FtT had  found  a  lack  of  evidence  about  the
    Appellant's relationship prior to 2011, but Mr Hussain pointed out that
    she had been granted entry clearance at that time,  it  being  accepted
    that she had a genuine and subsisting relationship.  The issue  in  the
    refusal was whether that relationship continued.

11. It was contended that documentary evidence to support cohabitation  did
    not post-date the Appellant's arrest, and the FtT was wrong in  law  to
    find otherwise.

12. Mr Hussain submitted that there  was  a  lack  of  clear  findings  and
    proportionality had not been adequately considered.

13. Mr Harrison relied upon the rule 24 response, although it was  accepted
    that conflicting findings in relation to family life had been  made  at
    paragraphs 18 and 23.

14. I announced at the hearing that in my view the FtT had erred in law and
    had done so  materially.   I  gave  my  reasons  for  this  conclusion,
    indicating that a written decision confirming those  reasons  would  be
    issued.

15. Once I had announced that the FtT decision should be  set  aside,  both
    representatives indicated that they were in agreement that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the FtT to  be  heard  afresh  with  no  findings
    preserved.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. The FtT made conflicting findings as to the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and her spouse.  At paragraph 18 there is a finding that  the
    relationship is not genuine and subsisting,  whereas  at  paragraph  23
    there is a finding that the Appellant has established  family  life  in
    the United Kingdom.

17. At paragraph 29 the FtT makes the following finding;

         "29. There is nothing in  the  evidence  to  indicate  elements  of
             dependency that would take the  relationships  concerned  into
             being family life for Article 8 purposes."

18. In my view the above demonstrates a misunderstanding of the concept  of
    family life between spouses.

19. The FtT has therefore made findings which are conflicting  and  unclear
    as to whether there is a genuine and subsisting relationship and family
    life between the Appellant and her spouse.  This was one  of  the  main
    issues in this appeal, as the Respondent in the  refusal  decision  did
    not  accept  that  the  couple  still  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.

20. I find that the FtT erred at paragraph 18 in making a finding that none
    of the documents produced, to prove cohabitation, pre-dated the  arrest
    and detention of the Appellant in 2015 as an overstayer, and  therefore
    no weight was attached to them in establishing whether the couple  were
    living together prior to the Appellant's arrest.  There  were  in  fact
    council tax bills in the joint names of the Appellant and  her  spouse,
    at the same address, which pre-dated the arrest.  These appear to  have
    been overlooked by the FtT, and failing to take into  account  material
    evidence is an error of law.

21. The FtT at paragraph 18 finds there is no evidence to suggest that  the
    Appellant and her spouse spent any time together  in  Pakistan  between
    their marriage in 2006 and 2011 when the  Appellant  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom.  This finding was relied upon by the  FtT  in  reaching
    the conclusion that there is no  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    between the couple.  I find this to be an error of law.  The Respondent
    in refusing leave to remain did not take issue  with  the  relationship
    pre-2011.   The  issue  was  whether   "the   relationship   is   still
    subsisting".  The Appellant was granted entry clearance as  the  spouse
    of a person settled here, it being accepted at that time that she had a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.  The FtT has therefore  considered
    a lack of evidence that was not in issue in the refusal,  and  was  not
    relevant to the issues in this appeal.

22. For the above reasons, the decision of the FtT is set aside.

23. I have taken into account the views of  both  representatives,  to  the
    effect that this appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  FtT,  and  have
    considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements.
     I find that no findings of fact can be preserved,  and  therefore  the
    extent of judicial fact-finding that is necessary,  means  that  it  is
    appropriate for this appeal to be considered afresh by the FtT.

24. The appeal will be heard by the FtT at the Manchester Hearing Centre by
    a judge other than Judge J Austin.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FtT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal.  I see no need to  make  an  anonymity
order.

Signed                              Date: 5th June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.

Signed                              Date: 5th June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
