
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05845/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 7th November 2017                |On: 13th November 2017               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                    [G A]
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Pipi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing and I consider whether or not there  is
    a material error of law in the decision the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    S.J. Clarke) ("FTT") promulgated on  17th  August  2017  in  which  she
    allowed  the  appeal  to  an  extent   but   made   a   direction   for
    reconsideration by the Respondent.



Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan  who  applied  for  leave  to
    enter as an adult dependent relative under  the  Immigration  Rules  at
    Appendix FM.  The respondent rejected the application as there  was  no
    reliable evidence of the relationship with the sponsor  (her  son)  who
    had been granted indefinite leave to remain as a refugee. No additional
    grounds were set out in the ECO decision nor raised in the  ECM  review
    [8].

FTT decision

3.   The FTT found that the evidence of a DNA report  established  that  the
    parties were related as claimed [7]. In the light of the refusal letter
    making reference only to  the  relationship  issue  and  was  "totally"
    "silent" on any other issues, the FTT decided that she could not assume
    that the respondent was satisfied as  to  the  other  requirements  for
    entry clearance [8].  Accordingly the FTT allowed  the  appeal  on  the
    relationship issue and in terms of the adult dependency issue  the  FTT
    directed that the respondent give further consideration [9].

Application for permission to appeal

4.   In ground one it was contended that the FTT erred in making a  decision
    that it had no jurisdiction to make, by in effect remitting the  matter
    to the Secretary of State (Greenwood No 2 (para 398 considered)  [2015]
    UKUT 629).  The second ground argued that the FTT was  wrong  to  raise
    matters not raised in the refusal  grounds  which  was  unfair  to  the
    appellant and/or the FTT ought  to  have  considered  those  issues  as
    primary decision maker. The FTT failed to consider Article 8 outside of
    the Rules; this was a human rights appeal.

Permission grant

5.   Permission was granted by FTJ JM Holmes,  who  found  that  there  were
    arguable grounds that the FTT  had  misunderstood  the  limits  of  her
    jurisdiction.  The FTT ought to have considered the article 8 appeal in
    the context of the facts found.

Rule 24 Response

6.   The respondent opposed the application but acknowledged  that  a  valid
    point was made in terms of the FTT's jurisdiction.

Submisssions

7.   Mr Pipi relied on the grounds of appeal and the  terms  of  permission.
    The ECM had referred to a completely different appellant and  thus  the
    Review carried no weight.  The  FTT  had  no  power  to  remit  to  the
    Secretary of State. Mr Nath opposed the application  arguing  that  the
    ECM had in fact rectified the  position  by  setting  out  all  matters
    relied on in the refusal. There were circumstances in which the FTT was
    permitted to request that the Secretary of State reconsiders.

Discussion and conclusion

8.   I found that there was a material error in law in the decision which  I
    set aside.  The FTT had no jurisdiction to make a decision  other  than
    to allow or to dismiss the appeal.  Further in the light  of  the  fact
    that the refusal was silent on  other  refusal  grounds  including  the
    adult dependent criteria, the FTT was not entitled to assume that there
    were other grounds.  The appellant ought to be given all of the refusal
    reasons in the decision notice and so is in a position  to  respond  to
    those matters on appeal,  otherwise  unfairness  would  arise.   Having
    considered both the  ECO  decision  and  the  ECM  review  I  found  no
    reference to any other disputed issue under the Rules.   Accordingly  I
    am satisfied that there was sufficient evidence (which included medical
    reports, evidence that the appellant is a widow, evidence of  financial
    transfers) before the FTT  to  enable  the  FTT  to  allow  the  appeal
    outright on human rights grounds given that she had found in favour  of
    the appellant on the only issue raised by the respondent and that there
    was evidence  of  family  relationship  and  dependency  on  emotional,
    medical and financial grounds.

Decision

9.   There is a material error of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside.

10.  I remake the decision by substituting a decision to  allow  the  appeal
    on human rights grounds.


                               Signed                     Date 9.11.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







NO ANONYMITY ORDER

NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed                 Date 9.11.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


