








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05365/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 30 January 2019               |On: 18 February 2019                     |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Mujtaba B Siddiqi
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G O'Cellaigh, counsel, instructed by M Y M
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the Secretary of State  and  to  the
      respondent as the claimant.

   2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge M Loughridge, who in a decision  promulgated
      on 4 June 2018, allowed the appellant's appeal against the decision of
      the respondent, dated 17 March 2017, refusing his application made  on
      27 October 2016 for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on the  basis
      of ten years' residence. The claimant contended  that  his  Article  8
      rights under the Human Rights Convention had been breached.

   3. The claimant first entered the UK on 8 October 2006 as a student. That
      was followed by further extensions of leave, including a  grant  on  3
      February 2012 following an application dated 30  December  2011  as  a
      Tier 4 migrant.

   4. The Secretary of State contended that the TOEIC certificate in support
      of his application made on  30  December  2011  application  had  been
      obtained fraudulently. He had obtained a TOEIC certificate from ETS by
      using a proxy test taker.  The  claimant's  presence  in  the  UK  was
      accordingly not conducive to the public good.

   5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Loughridge found that the  generic  evidence
      produced discharged the Secretary of State's  evidential  burden.   He
      then proceeded to look at the  second  stage,  namely  what,  if  any,
      evidence exists to show an innocent explanation, described in  SM  and
      Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT  00229  as
      an account which satisfies the minimal level of plausibility.

   6. He set out the factors said to be relevant to the issue  at  [29].  He
      noted that relatively few questions were put to the claimant in  cross
      examination regarding his evidence about taking the ETS test.  He  did
      not appear to have been interviewed at any stage by the  Secretary  of
      State, unlike the appellants in SM and Qadir. He had simply been asked
      how he booked the test; how he travelled to the test  centre;  whether
      he saw anyone cheating and whether there were any invigilators. He was
      not asked about the content of the test. He concluded that  there  was
      accordingly no evidence against him in  terms  of  lack  of  knowledge
      about the test itself [31].

   7. Further, he considered evidence relating to the claimant's  character,
      including various witness statements concerning  him.  Whilst  it  was
      correct that some of those who provided supporting  evidence  for  the
      claimant knew him through his work at MYM Solicitors,  and  given  the
      fact that the firm  is  representing  him  at  the  appeal,  that  did
      somewhat reduce the weight which should properly be attached  to  that
      evidence. He accordingly concluded that there is very strong  evidence
      of the claimant's good character [32].

   8. He found that the claimant "comfortably" passed the  burden  of  proof
      back to the Secretary of State.  With  regard  to  the  "third  step,"
      whether the Secretary of  State  has  established  dishonesty  on  the
      balance of probabilities, he found that the Secretary of State  failed
      to discharge the burden of proof that the appellant obtained his TOEIC
      certificate dishonestly. He accordingly  did  not  fall  foul  of  the
      suitability requirements under the relevant paragraphs  of  the  Rules
      [36].

   9. The fact that his application should  not  have  been  refused  was  a
      "weighty factor"  in  the  proportionality  exercise  leading  to  the
      conclusion that the decision  was  in  breach  of  Article  8  as  "an
      unnecessary/disproportionate interference with private/  family  life"
      [37].

  10. The renewed grounds seeking permission to appeal  contended  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge made detailed findings. However, he erred in
      failing to identify what about the claimant's evidence is in fact  "an
      innocent explanation" as at no point is there any indication  that  he
      explained why the certificate was cancelled due to  anomalies  in  the
      test identified by ETS. He in fact "simply describes a process", which
      whilst it may be plausible as he may have attended the test,  it  does
      not in fact eliminate the possibility  that  a  proxy  was  used,  nor
      explain why ETS were so certain  of  this  that  the  certificate  was
      deemed invalid.

  11. On  3  December  2018,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  granted  the
      Secretary of State permission to appeal, stating "I believe  that  the
      grounds are properly arguable."

  12. Mr Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of State adopted the grounds.  He
      submitted that the First-tier Judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons
      for the material findings. He accepted that the burden  of  proof  was
      initially on the Secretary of State.

  13. He referred to the decision in Ahsan v SSHD (Rev 1) [2017] EWCA Civ  1
      at [33] where the Court of Appeal referred  to  the  extent  to  which
      counsel emphasised  the  forensic  landscape  had  changed  since  the
      Secretary of State 's initial, and frankly stumbling,  steps  in  this
      litigation. The observations of the UT in SM should not be regarded as
      the last word.

  14. Where the impugned test was taken at an established fraud factory such
      as Elizabeth College, and also where the voice file  does  not  record
      the applicant's voice, or no attempt has been made to obtain  it,  the
      case that he or she cheated will  be  hard  to  resist.  Lord  Justice
      Underhill was willing to accept that even  in  such  specially  strong
      cases, the observations in the earlier case law to the effect  that  a
      decision whether the  applicant  or  appellant  has  cheated  is  fact
      specific - are no longer applicable, or that there is no  prospect  of
      their oral evidence affecting  the  outcome.  He  did  not  understand
      counsel on behalf of the Secretary of State to  have  been  contending
      otherwise.

  15. The Secretary of State's grounds contend that the  witness  statements
      and the spreadsheet extract show that the claimant's English  language
      test had been invalidated because of evidence of  fraud  in  the  test
      taken by him. In particular, it is asserted that given the certificate
      was  invalidated  as  opposed  to   being   declared   "questionable,"
      represents a clear indication of strong evidence of the use of a proxy
      rather  than  as  described  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  as
      circumstantial evidence.

  16. Mr Melvin noted that the Judge did not identify what there  was  about
      the claimant's evidence that was in fact  "an  innocent  explanation".
      The Judge stated that given that the evidence of Ms  Collings  and  Mr
      Millington was regarded as forming "the backbone" of the Secretary  of
      State's case, it seemed to him that it was reasonable to conclude that
      it is the generic evidence on its own which discharges the  evidential
      burden, "albeit only just" [25].

  17. Mr Melvin submitted that since the decision in  SM  and  Qadir,  there
      have been further relevant decisions on the issue. He referred to  the
      decision of Mr Justice Garnham in R (on the application of Gaogalalwe)
      v SSHD [2017]  EWHC  1709  (Admin)  and  in  particular  to  [34]  and
      following. He noted that since the  decision,  the  defendant  in  the
      judicial review proceedings  had  sought  and  obtained  corroborative
      evidence in the form of a witness statement from Ms Rachel  Green  and
      an expert report from Professor French.

  18. Ms Green explained how the "Revised Look Up Tool"  was  created  as  a
      means of demonstrating whether a specific set of tests showed  invalid
      or questionable results. The information relating to the  claimant  in
      the judicial review was taken from the Revised Look Up  Tool  for  the
      London School of Technology, the test centre used by that claimant, on
      26 March 2012. The data showed that 31 scores  (78%  of  the  results)
      were deemed "invalid" because of the use of a proxy  and  nine  scores
      (23%) were "questionable" and could not be relied on as  a  result  of
      the general practice of fraud at the test centre. The claimant's  test
      results were said to be "invalid" indicating the use of a proxy.

  19. It was agreed by counsel representing the claimant before  Mr  Justice
      Garnham that the evidence provided to the Secretary of  State  by  ETS
      together with the statement of Ms Green and the  report  of  Professor
      French, are sufficient to shift the  evidential  burden  described  in
      Qadir from the Secretary of State to the claimant.

  20. The claimant contended in that case that she discharged the evidential
      burden on her, pointing to various qualifications she obtained in  the
      UK. However, the Judge noted  that  even  the  2011  diploma  is  weak
      evidence that the claimant did not use someone else to take the spoken
      English  test  in  2012.  The  information   about   her   educational
      qualifications came from her solicitors and not from her.  He  had  no
      details about the nature of the diploma on which  she  relies  or  the
      level of English language needed  to  pass  it.  There  was  not  even
      evidence that the course and exams were conducted in English, although
      it was a course offered by the Metropolitan University of Cardiff  and
      he was prepared to assume that much.

  21. It was contended that Ms Gaogalalwe,  the  claimant  in  the  judicial
      review, would have had no motive for cheating in the test because  she
      was capable of passing it at the time. However, there was  no  witness
      statement from her confirming that she who took the test, nor were any
      details provided about the circumstances in which the test was  taken.
      Such a statement, supported by a statement of truth signed by her  was
      necessary to make good a rebuttal of  an  allegation  of  cheating  on
      facts such as these.

  22. With some hesitation, Mr Justice Garnham was willing  to  accept  that
      the reference by her solicitors to her success in the  exams  referred
      to, was sufficient to discharge the low evidential  burden  placed  on
      the claimant. He then turned to  consider  whether  the  Secretary  of
      State can then discharge the legal burden to prove on the  balance  of
      probabilities that the tests were fraudulent.

  23. He found at [44] that balancing the powerful evidence provided by  the
      Secretary of State pointing to a conclusion that the  claimant's  test
      result was obtained by fraud against the weak evidence provided by the
      claimant that her English language skills would have  been  sufficient
      to make cheating unnecessary, the Secretary of State 's  argument  "is
      irresistible" [44].

  24. Mr Melvin submitted in respect of this appellant's case,  that  it  is
      difficult to see how there was sufficient  evidence  of  the  claimant
      attending and taking the test himself. There was no evidence such as a
      financial receipt that was produced. Nor was there any  evidence  from
      the college supporting his assertion that he took  the  test  himself.
      Nor has he obtained the voice recording relating to his test, nor  has
      he complained to ETS. The only  evidence  before  the  Judge  was  the
      claimant's oral evidence that he attended and  that  he  was  of  good
      character. There had  therefore  been  a  blanket  acceptance  of  the
      claimant's evidence.

  25. He referred to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  judicial
      review of Nawaz, R  (on  the  application  of)  v  SSHD  (ETS:  Review
      standard/ evidential basis) [2017] UKUT 00288.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Freeman found that evidence obtained by the use of the  Look  Up  Tool
      and subject to human verification procedure, is an adequate basis  for
      the Secretary of State's deception finding in these cases and  in  the
      light of Flynn and Another [2008] EWCA Crim 970 and  the  evidence  of
      both Dr Harrison and Professor French. Further, the  lack  of  visible
      note taking  by  human  verifiers  does  not  provide  any  ground  of
      challenge to the decision as insufficiently transparent,  where  there
      has been an offer, whether accepted or not, to provide  a  copy  of  a
      voice recording for analysis.

  26. Mr Melvin  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
      acknowledge the recent evidence that had  been  available  before  the
      Court of Appeal nor consider  the  failure  by  the  claimant  or  his
      counsel to request the claimant's recording.

  27. On behalf of the claimant, Mr O'Cellaigh, who did  not  represent  the
      claimant before the First-tier Tribunal, submitted that Mr Melvin  has
      sought to advance an entirely new basis for contending that there  was
      a material error.

  28. He submitted that in the grounds seeking  permission,  it  was  simply
      contended that the evidential burden fell upon the claimant  to  offer
      an innocent explanation. It was not clear why the  evidence  from  the
      claimant which the Tribunal relied on would  preclude  the  use  of  a
      proxy test taker during the  test.  All  that  the  claimant  did  was
      provide a description of "a process and not an explanation" as to  why
      ETS found such anomalies in his test as  to  have  been  compelled  to
      invalidate his scores.

  29. Further, it was also asserted in the grounds  that  the  test  is  not
      whether the claimant speaks English  but  whether,  on  a  balance  of
      probabilities, he had deployed deception. There may be a reason why  a
      person who is able to  speak  English  to  the  required  level  would
      nonetheless cause or permit a proxy candidate to undertake an ETS test
      on their behalf, or otherwise to cheat.

  30. The Tribunal in MA (ETS - TOEIC Testing) [2016]  UKUT  00450  at  [57]
      stated that are a range of reasons why persons proficient  in  English
      may engage in TOEIC fraud. These include a lack of confidence, fear of
      failure, lack of time and commitment and contempt for the  immigration
      system. The issue is whether the claimant engaged in deception.

  31. Mr O'Cellaigh accepted that the claimant had the evidential burden  of
      raising an innocent explanation - Majumder v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1167
      at [18]. Lord Justice Beatson noted that the  Upper  Tribunal  decided
      that the Secretary of State had discharged the evidential burden  that
      lay on the Secretary of  State,  so  there  was  a  burden,  again  an
      evidential one, on the claimant raising an innocent explanation.

  32. He stated that the UT accepted the  submission  of  the  Secretary  of
      State that in considering an allegation of  dishonesty,  the  relevant
      factors included the following: what the person accused  had  to  gain
      from being dishonest; what he had to lose; what  is  known  about  his
      character; the cultural environment in  which  he  operated;  how  the
      individual accused of dishonesty performed  under  cross  examination;
      whether the Tribunal's assessment of that  person's  English  language
      proficiency is commensurate with his or her TOEIC scores  and  whether
      his or her academic achievements are such that it was  unnecessary  or
      illogical for them to have cheated. There had  been  no  criticism  of
      that approach by counsel representing the Secretary of State.

  33. In MA (ETS - TOEIC Testing) supra, it  was  noted  that  the  experts,
      including the Secretary of  State's  own  experts,  cannot  themselves
      explain  the  process  by  which  an  individual  is  connected  to  a
      particular voice file. It is thus not possible for any  individual  to
      explain how the error was made by ETS.

  34. Mr O'Cellaigh submitted that what is required in order to establish an
      "innocent explanation"  or  one  which  meets  the  minimum  level  of
      plausibility, is set out in the binding decisions of SM and Qadir  and
      Majumder. The Court of Appeal endorsed the  decision  in  SM,  finding
      that there was no requirement on an individual  to  explain  where  an
      error came from. Such a task would be impossible and would amount to a
      reversing of the burden of proof.

  35. He submitted that those judgments were  determinative  of  the  issues
      before the Tribunal and that the Secretary of State's appeal on  those
      grounds is without merit.

  36. Mr O'Cellaigh submitted that the respondent's attempt to amend at this
      stage should be refused. No application has been formally made;  there
      is no explanation as to why it was being made on the  morning  of  the
      hearing; it is many months out of time and amounts to an attempt to re-
      argue the appeal  on  a  basis  not  advanced  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

  37. Further, the point is without merit: It had simply been  contended  on
      appeal that the First-tier Tribunal erred in relying on SM and not  on
      the later decisions of Nawaz and Gaogalalwe.  The contention in effect
      was that the First-tier Tribunal should have treated the  evidence  of
      Professor French as virtually determinative of the appeal. Further, it
      was in effect  irrational  for  the  Tribunal  to  have  accepted  the
      claimant's case,  particularly  in  circumstances  where  he  made  no
      attempt to obtain the voice recording from ETS.

  38. However, whereas the decisions in  SM  and  Qadir  and  Majumder  were
      binding on the First-tier Tribunal, the decisions  in  Gaogalalwe  and
      Nawaz were not binding on the Tribunal as  they  were  first  instance
      judicial review decisions where the issue was directed to a  different
      question, namely whether the Secretary of State's generic evidence  in
      addition to the Look Up Tool could produce a rational conclusion  that
      deception had been employed. Although it clearly could,  that  is  not
      equivalent to a finding that fraud was actually used.

  39. In addition, he submitted that in Ahsan at [33] Underhill LJ  recorded
      no more than that the Secretary of State's submission that it would be
      hard to resist an accusation of cheating where a person had not sought
      to obtain the available voice  files,  was  broadly  accepted,  whilst
      stating in terms that it would depend on the claimant's oral evidence.
      Nor did the  Court  of  Appeal  examine  any  evidence  in  the  Ahsan
      decision, nor purport to give any guidance on the evidence.

  40. He submitted that the claimant had in any event sought to  obtain  his
      voice files, which attempts were frustrated by the Secretary of State.
      The current suggestion in the Secretary's grounds that the  First-tier
      Tribunal erred by not holding the absence of those files  against  him
      was '... with respect, extraordinary'.

  41. The claimant obtained numerous directions from the First-tier Tribunal
      that the Secretary of State, who was alleging fraud  and  claiming  to
      have this evidence, provide the relevant files. Those directions  were
      not complied with. Further, his representatives in fact wrote  to  ETS
      asking directly for the files which the Secretary of State had  failed
      to  provide  despite  repeated  requests.  Accordingly,  no   rational
      Tribunal could n these circumstances, have held against  the  claimant
      the absence of those voice files.

  42. Nor, he submitted, was the evidence of Professor  French  in  any  way
      determinative. His report was prepared for SM and  Qadir  and  related
      solely to the  reliability  of  voice  recognition.  His  report  says
      nothing at all about the question of whether an individual voice  file
      has been reliably matched to a person said  to  have  cheated.  It  is
      clear from Upper Tribunal as to the proper approach to appeals, in MA,
      supra, at [14] that there is no reliable way of determining whether  a
      person has been matched to the correct file.

  43. In the circumstances, there was no error  of  law  as  the  First-tier
      Tribunal followed the decisions and the approach in SM and  Qadir  and
      MA.

      Assessment

  44. I have set out the reasons advanced  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
      appealing. It is contended that the  Judge  failed  to  identify  what
      there  was  in  the  claimant's  evidence  amounts  to   an   innocent
      explanation. The claimant did not  explain  why  the  certificate  was
      cancelled due to anomalies in the test results identified by  ETS.  He
      simply described "a process". Whilst it is plausible that he may  have
      attended the test, this did not eliminate the possibility that a proxy
      was used, nor was it explained why ETS were so certain  of  this  that
      the certificate was deemed invalid.

  45. It is evident that the case advanced on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
      State at the hearing was not a ground put forward in  the  application
      for permission to appeal. Nor has any application been made  to  amend
      the application to include it. In that respect, I have had  regard  to
      Ferrer (limited appeal grounds,  Alvi)  Philippines  [2012]  UKUT  304
      where the Upper Tribunal held  that  in  the  immigration  and  asylum
      chamber, the overriding objective of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules  2008  is  unlikely  to  be  advanced  by  adopting  a
      procedure whereby new  grounds  of  appeal  can  be  advanced  without
      permission of the Upper Tribunal under Rule 5 of those rules.

  46. It is submitted that the contentions are without merit. The  decisions
      in SM and Qadir, as confirmed by the Court of Appeal in Majumder  were
      binding on the First-tier Tribunal. The issues raised in the  judicial
      reviews, however, were  concerned  as  to  whether  the  Secretary  of
      State's generic evidence, in addition  to  the  Look  up  Tool,  could
      produce a rational conclusion that deception had been employed. It was
      found  that  the  conclusions  were  Wednesbury  reasonable   in   the
      circumstances. That did not constitute a finding of  fact  that  fraud
      was actually used.

  47. It is evident that the claimant, through his  solicitors,  did  indeed
      seek to obtain the relevant voice files. Directions were made  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal that the Secretary of State provide  the  relevant
      files, which despite repeated  requests,  were  never  complied  with.
      Further, his representatives wrote to ETS directly seeking the files.

  48. There is accordingly no basis for the contention that the  absence  of
      those voice files should have constituted an adverse  finding  against
      the claimant's assertions.

  49. First-tier Tribunal Judge Loughridge directed himself appropriately at
      [29] in accordance with the test and approach set out in SM and Qadir.
      He proceeded to assess the relevant factors from  [30-36].  There  has
      been no contention that  the  underlying  reasoning  was  in  any  way
      flawed, or that any errors were made.

  50. The evidence  before  Judge  Loughridge  was  that  the  claimant  was
      studying a law degree, which required an exacting standard of English.
      He noted the extent of the claimant's academic career. He had recently
      passed the Pearson Speaking Test, which is  more  demanding  than  the
      ETS.

  51. He did not regard the fact that he failed the Pearson test in November
      2011 to be particularly relevant to his ability to pass the  ETS  test
      the following month. He failed the writing part of the  Pearson  test.
      The contention  was  that  it  was  largely  due  to  inadequate  exam
      technique rather than any inherent shortcomings in  his  knowledge  or
      comprehension.

  52. Further, the claimant needed to  obtain  an  extension  to  his  visa,
      otherwise he would not have been allowed to sit his final  law  exams.
      He explained that he travelled to the test centre by  taxi.  The  test
      was booked online using his college  account.  He  received  an  email
      acknowledgement although he is no longer able to access  that  account
      as the college closed in 2015. He did not see anyone  helping  at  the
      test centre. He does not recall whether there were invigilators.

  53. Further, Judge Loughridge took into account that there  was  the  risk
      that his entire future livelihood would be jeopardised by  fraud.  The
      character  references,  including  the  numerous  character  witnesses
      attested to his good character.

  54. I agree with the initial decision made by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Davis, who refused the Secretary of State's  initial  application  for
      permission to appeal. He  noted  that  there  was  not  the  slightest
      indication that the Judge's findings regarding the  TOEIC  certificate
      were in any way flawed. The Judge  made  extensive  reference  to  the
      evidence before him. The grounds amount to  a  disagreement  with  the
      findings, made by the application of the correct burden  and  standard
      of proof.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 14 February 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer









