
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/05997/2018
     hu/05996/2018
     hu/05994/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5th December 2018                   |On 9th January 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                 Bharti [S]
                                  Ajay [K]
                                    [G S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Malik instructed by Connaughts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, nationals of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 23rd  February  2018
    refusing their applications for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis
    of their private and family life.  The first Appellant is the wife, the
    second is the husband and the third is the child of  the  same  family.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas dismissed the  appeals  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 23rd July 2018.   The  Appellants  now  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on 11th October 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal in summary is that  the  first  Appellant
    named above came to the UK on 21st October 2009 with  entry  clearance.
    She was granted further periods of leave until 24th January  2017.   On
    20th January 2017 she applied for further leave to remain on the  basis
    of her private and family life. In the Reasons for Refusal  letter  the
    Secretary of State accepted that the first and second Appellants are in
    a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.   They  have  two   children
    together.  As the partner is not a British citizen and, at the date  of
    the application, the children (then aged 5 years and  7  months  and  1
    year and 8 months) had not spent seven years residing in  the  UK,  the
    Secretary of State considered that they did not meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the appeals and found that the
    removal of the Appellants is not disproportionate or  unlawful  in  the
    context of their rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  Two  grounds  are
    put forward in the Grounds of Appeal.

 4. It is contended in the first ground  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    findings on material matters and failed to take into  account  material
    evidence.  It is contended that the judge failed to take account of the
    report of an independent social worker.  Mr  Malik  did  not  make  any
    further submissions in relation to this ground at the hearing.   In  my
    view he was right to do so.  The judge considered  the  report  of  the
    social worker at paragraphs 13 and 14 of the decision  where  he  noted
    the conclusions that in  the  view  of  the  social  worker  the  third
    Appellant had put down roots that were described as robust, secure  and
    stable in the UK and that her best interests would not be protected and
    promoted should she be removed to Punjab.  At paragraph  33  the  judge
    noted that he had considered the best interests report prepared by  the
    social worker and  carefully  considered  the  contents.   The  grounds
    contend  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  social   worker's
    assessment  as  to  the  analysis  of  different  levels  of  education
    available in India.  In the decision at paragraph 33 the judge said

         "There is a system of state education available in  India  and  the
         fact that it is different to that in the UK is immaterial  to  this
         appeal.  It is accepted  that  there  will  be  disruption  to  the
         education of Appellant three, but in all of the circumstances,  she
         will adapt to life in India  with  the  help  and  support  of  her
         parents".

 5. As pointed out in the Rule 24 notice by the Secretary of  State  it  is
    not clear what,  if  any,  qualifications  the  social  worker  had  in
    relation to educational provision in India.  In my view the  judge  has
    given adequate consideration to the report from the  social  worker  in
    assessing the best interests of the children.

 6. It is contended in the second Ground of Appeal that the judge erred  in
    failing  to  engage  with  the  authorities  and  the  legislation   in
    particular Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 in terms of his assessment  of  the  Article  8  appeal.   In  his
    skeleton argument Mr Malik expanded upon this  ground  relying  on  the
    decisions in MA (Pakistan) and Others [2016] EWCA Civ 705 in particular
    paragraphs 46, 47 and 49.  In his submission the effect of the guidance
    in MA (Pakistan) is that, in the case of a child who has been in the UK
    for seven years or more or is a British citizen, there is a very strong
    expectation that the child's best interest will be to remain in the  UK
    and such very strong  expectation  can  only  be  displaced  by  strong
    reasons. He submitted that the fact  that  it  is  in  a  child's  best
    interests to  remain  in  the  UK  does  not  lead  inevitably  to  the
    conclusion that requiring the child  to  leave  would  be  unreasonable
    under Section 117B(6)(b) and that this statement simply underscores the
    fact that best interests do not lead categorically to  a  finding  that
    removal  would  be  unreasonable  and  that   there   is   a   residual
    consideration of  reasonableness  that  is  not  determined  simply  by
    reference to the best interests.  However he contends  that  ultimately
    in such cases the starting point is that leave should be granted unless
    there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

 7. In his skeleton argument and at the hearing Mr Malik also relied on the
    case of MT and ET (child's best interests; ex  tempore  pilot)  Nigeria
    [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC).  He accepted that the error of  law  found  by
    the Upper Tribunal in that case related to the ex tempore pilot  scheme
    but contended that in remaking  the  decision  the  Upper  Tribunal  at
    paragraphs 33 and 34 looked at whether there was a powerful  reason  to
    the contrary to displace the starting point that the child ought to  be
    granted leave.  In his submission the Upper Tribunal's finding reflects
    the high threshold that any notional powerful reasons to  the  contrary
    meet that the high threshold is in turn a  reflection  of  the  natural
    meaning of the phrase powerful reason to the contrary in the absence of
    such a high  threshold  the  phrase  is  rendered  meaningless  in  his
    submission.  It was therefore submitted that, in spite of the nuance in
    the law in this area, ultimately the law creates a  starting  point  to
    the position favourable to the  child,  namely  that  leave  should  be
    granted unless there are powerful reasons  to  the  contrary.   In  his
    submission the judge in this  case  completely  omits  to  engage  with
    Section 117B(6) and the associated authorities at all or properly.

 8. He further relied on the decision in Forman  (ss117A-C  considerations)
    [2015] UKUT 412 at paragraph 20.  In his submission as in the  case  of
    Forman the First-tier Tribunal Judge in this case erred in  failing  to
    set out Section 117B or to refer to it at all.  He submitted  that  the
    Upper Tribunal in Forman said that if Section 117B has not been set out
    then there is an error of law.  In the alternative  he  submitted  that
    the omission  is  material  in  this  case  because  MA  (Pakistan)  as
    underscored by MT and ET sets out the high threshold and if  the  judge
    does not state the high threshold it is not possible to know how he has
    applied it.  In these circumstances the findings are unsafe in his view
    and therefore the error is material.

 9. At the hearing Mr Lindsay submitted that the question posed by  Section
    117B(6) is whether it is reasonable to  expect  a  third  Appellant  to
    leave the UK with  her  parents.   In  his  submission  the  judge  has
    answered that question here  and  has  given  clear  reasons  for  that
    answer.  He referred to the headnote in the case of  Forman  where  the
    Tribunal said

         "(1) The public interest in firm immigration control is not diluted
             by the consideration that a  person  pursuing  a  claim  under
             Article 8 ECHR has at no time been a financial burden  on  the
             state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is  likely  to  remain  so
             indefinitely.  The significance of these factors is that where
             they are not present the public interest is fortified.

         (2)  The list of considerations contained in Section 117B and  117C
             of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the  2002
             Act) is not exhaustive.  A court or Tribunal  is  entitled  to
             take into account  additional  considerations,  provided  that
             they are relevant in the sense that they probably bear on  the
             public interest question.

         (3)  In cases where the provisions of Section 117B to 117C  are  of
             the  2002  Act  arise,  the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  must
             demonstrate that they have been given full effect."

10. He submitted therefore that the issue is not the failure to set out the
    law but whether Section 117B  had  been  given  full  effect.   In  his
    submission it has.  He also referred to the decision in MT and  ET  and
    to head note 1 which states:

         "A very young child, who has not started school  or  who  has  only
         recently done so, will have difficulty  in  establishing  that  her
         Article 8 private and family life has  a  material  element,  which
         lies outside her need to live with her parent or parents,  wherever
         that may be.  This position, however, changes over time,  with  the
         result  that  an  assessment  of  best  interests  must   adopt   a
         correspondingly wider focus, examining the child's position in  the
         wider world, of which school will usually be an important part".

    Mr Lindsay submitted that the judge found  at  paragraph  30  that  the
    Appellant was not at a critical point in her education.  Accordingly in
    his view it was open to the judge to conclude that the third  Appellant
    did not have a sustainable private life in the UK.  In  his  submission
    it is clear that family life is not relevant  here  as  the  Appellants
    will be returned together as a family.

11. Mr Lindsay relied on the decision in KO v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.  He relied on paragraph  10  where  the
    Supreme Court sets  out  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  on
    family life as a partner, a parent and private life ten year routes and
    to an extract headed "would it be unreasonable to expect an non-British
    citizen to leave the UK?" under which there were a number  of  relevant
    considerations such as risk to the child's health, family ties  in  the
    UK and the likelihood of integration into life in another  country  and
    went on to say:

         "It is generally the case that it is in a child's best interest  to
         remain with her parent(s).  Unless special factors apply,  it  will
         generally be reasonable to expect a child  to  leave  the  UK  with
         their parent(s), particularly if the parent(s)  have  no  right  to
         remain in the UK".

12. He further referred to paragraph 19 of the decision in KO  which  cites
    an extract from EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 paragraph 58 and where Lord Carnwath  in
    the Supreme Court went on to say

         "To the extent that Elias LJ may have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) paragraph 40, I would respectfully disagree.   There  is
         nothing in the section to suggest that 'reasonableness'  is  to  be
         considered otherwise than in the real world in which  the  children
         find themselves".

    Mr Lindsay submitted that the judge  answered  that  question  in  this
    case.

13. Mr Malik disagreed with Mr Lindsay's suggested  interpretation  of  the
    decision in KO.  He contended that nowhere in KO does it say  that  the
    IDIs contain a comprehensive statement of the law.  In  his  submission
    at paragraph 19 of KO there was  a  focus  there  on  the  question  of
    whether reasonableness takes into account having to  leave  the  UK  or
    instead looks at the reality of whether the child would have  to  leave
    the UK or not.  He contended that in KO there  was  a  broad  range  of
    issues considered and there were quite a lot of obiter  statements  and
    if the Supreme Court had wanted to disapprove  of  MA  (Pakistan)  they
    would have done so explicitly.

Error of Law

14. As set out above I do not accept that the judge erred  in  relation  to
    his approach to the social worker report.

15. In terms of the Article 8 consideration it is clear that paragraphs  22
    to 35 amount to a consideration of the appeal under Article 8.   In  my
    view all of the findings there go to the Article  8  issue.   I  accept
    that the judge has not set out a separate consideration under the Rules
    and under Section 117B explicitly.  However it is adequately clear that
    the judge has considered all relevant matters.

16. The judge accepted that the first and second Appellant have established
    a private and family life in the UK in the full knowledge that they had
    no settled status [24] the judge considered the  circumstances  of  the
    child at paragraphs 25, 29, 30 and 33.  In my view  it  is  crucial  to
    note that at paragraph 33 the judge concluded that it is  in  the  best
    interest of the children, in particular the third Appellant who had  at
    that stage been in the UK for over seven years, to be in a family  unit
    with her parents.

17. Having reached such a conclusion it is not therefore the case that  the
    judge was looking at any residual consideration  of  reasonableness  as
    suggested by Mr Malik in his skeleton argument at  paragraph  12.   His
    submission is based on a finding that the child's best interests are to
    remain in the UK.  That is not the finding made in this case.

18. There is no submission in the skeleton argument or at the hearing  that
    the  Appellants  met  the  requirements  of  the   Immigration   Rules.
    Accordingly all of the issues considered by the judge were  outside  of
    the Rules.  At paragraph 32 the judge  considered  whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to the family unit  continuing  their  private
    and family life in India.  The judge  considered  that  the  Appellants
    would adapt to life in India and that the third Appellant  would  adapt
    to life in India  with  the  help  and  support  of  her  parents.   At
    paragraph 29 the judge  considered  that  the  two  children,  although
    settled in school in the UK, would be able to adapt to  life  in  India
    and  would  continue  to  benefit  from  the   support   and   parental
    responsibility of their  parents  and  that  any  disruption  to  their
    education would be temporary and they would have the support  of  their
    family their parents and family members in India.

19. It is clear to me that, although not articulated in terms of whether it
    would be reasonable for the  third  Appellant  to  leave  the  UK,  the
    judge's concentration throughout the reasoning on the situation of  the
    third Appellant and the judge's assessment of the circumstances in  the
    UK and in India, it is  clear  to  me  that  the  judge  considered  in
    substance whether it was reasonable to expect the  third  Appellant  to
    leave the UK.  It is adequately clear that the  judge's  conclusion  on
    this matter was that it is reasonable to expect the third Appellant  to
    leave the UK.  In these circumstances in my view it is clear  that  the
    judge gave adequate consideration to the substance of Section  117B  as
    it affects these Appellants.  In my view the judge reached a conclusion
    open to him that  having  considered  all  relevant  factors  that  the
    decision to refuse the applications is proportionate.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 21st December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 21st December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
