
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05224/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th February 2019                |On 27 March 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     MT
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G. Loughran, instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal, promulgated on the 19th September 2018 dismissing her
    appeal against the decision to refuse her human rights claim.
    Permission to appeal was granted on the 9th January 2019.


 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines. She entered the UK on
    the 19th March 2013 with entry clearance as a domestic worker with a
    visa valid until 7 August 2013. She had remained in the UK without
    leave since that date.

 3. On 17th December 2014 the appellant applied for further leave to remain
    outside the Immigration Rules. The basis of her claim was that in view
    of her medical condition return to the Philippines would be a breach of
    Article 3 of the ECHR.

 4. The respondent refused her claim in a decision taken on the 9th March
    2017.

 5. The basis of her claim was that she had end stage kidney failure for
    which she required dialysis three times per week, and she would require
    a kidney transplant. It was stated that if she returned to the
    Philippines, she would be unable to afford treatment and her family
    could not support her.

 6. The decision letter considered the medical evidence that had been
    supplied with the application form (a report dated 13 June 2016). The
    respondent accepted that the appellant had an incurable condition but
    that she could continue receiving dialysis and took into account the
    dialysis was available in the Philippines as was appropriate
    medication. The respondent made reference to her financial
    circumstances and that she would be unable to afford treatment however,
    it was considered that those circumstances did not make a claim
    exceptional or entitled to remain in the United Kingdom. The decision
    letter also made reference to alternative sources of financial
    assistance for medical health and in particular sponsorship through
    Phil health. The COI report referred to sponsored membership Phil
    health being available to those belonging to the lowest 25% of the
    population.

 7. The respondent set out the relevant case law concerning Article 3
    claims at page 6 of the refusal letter. The respondent concluded that
    the appellant was not in the final stages of a terminal illness and
    that of the appellant had not shown that she could not access dialysis
    upon her return, her condition would not rapidly deteriorate. In the
    event the dialysis is not available the appellant had not shown that
    she was unable to obtain palliative care or family support.


 8. The appellant also made reference to her mental health as part of her
    Article 3 claim. By reference to a COI report dated 13 March 2013, the
    respondent set out that there were appropriate medical facilities
    available to the appellant in the Philippines.


 9. Her claim was also considered under Article 8 of the ECHR for the
    reasons set out at page 9 of the refusal letter the respondent
    considered that there were no "exceptional circumstances" to
    demonstrate that a grant of leave outside the rules. The respondent
    noted that her private life had been developed on the basis that she
    had no permission to remain permanently and thus had no legitimate
    expectation of stay. It was also noted that her last period of leave to
    remain expired on 7 August 2013 and that she had overstayed in the UK
    since that date without making any attempt to regularise her stay and
    acclaimed NHS treatment she was not entitled to.


10. The appellant issued grounds of appeal on 23 March 2017. In those
    grounds it was argued that:

          1) the decision was contrary to the U.K.'s obligations under the
             European Convention of Human Rights and unlawful under section
             6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


          2) The decision was contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR and that
             the respondent erred in failing to consider that the
             appellant's case was aligned far closer to D, rather than to
             N. Removal of the appellant would bring certainty and
             immediacy of death and was sufficient to bring the case within
             the "exceptional" category recognised by the ECHR
             jurisprudence.


          3) It was further argued that the respondent erred in law by
             failing to consider the recent judgement of Paposhvili v
             Belgium (application number 41738/10) and the representations
             made by the appellant dated the 1/2/17 in respect of Article
             8, it was submitted that removal would breach her rights under
             Article 8 and that there were no compelling public interest
             grounds of her removal. The respondent failed to take into
             account the foreseeable consequences for the appellant's
             mental health of the decision and its implementation upon the
             effective enjoyment of her right to respect for private life.

11. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 11 September 2018.
    The judge heard evidence from the appellant and two witnesses called on
    her behalf. In a decision promulgated on 19 September 2018 he dismissed
    her appeal on all grounds.

12. The judge's findings of fact and analysis of the evidence can be
    summarised as follows: -

          1) The judge took into account the medical report dated 13 June
             2016 which confirmed that the appellant had irreversible end-
             stage kidney disease and that she had commenced dialysis on 21
             June 2014 and received it three times a week. He recorded the
             evidence that if the dialysis ended, she would die most likely
             within two or three weeks (paragraph 5). He further recorded
             the evidence that if dialysis was reduced to 2 sessions per
             week there would be a long-term detrimental effect on the life
             expectancy of the appellant and such a reduction would
             increase the risk of premature death. The judge recorded the
             medical evidence stating that there may be some short-term
             effects of reducing the dialysis to 2 times per week if the
             appellant could not control her fluid intake. Such a reduction
             dialysis may also lead to worse control of waste products
             leading to symptoms such as itching, cramps, restless legs,
             nausea, weakness, fatigue and exhaustion and in the longer-
             term bone disease and other complications.


          2) The judge took into account and email at page S107 which
             demonstrated the dialysis is available in the Philippines and
             that it could be arranged in advance so that upon removal the
             appellant could access dialysis on her arrival without delay.
             He concluded that the minimum that she would receive is the 90-
             day package B which would be authorised by Phil health which
             would include 90 days dialysis treatment per annum which would
             be less than two sessions a week (1.73) as opposed to the
             three sessions a week that she received in the United Kingdom.


          3) The judge found that the appellant could receive dialysis in
             the Philippines and therefore death would not be imminent and
             that the Article 3 claim was not made out. The judge found
             that she would be likely to be offered package B (90 day
             dialysis) and whilst this was less than three days a week that
             she was currently receiving, taking into account the medical
             evidence, a reduction in dialysis may not necessarily lead to
             the appellant experiencing some if not all of the side effects
             listed (see paragraph 54).


          4) He reached the conclusion that the appellant would not suffer
             a rapid decline health and would not rapidly experience
             intense suffering. He found that some of the problems referred
             to in the medical report were described as a long-term
             detrimental effect and therefore they were not rapid. He found
             that the immediate short-term effects referred to by the
             medical evidence would only occur if the appellant could not
             control her fluid intake. The judge found that as the
             appellant presented as a "sensible individual and having been
             warned about such short-term effects I find no reason why she
             could not control a fluid intake." He went on to state "in any
             event, I do not accept that the short-term effects, even if
             they occur, would amount intense suffering to the standard
             envisaged in either Paposhvili or AM. He therefore concluded
             that the appellant had not shown that there were substantial
             grounds for believing that there would be a real risk of a
             rapid decline in her health and/or that she would rapidly
             experience intense suffering and thus the test set out in AM
             had not been satisfied (see paragraph 57)).


          5) So far as travelling to the dialysis centre was concerned, he
             found two centres available approximately an hour away by bus
             and that she would be able to access those centres. He took
             into account that she travelled to receive dialysis now and
             the distance was a similar journey time (see paragraphs 60 -
             61).


          6) The judge accepted that the appellant and her family were poor
             and had little income but noted from the witness statements of
             her parents that they were able to afford their own medical
             care. Neither said that they had to pay anything to Phil
             health although they had to pay for medication. He recorded
             that he found it surprising that the witness statement did not
             deal with the position of her parents in relation to Phil
             health.


          7) He found that she would be able to access dialysis to the Phil
             health scheme and she could now enrol in that scheme as the
             documents demonstrated that overseas workers were covered (see
             paragraphs 64 and 65).


          8) The judge therefore concluded that returning the appellant to
             the Philippines would not be in breach of Article 3 on medical
             grounds (see paragraph 66).


          9) The judge took into account her mental health and the medical
             evidence of a psychologist (page S 75). He found that
             arrangements could be put in place for her dialysis before the
             appellant returned to the Philippines and it addressed the
             issues at paragraph 9.6.1.2 and 9.6.1.3 of the report. He
             considered that any stability could be given to the appellant
             by resolving her immigration status by return and that either
             remaining in the UK or being returned would provide permanent
             stability. He also considered what was said about the
             withdrawal of dialysis treatment but reached the conclusion
             that the discovery of a chronic life-threatening condition
             will be likely to result in high levels of anxiety and
             depression and thoughts of suicide whether that discovery
             occurred in the UK or the Philippines.


         10) As to Article 8, he took into account immigration history;
             having entered on 19 March 2013 had been in the UK for 5 �
             years. He took into account the witness statements to show
             that she built up a substantial private life with friends,
             church and in her medical treatment. While she claimed to have
             a partner, they did not live together and had not met until
             December 2017 and thus had only known each other for a short
             time. He was not persuaded that they had "family life" and
             that he was a boyfriend. However, he took into account the
             relationship in terms of private life.


         11) The judge found she could not meet the immigration rules and
             taking into account section 117B public interest
             considerations, he attached little weight to the private life
             that she had established since at all times her presence had
             been precarious. In the alternative any family life that she
             had established was at a time when her immigration status was
             unlawful and gave little weight to it. The appellant was not
             self-sufficient, and nor would she ever be as she was
             dependent upon government support and it also incurred high
             charges using the NHS.


         12) If returned to the Philippines, she would derive support from
             her family. He concluded that there was an "overwhelming
             public interest in the appeal in maintaining immigration
             control" and that there was also the issue of the economic
             well-being of the United Kingdom. Having carried out the
             balancing exercise, he found that there was "very little in
             the appellant's favour" this dismissed her appeal under
             Article 8.

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and initially
    permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal. On 9 January 2019,
    Upper Tribunal Gill granted permission.


14. Thus, the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal. I heard submissions
    from each of the advocates which I shall incorporate and refer to in my
    analysis and conclusions.


Decision on the error of law:

15. Ground one relates to the analysis of the medical evidence before the
    Tribunal. The judge found [56] that the appellant could access 90
    sessions of dialysis, which would be averaged out at 1.7 sessions per
    week. He therefore concluded that on that evidence she would not suffer
    a rapid decline in her health and would not rapidly experience intense
    suffering. He further concluded that the immediate short-term effects
    upon her health referred to in the medical report would only occur if
    the appellant could not control her fluid intake. On this issue the
    judge reached the conclusion that: "the appellant presents as a
    sensible individual and having been warned about such short-term
    effects I find no reason why she could not control her fluid
    intake...".


16. The medical evidence set out at [AB 37] at paragraph 6 sets out the
    complications arising from the reduction in dialysis from the three
    sessions that she presently undertook to the two sessions (1.7
    sessions). Prof Levy made reference to the long-term detrimental
    effects on the length of her life increasing the risk of premature
    death and risk of complications from renal failure, cardiac arrest and
    bone disease. Apart from the long-term detrimental effects he made
    reference to the "immediate short-term effect if she was unable to
    control her fluid intake". He stated that she would be likely to be
    very susceptible to "rapid accumulation of fluid in the chest
    (pulmonary oedema) which could be fatal or giving rise to emergency
    admission to hospital. This would commonly occur within a few days of a
    reduction in her dialysis regimen." He went on to make reference to
    other conditions as a result which could give rise to irreversible
    damage.


17. Therefore, the medical evidence set out the consequences after the
    reduction of dialysis and the immediate short-term effects upon her
    health if the appellant was unable to control her fluid intake. There
    was no evidence before the judge as to how the appellant would control
    her fluid intake or in what circumstances or even as to what was meant
    by "fluid intake" in the context of her treatment. The only source of
    evidence was that referred to in the medical report.

18. Miss Everett submitted that every change of routine would be different
    and that the judge had made a finding based on her being able to manage
    her condition in the past. She submitted that the appellant was not in
    the position of a young child but someone who had been able to manage
    her condition to a degree.

19. Against that background, I am satisfied that the judge did fall into
    error when considering that medical issue. I accept the submission made
    by Miss Loughran that there was no evidence before the Tribunal as to
    what was meant by "fluid intake" and therefore the finding made had no
    proper evidential basis.

20. Furthermore, whilst Miss Everett submitted that the judge was entitled
    to reach the finding based on his assessment of her being a "sensible
    person", the judge made no reference to her past ability to manage the
    condition and there was no evidence in this regard before the Tribunal.

21. Even if it could be said that she could manage her condition in the UK,
    as Miss Loughran submitted, it did not necessarily follow that she
    could do so in the Philippines and the conditions there were a relevant
    factor in reaching an overall decision. At paragraph 57 (appellant's
    witness statement) the appellant sets out the likely conditions and
    what would be necessary for effective dialysis to take place. In this
    regard she sets out that a proper waste purification system would be
    required, further evidence was given that there was no safe drinking
    water. Those paragraphs also make reference to the facilities for her
    in her parents' home all of which was relevant to any type of dialysis
    which would be undertaken. Therefore, the reasoning based on her
    presentation as a "sensible person" does not engage with all of the
    evidence before the Tribunal.

22. The judge also found at [56], in the alternative that he was not
    satisfied that the short-term effects, even if they occurred would
    amount to "intense suffering". At paragraph 41 of the decision, the
    judge cited paragraph 38 of AM (Zimbabwe) and another v SSHD [2018]
    EWCA Civ 64 which stated as follows:

         "so far as the ECtHR and the Convention are concerned, the
         protection of Article 3 against removal in medical cases is now not
         confined to deathbed cases where death is already imminent when the
         applicant is in the removing country. It extends to cases where
         "substantial grounds have been shown for believing that (the
         applicant), although not at the imminent risk of dying, would face
         a real risk on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in
         the receiving country or  lack of access to such treatment, of
         being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his
         or her state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a
         significant reduction in life expectancy"(paragraph [183]). This
         means cases where the applicant faces a real risk of rapidly
         experiencing intense suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard) in
         the receiving state because of their illness and the non-
         availability there of treatment which is available to them in the
         removing state or faces a real risk of death within a short time in
         the receiving state the same reason. In other words, the boundary
         of Article 3 protection has been shifted from being defined by
         imminence of death in the removing state (even with the treatment
         available there) to be defined by the imminence (i.e. likely
         "rapid" experience) of intense suffering or death in the receiving
         state, which may only occur because of the non-availability that
         state of the treatment which had previously been available in the
         removing state."

23. However, whilst acknowledging that relaxation of the test, Sales LJ
    considered "it does so only to a very modest extent". The Article 3
    threshold in medical cases remains high (see MM (Malawi)).


24. In terms of the evidence, I accept the submission made by Miss Loughran
    that the finding failed to properly take into account the written
    evidence set out in the medical report at paragraph 6 and that if those
    circumstances arose, the medical evidence referred that to the
    consequences as being fatal, therefore even taking account of the high
    threshold, the judge had not applied the medical evidence to the
    applicable test.

25. Ground 2 relates to the evidence concerning the availability of
    treatment under the Philhealth scheme. The judge had reached the
    conclusion that dialysis was available in the Philippines and that the
    appellant could access this (see paragraph 60). At paragraphs 64 - 65,
    the judge took into account the evidence as to the availability of the
    Phil health scheme. Miss Everett on behalf of the respondent submitted
    that the judge did consider the evidence as to the scheme and was
    entitled to reach the finding that whilst it might be of some cost to
    the appellant it was available. She submitted the judge had stated that
    he was not clear whether the appellant's parents are accessing
    healthcare or not but that he was entitled to say that there was no
    evidence the appellant had approached them.


26. Miss Loughran referred the Tribunal to the evidence relied upon by the
    judge which was at page 392 of the bundle. It referred to the scheme
    offering 90 sessions to members annually and that as at 2013 all
    citizens are entitled to cover by Phil health with the government
    pledging poor families will be provided with insurance free of charge.


27. I accept the submission made by Miss Loughran that the evidence of the
    Phil health scheme and its availability is unclear and that there
    appears to be some confusion in the evidence as to who it applies to,
    whether any contribution is required and whether treatment for dialysis
    is free and whether there is or has been any attempt to reclassify
    dialysis as free treatment. There is a reference to the legislation in
    2018 but no evidence as to whether or not that has occurred.
    Furthermore, there was evidence before the Tribunal that the scheme
    itself was not effective (see AB page 384). There was also an email at
    page 107 which made reference to the cost of treatment and refers to be
    a "registered member". The analysis made of the judge of the
    availability of treatment was in the context of the appellant being
    covered by that scheme. However, it was unclear on what basis the
    material supported a conclusion that she was a member or would be
    entitled to be a member or on what basis. Some of the findings made on
    this issue also did not take into account all the available evidence,
    for example, at [63) the judge found that the appellant's parents were
    able to afford the medical care but that was not consistent with the
    evidence given by the appellant which demonstrated that they went
    without their medication had struggled to meet their own medical needs.


28. A further issue arises from the submissions of the parties as to how
    the appellant could practically access any treatment. The judge set out
    his findings at paragraph 61 that there were two centres available to
    the appellant an hour away by bus and compared the journey and distance
    time to be similar to that taken in the United Kingdom.


29. It is submitted by Miss Loughran that the judge failed to take into
    account the evidence as to the journey from the UK to the Philippines.
    She gave the approximate flight time from the UK to the capital being
    over 13 hours and the appellant's evidence that there would be a
    further 21 hours by bus and three hours by boat and overall a figure of
    36 hours was given as to the overall period of travel that there would
    be before arriving at her home and therefore obtaining treatment.


30. Miss Everett on behalf of the respondent submitted that the journey was
    a matter of risk and that any change in her routine would be done in a
    structured way and there was no evidence that the journey itself would
    be fatal. She submitted that it could be staged or an alternative her
    parents could come and stay in Manila and she could access treatment
    there.


31. When looking at the issue of travel, Miss Everett is right to submit
    that this was not akin to a situation of being on life support.
    However, the judge's finding at paragraph at 61 solely related to
    accessing treatment in her home area. In my judgment it was open to the
    judge to find that the journey of one hour away was similar in time to
    the journey made in the UK for treatment. However, the issue raised in
    the grounds and in the submissions made relate to travel from the UK to
    the Philippines before any treatment could be accessed. It does not
    appear that this evidence was taken into account by the judge (as set
    out in her witness statement) and he made no findings as to how the
    journey would take place or in the context of any detrimental impact on
    her health. The submission made by Miss Everett was that the journey
    could be taken in stages, but there was no evidence to make any finding
    in this regard.


32. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the errors identified in the
    grounds are made out. As those errors go to findings of fact and
    analysis of evidence, I set aside the decision and do not reserve any
    of the findings.

33. As to remaking the decision, given the nature of the errors I accept
    the submission made by Miss Loughran that further evidence will be
    required and further clear findings made, including updating evidence
    relevant to the appellant circumstances. She therefore submits that the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

34. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of
    appeals in this Tribunal. That reads as follows:

         "[7.2]   The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied
         that:-


                (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
                before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
                considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


                (b)    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
                which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                to be re-made is such that, having regard to the overriding
                objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to
                the First-tier Tribunal."

35. Thus, I have reached the conclusion that it is appropriate to remit  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all matters.


Notice of Decision


36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is therefore set aside.  It is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
     Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Date 25/3/2019

