
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05390/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/05395/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/05396/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2020                    |On 26 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MBK
                                     RKK
                                     JKK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By directions  dated  15  June  2020,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan
    expressed the provisional view of the Upper Tribunal that the  question
    of error of law in  this  appeal  might  fairly  and  appropriately  be
    considered without a hearing. Both  parties  have  responded  to  those
    directions with written submissions. Neither party has  requested  that
    there be an oral initial hearing I have considered the submissions  and
    the file carefully, and I have decided that I can and should fairly and
    appropriately determine the appeal without a hearing.

 2. This appeal is brought by two brothers and a sister against a  decision
    of the Entry Clearance Officer refusing them  entry  clearance  as  the
    children of the sponsor, their mother, MM (hereinafter referred  to  as
    the sponsor). The children were born respectively  in  2001,  2002  and
    2011. They are citizens of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo.  Their
    father died in June 2012. The judge recorded [24] that the sponsor  had
    been 'wholly absent' from the appellant's lives for the period  2012  -
    2017. The father of the children, the sponsor's husband, supported  the
    children financially  until  his  death.  At  home  in  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo, and during the mother's absence  from  their  lives,
    the children have been cared for by a friend, F, who was  described  in
    court by the sponsor herself as being "like a mother" to the  children.
    At the conclusion of her decision [29], the judge wrote:

         "This is a human rights appeal. I am asked to find  that  there  is
         family life between the appellant and  the  sponsor.  On  the  very
         limited information available  to  me,  including  absence  of  any
         evidence from the appellants themselves, I am  not  satisfied  that
         they do exercise family life with the sponsor. Even if I  am  wrong
         about that, given the findings I have already made, I do  not  find
         the refusal  of  entry  clearance  will  amount  to  a  substantial
         interference with it, since the appellants have  been  carrying  on
         their relationship with the sponsor at  a  distance,  using  modern
         means of communication, for the last 2-3 years. There is no  reason
         why they could not continue to do so, and  possibly  also  meet  on
         occasions for family visits. Even if the refusal of entry clearance
         does amount an interference with family life (which I do not  find)
         nevertheless, the interference would in all  the  circumstances  of
         this case, be proportionate, in my judgement, given my findings."

 3. I am grateful to both representatives for providing clear and  succinct
    written  submissions.  The  appellants  submit  that  the  judge   gave
    inadequate reasons for finding that there was no  family  life  between
    the appellants and the sponsor. The appellant asserts that the  sponsor
    has shared sole responsibility with  F,  notwithstanding  her  physical
    separation from them. She submits  that  telephone  calling  cards  are
    capable of acting as corroborative evidence of contact. Given  evidence
    that the appellants father is dead, that there has been contact between
    the appellants and sponsor since 2017 and that the  sponsor  claims  to
    exercise control and direction over the lives of the appellants and has
    provided financial support, the sponsor claims that  the  judge  should
    have found that family life existed.

 4. The burden of proof in the appeal rested  on  the  appellants  and  the
    judge has found that that burden has not  been  discharged.  The  judge
    noted the 'very limited information'  available  to  her.  The  matters
    listed by the appellants may be capable of supporting a claim  for  the
    existence of family life but they do not compel  a  finding  that  such
    family life exists. In my opinion, it was  open  to  the  judge,  on  a
    proper consideration of the evidence including the matters referred  to
    by the appellants, to conclude that family life  of a  kind  which  may
    attract the protection of Article 8 ECHR had not been proven to  exist.
    The submissions of the appellants amount to no more than a disagreement
    with the legitimate findings of the tribunal.

 5. Given that this is a human rights  appeal,  the  judge's  finding  that
    family life did not exist was determinative; in any Razgar [2004]  UKHL
    27 analysis, the appeal could not  get  as  far  as  a  proportionality
    assessment. The appellants assert  that,  because  the  father  of  the
    children had died, paragraph 297(i)(d) of  the  Immigration  Rules  had
    been met, a fact which should have informed  the  judge's  findings  on
    family life. I disagree. This was a human rights appeal only; there was
    never any appeal in respect of the immigration rules per se.  In  their
    submission, the appellants refer to  the  judgement  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in TZ and PG [2018] EWCA Civ 1109. At [34], the Court of  Appeal
    held:

         "That leaves the question of whether the tribunal  is  required  to
         make a decision on article 8 requirements  within  the  Rules  i.e.
         whether there are insurmountable obstacles, before or in  order  to
         make a decision about article 8 outside the Rules.  The  policy  of
         the Secretary of State as expressed in  the  Rules  is  not  to  be
         ignored when a decision about article 8 is to be made  outside  the
         Rules.  An  evaluation  of   the   question   whether   there   are
         insurmountable obstacles is a relevant factor because  considerable
         weight is to be placed  on  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  as
         reflected in the Rules of the  circumstances  in  which  a  foreign
         national partner should be granted leave  to  remain.  Accordingly,
         the tribunal should undertake an evaluation of  the  insurmountable
         obstacles test within the Rules in order to  inform  an  evaluation
         outside the Rules because  that  formulates  the  strength  of  the
         public policy in immigration control 'in the case before it', which
         is what the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (at [50]) held  was  to  be
         taken into account. That  has  the  benefit  that  where  a  person
         satisfies the Rules, whether or not by reference to  an  article  8
         informed requirement, then this will be positively determinative of
         that person's article 8 appeal, provided their case engages article
         8(1), for the very reason that it would  then  be  disproportionate
         for that person to be removed." [my emphasis]

    In the present appeal, the judge has found that family  life  does  not
    exist and that article 8(1) is not engaged. The death of the children's
    father may have  been  enough  to  satisfy  the  black  letter  of  the
    immigration rule but the judge was required to determine whether family
    life existed by reference to all the evidence not  merely  that  single
    fact. The proviso  inserted  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  which  I  have
    highlighted  in  the  passage  quoted  above  remains  of   fundamental
    importance even when an ability to satisfy the immigration rule  should
    be treated as "positively determinative". The passage shows that  there
    will be cases in which article 8(1) is  not  engaged  even  though  the
    requirements of a rule may be met.

 6. For the reasons I have given, this appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed




    Signed   Date 25 August 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

