
                                    [pic]


    In the Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05074/2018
                                                               HU/05081/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                        |On 30 January 2019            |




                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY




                                   Between


                               Salah Uddin (1)
                               FIROZA [A] (2)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
    For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a senior Home Office presenting
    officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

      1. In this decision I will refer to the parties  by  the  designations
         before the First-Tier Tribunal  (FTT)  notwithstanding  that  their
         roles are reversed in the Upper Tribunal (UT). They appeal to the U
         T with the permission of FTT Judge Saffer who, on 30 October  2018,
         identified that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beach
         (the judge), may contain  a  material  error  of  law  because  the
         article 8 analysis, having regard to the case  of  Agyarco  v  SSHD
         [2017] UKSC 11, may have been flawed and the judge may have "struck
         the wrong balance". The judge heard the appellants' appeal  against
         the  respondent's  refusal  to  refuse  to  grant  either  of   the
         appellants leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.

    The Appellant's Immigration Background and History

      2. The first appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on  1st
         of January 1987. The second appellant was born on 23 October  1983.
         They are married to one another.

      3. The first appellant came to the UK on 23 March 2009 with  leave  to
         enter as a student. He had valid leave  to  remain  until  30  June
         2009, but this was extended as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant until  17
         April 2011. The first appellant applied for further leave to remain
         as a Tier 1 (Post study work migrant) valid until 26 April 2013. On
         25th of April 2013 the first appellant applied for and was  granted
         further leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Migrant  until  30
         April 2015. On 29th of April 2015, the first appellant applied  for
         further leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)  Migrant  and  was
         granted leave to remain until 29th of August 2016. Finally,  on  26
         April 2016, the first appellant applied further leave to remain  on
         the basis that he had formed a private or family life in the UK and
         that it would be unlawful for  the  respondent  to  interfere  with
         those rights but for reasons  which  do  not  appear  relevant  the
         appellant made another application for leave to remain on the  same
         basis on 8 December 2016.

      4. The second appellant entered the UK on 20 April 2012 with leave  to
         enter as a Tier 1 (Post-study work partner) valid  until  26  April
         2013. The second appellant applied for further leave to remain as a
         dependent and was granted further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (Gen)
         migrant valid until 30 April 2015. On 29th of April 2015 the second
         appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain  and  was  granted
         further leave to remain as dependent of  a  Tier  4  (Gen)  migrant
         valid until 29 August 2016.

      5. On 26 August 2016 both appellants applied for leave  to  remain  on
         the basis of their private and family lives in the UK and on 8th of
         December 2016. On 6 February 2018 the decision was made  to  refuse
         the  applications.  The  appellants  subsequently  appealed   those
         refusals on or about 14 February 2018.

      6. The respondent gave her reasons for refusing the applications in  a
         letter dated 24th of August 2017. In  that  letter  the  respondent
         explained that decision not involving a child the correct  approach
         had been set out by the Supreme Court in the case of MM (Lebanon) v
         Secretary of State [2017] UKSC  10.  The  relevant  provisions  are
         found in Appendix F M and  paragraph  276  ADE  (1)  of  the  (new)
         Immigration Rules, which took account of the need to respect  human
         rights law. Those changes were introduced as a consequence  of  the
         case of MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 10. They came into force on
         10 August 2017. The applications were considered under R - LTRP.1.1
         (a) (b) and (d) of Appendix FM (which are found  at  page  1288  of
         Immigration Law Handbook 10th edition). That paragraph  forms  part
         of Appendix FM Family Members "Requirements for  limited  leave  to
         remain as a partner". However, the appellant did not qualify  under
         the 10-year partner route for reason of the fact  that  under  R  -
         LTRP.1.1. (d) (ii) the appellants did not meet all the  eligibility
         requirements of E - LTRP of  Appendix  FM.  It  was  accepted  that
         neither appellant fell for refusal under R-LTRP.1.1.(d) (i) -  i.e.
         the applications did not fail on grounds of suitability.  But,  the
         eligibility requirements under R - LTRP.1.1 (d) (ii) were  not  met
         because the applicant's partner must be a British citizen,  present
         and settled in the UK whereas the first appellant's partner, Firoza
         [A], is a Bangladeshi citizen who applied for  family  and  private
         life in line with his application.  The  EX.1  exemption  from  the
         eligibility requirements were considered under  R  -  LTRP  1.1.(d)
         (iii) of Appendix FM  and  paragraph  EX.1  applied  in  the  first
         appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  child
         qualified under paragraph EX 1. (b). The first  appellant  did  not
         succeed under EX 1 (a) because his child ([A]), who had  only  been
         born in September 2016, has been less than seven years  in  the  UK
         and therefore subparagraph (cc) was not satisfied. EX.1.(b) did not
         apply because although  the  first  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the  UK,  even  if
         she was a British citizen or were settled here  there  will  be  no
         "insurmountable obstacles" to continuing family  life  between  the
         appellants and their child in Bangladesh.

      7. In relation to the second appellant,  the  respondent  reached  the
         same conclusion in relation  to  EX.1.(a)  and  in  relation  to  E
         X.1.(b).  The  respondent  noted  that  the  appellants  would   be
         returning as one family unit with their child to  Bangladesh  where
         they would be expected to help each other re-adjust to  Bangladeshi
         life. The respondent noted that, with the exception of their  child
         [A]. The appellants have spent the bulk  of  their  lives  in  that
         country.

      8. The appellants' appealed against the respondent's refusal to  grant
         further leave to remain  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT).  The
         appeal was heard on 28th of June 2018 and promulgated  on  20  July
         2018.

      9. The judge found articles 3 and  8  of  the  ECHR  were  potentially
         engaged.  She  accepted  evidence  from  Dr  Tahir,  a   consultant
         rheumatologist, that the second appellant suffered from  rheumatoid
         arthritis and is currently on medication at a cost to the NHS.  She
         noted that the threshold for succeeding  in  article  3  and  8  on
         medical grounds was a high one. Whilst the judge noted  that  there
         was a "significant public interest in removing those with no  basis
         to remain in the UK particularly when NHS resources will be used by
         an applicant", she nevertheless found that there was evidence  that
         it  would  be  difficult  for  the  second  appellant  to   receive
         medication in Bangladesh. Overall, at paragraph 23, she appeared to
         accept  that  medication  would  be  available  in  Bangladesh  and
         therefore the respondent would not be in breach of article 3  or  8
         of the ECHR if the second appellant were  returned  to  Bangladesh.
         However, subsequently, the judge contradicted  herself  by  stating
         that medication in some cases not is not available  at  all  or  is
         only available at substantial  cost.  In  paragraph  28  the  judge
         therefore concluded that the respondent had nevertheless not  shown
         here her decision was "a justified,  necessary  and  proportionate"
         one.

     10. The grounds of appeal to the appeal to the UT  attack  the  judge's
         decision because it is stated  that  the  judge  appeared  to  have
         concluded that the appellants couldn't  succeed  on  article  3  or
         article 8 grounds, on the basis of the second  appellant's  medical
         needs, but had then gone on to allow the appeal. In any  event  the
         second  appellant's  medical  condition  did   not   require   both
         appellants to stay in the UK and exercise their  right  to  respect
         for a family and private  life  here.  The  judge  found  that  the
         respondent had correctly decided that  there  were  no  significant
         obstacles  to  the  appellants  continuing  their  family  life  in
         Bangladesh and therefore that the respondent had correctly  decided
         the case under the rules. In so far as there had  been  any  appeal
         under the rules, which following the commencement into force of the
         Immigration Act 2014 there was not, that  appeal  would  have  been
         dismissed on  the  basis  that  there  were  no  "very  significant
         obstacles" to the reintegration of the appellants into  society  in
         Bangladesh. It was bizarre that the judge has subsequently gone  on
         to apparently finding the appellant's favour on article 8  grounds.
         The judge had materially erred by allowing the appeal under article
         8, if indeed she intended to do so. The  second  appellant  suffers
         from  rheumatoid  arthritis,  but  the  second  appellant  was  not
         receiving the medication which she is now receiving at the date  of
         the respondent's decision. The judge does not consider  alternative
         medications available in Bangladesh.  Furthermore,  the  medication
         she was currently on was provided as part of a drug trial and there
         is no guarantee it will permanently be available in the UK, even if
         the appellant is a foreign national were entitled to it. The  judge
         failed to follow the guidance in GS India or MM  (Zimbabwe)  [2012]
         EWCA Civ 279 in relation to healthcare  cases.  The  ECHR  did  not
         impose an obligation on a contracting state provide those liable to
         deportation  (or  removal)  with  medical  treatments  and  it  was
         submitted following the leading case of Agyarko that  very  similar
         principles apply in a removal  case/an  application  for  leave  to
         remain  to  those  enunciated   in   the   above-mentioned   cases.
         Unjustifiably harsh consequences must be established to  bring  the
         case within article 8. No consideration was given  to  the  leading
         cases before the UK Supreme Court and Court of Appeal quoted above.
         The respondent applied for and obtained permission to appeal.

    The hearing

     11. The appellant did not attend the hearing but  submitted  by  fax  a
         document which I will treat as a rule 24  response.  The  appellant
         claimed that  the  FTT  determination  had  correctly  allowed  the
         appellant's appeal having heard evidence including medical evidence
         confirming the drugs the appellant (Firoza  [A])  took  worked  but
         would not be available in Bangladesh.

     12. But Mr Tufan described the reasoning as "confused" and pointed  out
         that it was very difficult to understand the basis of  the  judge's
         decision. Family life had been precariously formed in  the  absence
         of any clear evidence the case failed to reach  the  high  standard
         required for an article 3 or an article 8 claim  based  on  medical
         grounds. I was referred to the case of G S presumably  a  reference
         to the case reported at [2015] EWCA Civ 40. I was therefore invited
         allow the appeal by the respondent and set aside  the  decision  of
         the FTT and re-make the decision in favour of the respondent.

     13. At the end of the hearing I reserved  my  decision  as  to  whether
         there was a material error of law but  indicated  I  was  going  to
         allow the appeal and remake the  decision  based  on  the  evidence
         before the FTT.

    Discussion

     14.  The  judge's  decision  is  confused  appears  to  waver   between
         dismissing the appellant's appeal and allowing the appeal.  As  Far
         as one can discern the reason for the decision, it  seems  to  have
         been that the second appellant was receiving an  experimental  form
         of treatment to deal with her rheumatoid arthritis  and  the  judge
         was not satisfied would be available in Bangladesh. Her symptoms on
         receiving that treatment were described as "significantly improved"
         by her consultant at paragraph 20  of  the  decision.  This  had  a
         direct beneficial impact on the second appellant's quality of  life
         and increased her ability to properly participate in caring for her
         child. Thus, the judge's reasoning seems to have been, the  quality
         of family life would be improved by allowing the  second  appellant
         to continue to receive medical treatment at a cost to  the  NHS  in
         the UK.

     15. The problem with the judge's analysis, apart from the fact that  it
         is inconsistent and contradictory, is that the judge ignored  well-
         established case law. Article 3 is only available in "health cases"
         where there were exceptional circumstances. The judge  appeared  to
         recognise this principle  but  then  failed  to  apply  it  in  her
         decision. In particular, the  case  of  N  v  UK  [2008]  ECHR  453
         illustrates that the inability to obtain medication  in  a  foreign
         country will not usually give ground rise to a claim for breach  of
         article 3 of the ECHR. To require a contracting  state  to  provide
         medical treatment to a foreign national placed too much of a burden
         on its resources and it would  only  be  in  the  most  exceptional
         cases, such as the immediate prospect of an  early  death,  that  a
         court or tribunal would be able to treat a failure to  be  able  to
         continue with medical treatment as inhuman and degrading  treatment
         by a contracting state.

     16. As far as article 8 is concerned, this has recently been considered
         a number of cases including Paposhvili v Belgian [2016] ECHR  1113.
         For an article 8 claim to  succeed  there  must  be  some  separate
         additional factual element in the  case  to  bring  it  within  the
         article 8 paradigms. There is a  very  strong  public  interest  in
         ensuring immigration control and the control of the economic  costs
         of healthcare to foreign nationals, which formed part of the public
         interest. This is reinforced by the changes introduced in  Part  5A
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (2002  Act)  by
         the Immigration Act 2014. The maintenance of effective  immigration
         control is in the public interest as is the need  to  ensure  those
         seeking to remain in UK are less of a burden on taxpayers.

     17. I am satisfied that the judge failed to give a  clear  decision  or
         demonstrate that she understood the need to strike a proper balance
         between the appellant's desire healthcare to a  high  standard  and
         the respondent's need to respect the  economic  well-being  of  the
         United Kingdom and the need for  proper  immigration  control  over
         foreign nationals. In this case it's is necessary to set aside  the
         decision as containing material error  of  law,  therefore.  It  is
         therefore necessary to remake a decision.

     18. Standard directions were sent out in November  2018  informing  the
         appellant that in the event that the UT decided it was necessary to
         remake the decision it would do so based on the evidence before the
         FTT. However, either party had the right to  apply  to  adduce  any
         evidence was not before the FTT under rule 15 (2A) of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (U T) Rules 2008. Such an application need to justify why
         such evidence had  not  been  produced  before  the  FTT.  No  such
         application has been made in this case and in the  circumstances  I
         have decided to remake the decision based on  the  evidence  before
         the FTT.

     19. Clearly, applying the above  law,  it  is  necessary  to  strike  a
         balance between the second appellant's need for long-term treatment
         for rheumatoid arthritis and the need to ensure that  those  public
         interest factors discussed above tipped the balance  in  favour  of
         the appellant rather than the respondent.

     20.  First  of  all,  rheumatoid  arthritis  is  a  common   condition,
         particularly among older people. Although I do not  seek  to  decry
         the painfulness of rheumatoid arthritis and the improvement in  the
         appellant's condition by administering appropriate medication,  her
         condition cannot be described as "life-threatening".  However,  her
         consultant states that her long-term condition will deteriorate  as
         a result of not receiving her  current  medication  because  of  an
         increase  in  associated  morbidity  with  a   possible   potential
         reduction in  life  expectancy.  There  is  no  doubt  the  current
         medication improves the quality of the second appellant's life, and
         it is probably correct to say this  will  have  an  impact  on  her
         family life including her ability caring for her child. However, to
         suggest in paragraph 28 of the judge' s decision that if the second
         appellant returned to Bangladesh her child  would  effectively  "be
         deprived of a parent" appears to be without foundation.

     21. Secondly, the appellant was on an experimental form  of  medication
         and there was no guarantee would be available in the long term even
         if she were allowed to stay in the UK.

     22. Thirdly, there was no proper enquiry as to whether such  medication
         would be available in Bangladesh and the onus of proving  that  she
         qualified  on  this  ground  lay  on  the  appellant  not  on   the
         respondent. The judge herself said (at paragraph 23): "the evidence
         is not that the second  appellant  would  have  no  access  to  any
         medication in Bangladesh but rather that she would not have  access
         to the particular medication which she is currently receiving,  and
         which improves her standard and quality of living." The  respondent
         has  asserted  that  suitable  rheumatoid  arthritis  treatment  is
         available in Bangladesh and no evidence has been placed before  the
         UT to contradict that assertion.

     23. Fourthly, there is no  obligation  on  the  UK  to  provide  health
         treatment to foreign nationals. It is no function of article  8  to
         enable foreign nationals to form a private  or  family  life  where
         they wish to. It is not  appropriate  to  carry  out  a  comparison
         between medical facilities available in an advanced Western country
         and a less advanced  eastern  country.  There  may  be  exceptional
         circumstances where  an  applicant  may  qualify  under  article  8
         grounds because of  the  need  for  health  facilities,  but  these
         circumstances do not appear to encompass the circumstances in  this
         case. Essentially, a very strong and compelling claim is  required,
         and it is noteworthy here that the whole family unit to  return  to
         Bangladesh, the country that the first  and  second  appellant  had
         lived in their lives as one family unit. I do not accept  level  of
         disruption consequence upon having to find  alternative  treatments
         in Bangladesh would have a significant  impact  on  the  appellants
         family life in general. There is a mere assertion by the  appellant
         this medical treatment would not be available in Bangladesh.

     24. I am satisfied that the respondent took account of  the  rights  of
         the child, but that child was only two years of age and has not yet
         been absorbed into the UK education system.

     25. I am satisfied that the  respondent's  decision  took  account  all
         relevant factors and therefore that the correct conclusion ought to
         have been that the respondent's decision was in accordance the  law
         and specifically  in  accordance  with  article  8,  the  principal
         article relied upon here.

    Conclusion

     26. The respondent's appeal to the UT is allowed.

    Notice of Decision

    The respondent's appeal to the U T is allowed. I set aside the decision
    of the FTT and remake the decision.

    The decision of the U T is that the appeal FTT on human rights grounds/
    under the immigration rules is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed                              Date 18 January 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury





    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




    Signed                              Date 18 January 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




