

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05963/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 April 2018                       |On 30 April 2018                   |
|                                      |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 AKHTAR ALI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


        1. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  dismissed  Mr  Ali's  appeal
           against the respondent's decision to  refuse  his  human  rights
           claim for reasons set out  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7th
           August 2017 following a hearing on 5th  July  2017  (incorrectly
           recorded on the decision as 5th July 2016).


        2. Mr Ali sought and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
           grounds that it was arguable that the finding that he  had  been
           complicit in ETS fraud was improperly made; that such a  finding
           had adversely materially infected the proportionality assessment
           and the judge had failed to have adequate or any regard  to  the
           respondent's policy as it impacted upon  Mr  Ali's  relationship
           with his British Citizen children.


           Background


        3. Mr Ali, a Pakistani  citizen  date  of  birth  20  August  1975,
           arrived in the UK with  entry  clearance  as  a  student  on  24
           October 2002, valid until 24 January 2004. He  was  subsequently
           granted further periods of leave to remain as a student until 17
           July 2014. On 9 May 2013 he  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
           remain which was revoked on 13 October 2015.


        4. On 14 December 2015 he made an application for leave  to  remain
           on human rights grounds, based upon his private and family life.
           He is married and lives with Uzma Bibi, a Pakistani citizen  who
           at the date of his application had leave to  remain  until  16th
           January 2017 and at the date of hearing  before  the  First-tier
           Tribunal had a pending, in time application to extend her  leave
           to remain. They have 4 children, the oldest  of  whom  (date  of
           birth 1 January 2008) has leave in line with his mother and  the
           three younger children (triplets with a  date  of  birth  of  24
           December 2010) are British Citizens.


        5.  The  application  for  leave  to  remain  was  refused  by  the
           respondent on the grounds, in essence, that he did not meet  the
           suitability requirements of the Immigration Rules  because,  the
           respondent asserted, Mr Ali had submitted a TOEIC certificate of
           which there was significant evidence that it had  been  obtained
           by fraud; he did not meet the eligibility  requirements  because
           his partner had limited leave to remain in the UK, there were no
           very significant obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in  Pakistan
           where he had spent his formative years and his  British  Citizen
           children can remain in the UK with their mother - his wife.


           First-tier Tribunal decision


        6. Relevant extracts from the First-tier Tribunal decision  are  as
           follows:


                12. The generic evidence has, in  the  context  of  judicial
                    review proceedings, been held to justify  a  finding  of
                    the  use  of  a  proxy  and  the  invalidation   of   an
                    individual's test result. Relevant is the context of the
                    results of the test centre in general, for  the  Premier
                    Language Training Centre for 21st March 2012 these  show
                    that 32% of the tests undertaken were declared  invalid.
                    That means that following the procedure set out  in  the
                    Secretary of State's evidence effectively one  third  of
                    the tests taken that day were found to have  been  taken
                    using a  proxy.  It  cannot  be  said  that  these  were
                    isolated incidents and contrasts with Professor French's
                    figure of possibly  2%  false  positives,  there  is  no
                    evidence to show that that figure is unreliable.


                13. ...evidence shows that  even  with  2%  false  positives
                    there was a significant amount  of  malpractice  at  the
                    test centre on the day something  that  the  Appellant's
                    account is entirely silent on and yet it is difficult to
                    see how he could have been unaware of what was going  on
                    even if he was uninvolved. The fact that he attended the
                    test centre does not itself show that he  actually  took
                    the test as evidence from the Panorama programme  showed
                    that individuals would put in their details and stand to
                    one side.


                14.  Many  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  cases  refer   to   the
                    availability of the individual's voice recording. I have
                    not  seen  an  offer  to  the  Appellant  of  his  voice
                    recording but despite the time that he has had available
                    he has not approached the Home Office  or  ETS  directly
                    for a copy of his own tests. His evidence that  he  went
                    and spoke to a receptionist is a one off  event  and  at
                    best that is all he says he did, there is no evidence of
                    correspondence from him to  the  test  centre  or  other
                    bodies and in the circumstances I do  not  accept  that,
                    even he attended, he was given a brush off  or  that  he
                    would have done nothing more about. Given the  potential
                    consequences and the overall circumstances the  lack  of
                    effort on his part is very troubling.


                15. In addition to that there is no independent evidence  of
                    the Appellant's English language ability. He has not, in
                    the years since he was informed that the test result was
                    declared invalid taken  an  English  language  test  not
                    subject to the concerns that surround ETS tests  and  at
                    the hearing did not bring evidence of  his  degree  from
                    university in Pakistan.....


                16. ....The Home Office's evidence has been bolstered by the
                    evidence of Professor French and  I  have  the  printout
                    from the Lookup Tool...


                17. Given the observations above I find that  the  Appellant
                    has  not  discharged  the  evidential  burden  and   the
                    evidence relied on by the Secretary of State  and  taken
                    in the context of the evidence overall  is  sufficiently
                    strong to show that the Appellant used a  proxy  in  the
                    ETS test that was properly declared  invalid  using  the
                    methods that are set out in the evidence  and  discussed
                    at length in the various cases in the Upper Tribunal. In
                    other words the Secretary of State  has  discharged  the
                    burden of proof by providing  cogent  evidence  to  show
                    that the Appellant used deception in the  test  that  he
                    claimed to have taken.


           Error of law


        7. The First-tier Tribunal relied on three  principal  reasons  for
           finding against  Mr  Ali.  Firstly,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Parkes held that there had been a significant level of  cheating
           at the test centre and the appellant could not have been unaware
           of that. In  reaching  this  finding,  there  is  an  underlying
           assumption by the First-tier Tribunal judge that  the  appellant
           was in the same room as that in which the  cheating  took  place
           yet the appellant was not asked about the physical  arrangements
           for the taking  of  the  test  in  this  context.  That  1/3  of
           participants were cheating means that 2/3rds were not, yet  this
           has not been factored in  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
           decision in the context of what would or could be  seen  by  the
           appellant. There does not appear to be an objective  basis  upon
           which a finding could be made that the appellant would have been
           aware of cheating.


        8. Secondly, First-tier Tribunal Parkes makes  an  adverse  finding
           because the appellant did not approach the Home  Office  or  ETS
           for a voice transcript in the years since he had  been  notified
           that the test result was declared invalid (November 2015). Ahsan
           [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 (see paragraph 25), heard on  5th  December
           2017, makes reference to the availability  of  voice  files.  It
           seems that at least by the beginning of August  2016  (paragraph
           29 of Ahsan), it was known that voice files could  be  obtained,
           although it is not clear from Ahsan how easy that process was at
           that time or how that mechanism worked.  Paragraph 22 of SM  and
           Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 229  (IAC),
           heard between 5 February and 7 March 2016, records


                .....Mr Millington testified that to his knowledge the  Home
                Office has at no time requested ETS  to  provide  the  voice
                recordings in respect of any individual. Nor, he added,  has
                the Home Office ever asked for the software used by ETS.  Mr
                Millington explained that during the one day meeting in  the
                United States, ETS made clear its unwillingness to  disclose
                the  software  on  the  ground  that  they   considered   it
                "confidential". We were  informed  mid-trial  that  ETS  had
                communicated its unwillingness to provide any of  the  voice
                recordings, absent judicial compulsion to do so.


           It seems apparent that at the  date  that  Mr  Ali's  indefinite
           leave to remain was revoked and at the  date  he  submitted  his
           appeal against the refusal  of  his  human  rights  claim  (25th
           February 2016) it was  either  not  possible  (without  judicial
           compulsion) or not known that voice  tapes  could  be  obtained.
           Between the date of filing of the appeal and the hearing of  the
           appeal it seems likely that voice tapes may possibly  have  been
           obtained although it does not appear that there was any evidence
           to that effect put before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  by
           the Secretary of State. There was no evidence of  any  offer  of
           tapes being  made  to  the  appellant.  Likewise  there  was  no
           evidence that, in the changed circumstances of the  availability
           of voice tapes that the appellant made enquiries as  to  how  to
           obtain it. But it is difficult to understand  on  what  basis  a
           failure to attempt to obtain something which was  not  available
           could be held adverse to the appellant.


        9. Thirdly, First-tier Tribunal judge Parkes refers to the lack  of
           independent evidence of the appellant's language  ability,  that
           he has not taken a test since his test was declared invalid  and
           he has not produced his degree certificate.


       10. The lack of a further language test certificate is at  best,  in
           the context of this appeal, a neutral factor.  It did  not  form
           part of the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  and  in  any
           event has little bearing on whether the appellant  cheated  some
           five years earlier. The appellant  gave  his  oral  evidence  in
           English and in any event the hearing was some five  years  after
           he claimed to have taken the language test.


       11. The evidence therefore relied upon by First-tier Tribunal  judge
           Parkes to reach an adverse finding is the lack  of  activity  by
           the appellant to do something which  it  was  not  apparent  was
           available until after the appeal had been  filed  together  with
           matters that were not put to him in cross examination and in any
           event amount to speculation that cheating by  1/3  of  examinees
           would have been apparent.


       12. Although plainly the weight  to  be  attached  to  the  evidence
           before it is a matter for the First-tier Tribunal, the  evidence
           has to be such as to be capable of the weight given  to  justify
           the findings. In  this  case  the  evidence  does  not  reach  a
           threshold  that  would  enable  the  necessary  weight   to   be
           attributed to  justify  a  finding  of  deception.  The  generic
           evidence, although significantly bolstered since SM  and  Qadir,
           does not, in the context of this  appellant's  evidence  justify
           the findings made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  that  he
           exercised deception.


       13. The First-tier Tribunal judge materially erred  in  law  in  his
           finding that the appellant had exercised deception. I set  aside
           that finding.


       14. The findings with regard to family life and the  proportionality
           of the decision to refuse Mr Ali's human rights claim  with  the
           consequent likely removal of him from the UK and separation from
           his children were significantly tainted by the finding  that  he
           had practiced deception. It follows those findings cannot  stand
           and I set them aside.


       15. This decision is set aside in  its  entirety  with  no  findings
           preserved. Full consideration of evidence and  fact  finding  is
           required  which  is  a  task  appropriate  for  the   First-tier
           Tribunal. This appeal is therefore remitted  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.


       16. Given the potential evidence available to the appellant  I  have
           no doubt that he will seek to submit further evidence but I make
           no directions in that regard.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard again.




                                    Date 24th April 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
