
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05123/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 9 January 2018                             |On 18 January 2018           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     T N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Colvin ("the FTTJ") promulgated on  1  August  2017,  in
    which she dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal of leave
    to remain on human rights grounds on 3 February 2016.

 2. Given my references  to  appellant's  health,  an  anonymity  order  is
    appropriate.



Background

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on [ ]  1975.  He  entered
    the UK in February 2003 as a student with a  visa  valid  to  September
    2003. This was extended on various occasions until  expiry  in  January
    2008. A further application for  leave  to  remain  as  a  student  was
    refused but allowed on appeal and the appellant  was  granted  a  short
    period of leave to remain in order to make a fresh student application.
     He then applied for further  leave  to  remain,  on  grounds  of  long
    residence, in September 2012. This was  refused  in  October  2013.  He
    applied again in September 2015 for leave to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds and it is the refusal of this latest application which  was  at
    issue on appeal before the FTTJ.

 4. Permission to appeal was refused in the First-tier Tribunal but granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson in the following terms:

         "...


         The appellant primarily appeals on  the  basis  that  Judge  Colvin
         failed to give proper consideration to the  respondent's  error  in
         sending his passport to a  previous  representative  following  his
         appeal being allowed by the Court of Appeal in 2009  which  led  to
         his irregular immigration status.  This  part  of  the  appellant's
         history was  taken  into  account  by  Judge  Colvin  expressly  in
         paragraph 16 in which the original error was noted but it was  also
         found that the appellant then did  nothing  after  2010  about  the
         issue, for example that he  made  any  attempts  to  obtain  a  new
         passport or even contact  the  respondent  to  ensure  he  had  the
         benefit for the further short period of leave to remain granted  in
         2009.  Following an application in  2012  there  was  then  another
         period of over 2 years before any attempt was  made  to  regularise
         his immigration status. This lack of action is not  caused  by  the
         passport error in 2009 and in any event, could not materially  have
         affected the outcome of the appeal. Permission is therefore refused
         on this ground and also on the medical grounds  set  out  on  which
         findings were made by Judge Colvin that he was entitled to reach on
         the evidence before him.


         The appellant's grounds of appeal otherwise set out his immigration
         history and circumstances in the United Kingdom. As part  of  that,
         he encloses a letter that was not before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         from his nephew about dependency and  family  ties  in  the  United
         Kingdom which he did not think was required previously, although he
         did raise the issue of dependence on family in the  United  Kingdom
         during his appeal.


         Judge Colvin found that the appellant was living with family in the
         United Kingdom and that he was financially dependent on  them,  but
         for the purposes of Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
         Rights, found that the appellant had not established family life as
         it did not go beyond the normal emotional ties in a family.   Those
         findings are arguably inconsistent -  living  with  a  sibling  and
         being financially supported by them arguably does go beyond  normal
         emotional ties between adult siblings such that Article  8  may  be
         engaged.  I therefore grant permission to  appeal  on  this  ground
         only, that Judge Colvin arguably erred in law in concluding on  the
         facts found, that the appellant had not established family life  in
         the United Kingdom.


         The First-tier Tribunal's decision arguably contains  an  error  of
         law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal  and  permission
         to appeal is therefore  granted,  limited  to  the  arguable  error
         identified above as to whether the appellant had established family
         life in the United Kingdom for the purposes of Article 8."


Error of Law Submissions

 5. The appellant was not represented at the  hearing  before  me.  He  was
    accompanied  by  his  nephew,  Mr  Rubait  Hussain.   I  explained  the
    proceedings to the appellant and that permission  to  appeal  had  been
    granted on limited grounds.  He confirmed he understood. I  endeavoured
    to ensure that he addressed the relevant issues during the  hearing.  I
    summarised his submissions to ensure that I had understood them and  he
    confirmed that I had done so.


 6. The appellant adopted his detailed grounds for permission to appeal  to
    this tribunal. In summary, insofar as they are relevant to  the  issues
    to be decided pursuant to the grant of permission to appeal,  his  case
    is as follows. The appellant had not been aware, prior to  the  hearing
    before the FTTJ, of the "arguments" on which the respondent would rely;
    the appellant had prepared for the hearing on the  ground  of  "Article
    6".  The FTTJ had found  there  was  no  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    dependence on his sister and family in the UK  yet  the  appellant  had
    sent the respondent, with his application, a letter from his nephew  to
    confirm such dependence. That material was not before the  FTTJ  having
    not been produced by the respondent in her bundle  of  documents.   The
    appellant had various medical conditions which required  emotional  and
    physical support; only his family could provide  this.   The  FTTJ  had
    drawn adverse inference from the  failure  of  the  appellant's  family
    members to attend the hearing but this was due  to  the  absence  of  a
    "respondent's notice" so the appellant had had  "no  idea  about  which
    document to rely on or any witness to bring". The appellant appended to
    his grounds of appeal a further letter from his nephew to evidence  his
    dependence on his family in the UK; that letter was produced after  the
    FTTJ's decision was promulgated.


 7. For the respondent, Mr Tufan submitted the appellant did not fulfil the
    criteria in the Immigration Rules.  Even  if  there  had  been  further
    evidence before the FTTJ of financial dependence, this would  not  have
    materially affected the outcome. The respondent relied  on  AAO  v  ECO
    [2011] EWCA Civ 840 at [35] which referred to Kugathas  v  SSHD  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31, where the only element of  dependency  was  financial.  He
    submitted this was not the case which would change that trend.  Even if
    Article  8  were  engaged,  little  weight  should  be  given  to   the
    appellant's private or family  life,  given  the  appellant's  lack  of
    financial independence  (s117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002). Mr Tufan accepted that a letter had been sent to  the
    respondent by the appellant in support of his application and that this
    had not been included in the respondent's bundle which was  before  the
    FTTJ. He said the absence of this evidence  was  not  material  to  the
    outcome; it did not  demonstrate  ties  beyond  the  norm  between  the
    appellant and his nephew. He noted that financial dependence  had  been
    "amplified" in the grounds to this tribunal. He  submitted  that  these
    suggested the financial dependence of the appellant on his family  here
    amounted to no more than a loan; the appellant saw it as a debt  to  be
    repaid. This undermined his claim to be financially dependent.

 8. In reply, the appellant accepted he had appreciated from the notice  of
    hearing that he could have called witnesses at the hearing  before  the
    FTTJ; he had not however received a copy  of  the  respondent's  bundle
    before  the  hearing;  he  had  not   known   what   the   respondent's
    representative would ask of him; he had not known  what  the  arguments
    would be.  The appellant  had  very  strong  emotional,  financial  and
    practical ties to his family in the  UK:  his  sister,  brother-in-law,
    nephew and the children of the  family.  He  described  his  sister  as
    having raised him.  He submitted that the FTTJ had erred in failing  to
    take account of his close relationship with his family in  the  UK,  on
    whom he was dependent financially and emotionally.



Discussion

 9. There is no challenge to the  FTTJ's  decision  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Thus the appellant did not fulfil the  criteria  in  the  Rules
    insofar as his family and private life was concerned. The issue  to  be
    decided by the FTTJ was whether Article 8 was engaged outside the Rules
    in both respects and whether, if so, the degree  of  interference  with
    the appellant's  protected  rights  was  proportionate  to  the  public
    interest.  The grant of permission to appeal is limited to  the  FTTJ's
    findings as  regards  the  engagement  of  Article  8  insofar  as  the
    appellant's family life is concerned. The FTTJ's brief findings on this
    are at [13].


10.  The  appellant  confirmed  the  FTTJ  had  accurately  summarised  the
    appellant's case at [3] - [6] of her decision.  Those paragraphs  refer
    to the appellant's education in the UK being paid for by his sister. It
    states the appellant "has grown up with his nephew and his  brother-in-
    law takes care of him as his son". The FTTJ noted at [8] the submission
    for the respondent that "The appellant has  had  significant  financial
    assistance whilst in the UK from his sister,  her  husband  and  nephew
    including all student fees. He has been wholly reliant on  this  family
    since ceasing work ... The relationship with his sister in the UK  does
    not amount to family life as there is no  evidence  to  show  emotional
    ties that go beyond the normal emotional ties."  There is no  challenge
    to the findings of the FTTJ at [12] that


         "He has his sister and brother and their families in Bangladesh and
         the family of his brother-in-law with whom he lives in the  UK.  He
         has been financially supported by his  sister,  brother-in-law  and
         nephew whilst in the UK including payment of all his  student  fees
         over a number of years."


11. At [13] the FTTJ finds


         "The appellant has raised the issue of dependency on his sister and
         her family in the UK but there is no evidence to show that there is
         a dependency that goes  beyond  the  normal  emotional  ties  in  a
         family. I therefore do not find that family life  under  Article  8
         outside of the Immigration Rules is engaged."


12. It is implicitly accepted by the FTTJ, as indeed it  had  been  in  the
    respondent's submissions, that there was financial  dependence  between
    the appellant and his family in the UK. This had existed over a  number
    of years; further, the appellant lived with his sister and her  family.
    It is not clear on  what  basis  the  FTTJ  found  that  this  did  not
    constitute family life pursuant to Article 8. She merely asserts "there
    is no evidence to show that there is a dependency that goes beyond  the
    normal emotional ties in a family".   There  is  no  reference  to  the
    authorities on the issue of dependence. There is no assessment  of  the
    appellant's evidence on the issue and the acceptance of the  respondent
    that there was financial dependence should  have  caused  the  FTTJ  to
    carry out such an assessment.  It is not clear from  the  decision  why
    the FTTJ rejected the appellant's case that he had a family life in the
    UK with his sister and other members of the family on whom  he  claimed
    to be financially and emotionally dependent.


13. The FTTJ's assessment of the evidence  as  to  whether  Article  8  was
    engaged in respect of the appellant's family life is inadequate as  are
    her findings on the  issue.  Furthermore,  they  are,  on  their  face,
    inconsistent for the reasons set out in  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal. They have  not  been  fully  reasoned  and  are  therefore  not
    sustainable. The FTTJ has erred in law insofar as  her  assessment  and
    findings are concerned.

14. I turn to the issue of materiality.

15. I have been referred to the additional evidence which has been  adduced
    by the appellant, his two letters from his nephew  dated  16  September
    2015 and 15 August 2017. Mr Tufan accepted  that  the  first  of  these
    should have been before the FTTJ, yet was not.  The  FTTJ  should  have
    taken it into account. I therefore take it into account in  considering
    the issue of materiality.

16. The appellant asserts he did not know the respondent's case or what had
    been expected of him at the hearing. I do not accept this: he had  seen
    the reasons for refusal and this makes clear the reasons for refusal of
    leave to remain on human rights grounds: the appellant did not meet the
    criteria in Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.  The  respondent  did  not
    consider there were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    reintegration on return to Bangladesh. The respondent also stated, with
    regard to the issue of whether there were exceptional circumstances the
    following:


         "We have considered whether your application raises any exceptional
         circumstances  relating  to  yourself,  any  dependants   on   your
         application, or any wider family members, which consistent with the
         right to respect for private and family life contained in Article 8
         of the European Convention on Human Rights, might warrant  a  grant
         of leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside  the  requirements
         of the Immigration Rules".


17. Furthermore, the appellant had provided the respondent, in  support  of
    his application, the evidence of his nephew with regard to  his  family
    life in the UK, including the history of financial support from  family
    members. This suggests the appellant was aware this was at issue at the
    time of application.  It can be reasonably inferred that the  appellant
    would have appreciated that the same issues were to be decided  by  the
    FTTJ.  Whilst the appellant told me he had not received a copy  of  the
    respondent's bundle, that bundle was very limited. I am unable to  find
    that the appellant was disadvantaged by the absence of the respondent's
    bundle.  He has not referred me to  any  evidence  or  other  material,
    apart from the  letter  from  his  nephew  cited  above,  held  by  the
    respondent, which would have impacted on the outcome of the appeal.


18. I now deal with the second letter from the appellant's nephew, dated 15
    August 2017. This was provided by the appellant  with  his  grounds  of
    appeal to this tribunal. It was not before the FTTJ: it did  not  exist
    at the date of hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  This  is  therefore
    new evidence.  Reliance on fresh evidence to establish the existence of
    a mistake of fact is covered by  the  principles  in  Ladd  v  Marshall
    [1954[ 3 All ER 745, although these principles might be  departed  from
    in exceptional cases where the interests of justice require,  according
    to  R v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982. The principles in Ladd v Marshall are
    (i) the new evidence could not  with  reasonable  diligence  have  been
    obtained for use at the trial; (ii) the new evidence must be such that,
    if given, it would probably have had  an  important  influence  on  the
    result of the case (though it need not be decisive) and (iii)  the  new
    evidence  was   apparently   credible   although   it   need   not   be
    incontrovertible.

19. The evidence of the appellant's nephew in his letter of 15 August  2017
    is largely repetition of earlier evidence in his letter of 16 September
    2015, save that it is more detailed and addresses the adverse  findings
    of the FTTJ as regards the appellant's family  life.   It  is  evidence
    which could have been obtained by the appellant prior  to  the  hearing
    before the FTTJ.  The appellant states that he did not call his  nephew
    or other family members to give oral evidence at the hearing before the
    FTTJ because he did not know what issues would  be  addressed  at  that
    hearing. I do not accept that submission for the reasons set out above.



20. As regards the issue of materiality, it is highly relevant  that  there
    is no challenge, before me, to the findings of the FTTJ as regards  the
    appellant's status pursuant  to  the  Immigration  Rules;  Appendix  FM
    insofar as his family life is concerned and paragraph 276ADE insofar as
    his private life is concerned. He does not meet  the  criteria  in  the
    Rules.

21. Article 8 provides:


         "(1). Everyone has the right to respect for his private and  family
         life, his home and his correspondence.


         (2)      There shall be no interference by a public authority  with
         the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the
         law and is necessary in a democratic society in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others."


22. In Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 the House of  Lords  set  out  five  steps  to
    follow in determining Article 8 outside of the Rules: (i)  Does  family
    life, private life, home or correspondence exist within the meaning  of
    Article 8?  (ii) If so, has or will the right to respect for this  been
    interfered with?  (iii) If so, is the interference in  accordance  with
    the law?  (iv) If so, is the interference in  pursuit  of  one  of  the
    legitimate aims set out in  Article  8(2)?;  and  (v)  If  so,  is  the
    interference  proportionate to the pursuit of the legitimate aim?

23. The threshold which has to be crossed for a finding that Article  8  is
    engaged, at  the  first  Razgar  stage,  is  not  especially  high  (AG
    (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 801).

24. In Kugathas v SSHD [2003] INLR 170 the Court of Appeal  said  that,  in
    order to establish family life, it is necessary to show that there is a
    real committed or effective support or relationship between the  family
    members and the normal emotional ties between a mother and an adult son
    (as was the issue in that case) would not, without more, be enough.


25. In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy)  [2012]  UKUT  00160
    (IAC) the Tribunal said that a review of  the  jurisprudence  discloses
    that there is no general  proposition  that  Article  8  can  never  be
    engaged when the family life it is sought to establish is between adult
    siblings living together. Rather than  applying  a  blanket  rule  with
    regard to adult children, each case  should  be  analysed  on  its  own
    facts, to decide whether or not family life exists, within the  meaning
    of Article 8(1).  Whilst some generalisations are possible, each  case
    is fact-sensitive.


26. In the present  case,  the  evidence  before  the  FTTJ  was  that  the
    appellant was aged 40. He came to the UK at  the  age  of  27.  He  was
    married in Bangladesh and had a daughter there (albeit he  was  not  in
    contact with her). He has adult siblings in Bangladesh.  His sister had
    moved to the UK when the appellant  was  little  (paragraph  5  of  the
    FTTJ's decision refers).

27. The appellant came to the  UK  as  an  adult  student  and  would  have
    appreciated that he would be expected to leave the UK at the end of his
    studies.  The appellant's studies in the UK were funded by  his  sister
    in the UK. This, without more, is not indicative of family life because
    it is common for a foreign student's studies to be funded by  a  family
    member.  At the time this  arrangement  was  put  in  place  the  adult
    siblings were living in different countries.    I  do  not  accept  the
    submission of the appellant before me that his sister had "raised" him.
     This submission is not consistent with the appellant's  sister  having
    come to the UK when he was little. Nor is it consistent with his having
    lived independently in Bangladesh as an adult.   There  was  no  family
    life between the appellant and  his  adult  sister  at  the  time  this
    financial arrangement came into being.  The  appellant  has  previously
    worked in the UK. While the evidence on the issue is not detailed, this
    appears to have been at a  time  when  the  appellant  was  here  as  a
    student.  His current inability to work appears to result from his lack
    of immigration status and perhaps his poor health.   The  existence  of
    financial dependence is not  therefore,  without  more,  indicative  of
    family life.

28. In his grounds of appeal to this tribunal the appellant states that his
    family in the UK has supported him financially and he has  "accumulated
    quite a good amount of debt". This is not evidence which was before the
    FTTJ and I do not take  it  into  account  in  the  assessment  of  the
    materiality of the FTTJ's error in the assessment as to whether Article
    8 is engaged by the respondent's decision. Rather, I adopt the findings
    of the FTTJ that the  appellant  is  financially  dependent  on  family
    members in the UK.

29. There is very little information about the children of the  appellant's
    extended  family.  While   their   best   interests   are   a   primary
    consideration, there is no evidence that they would come to any harm or
    would suffer any detriment in the event of the  appellant's  return  to
    Bangladesh. That said, they would,  undoubtedly  miss  him.   There  is
    insufficient evidence for a finding that the  appellant  has  a  caring
    role in relation to the children.  Nonetheless, it  is  in  their  best
    interests for their family environment to remain stable  and  unchanged
    with the appellant continuing to live in the family home.

30. The appellant's relationship with his  sister,  brother-in-law,  nephew
    and the children has only developed into a close one since his  arrival
    in this country at the age of 27, his  sister  having  previously  come
    here when he was little.  There  is  scant  evidence  as  to  how  that
    development has taken place: for example, where he has lived since  his
    arrival in the UK and whether solely with his family. The  evidence  is
    that he has worked in this country in the past  but  it  is  not  clear
    whether he lived with his sister or other members of the  family  while
    doing so.  The appellant's sister and brother-in-law did not give  oral
    evidence before the FTTJ. Their perspective of the relationship is  not
    known.

31. The letter from the appellant's nephew of 16 September 2015 adds little
    to the evidence already before the FTTJ: it refers to  the  appellant's
    living  with  family,  having  a  close  family  relationship  and  the
    existence of financial support, issues which are not in dispute.

32. This is a case which is marked by a  paucity  of  evidence  before  the
    FTTJ.  The burden of proving  Article  8  is  engaged  rests  with  the
    appellant. While the threshold is  not  an  especially  high  one,  the
    evidence before the FTTJ was very limited.   It is not in dispute  that
    the appellant lives with his adult sibling and  other  members  of  his
    family in the UK and is financially  dependent  on  them;  this  is  an
    arrangement which is both historical and has resulted from his lack  of
    immigration status, his inability to  earn  a  living  and  his  health
    issues.  Notwithstanding  the  family's  financial  commitment  to  the
    appellant's studies, their current financial  support  is  a  temporary
    arrangement brought about by the appellant's inability to work.  It  is
    not one which would continue were the appellant to be granted leave  to
    remain: his history of working in the UK suggests that  he  would  work
    here and live independently if permitted to do so.  Such a  finding  is
    consistent with his having lived independently in the past, having been
    married and fathered a child of his own.  Payment  of  the  appellant's
    tuition fees was an arrangement which was initiated while the appellant
    was living in Bangladesh and not within his sibling's family unit.  The
    family members are undoubtedly close but this is consistent with  their
    living in the same household and the appellant's inability to work  and
    his current reliance on his family for financial support.

33. The very limited evidence is not sufficient for a  finding  of  a  bond
    between family members which is over  and  above  the  norm  for  adult
    siblings, nephew and small children.  Rather, theirs is a  relationship
    which has developed over time as a result of proximity  and  necessity.
    Even given that background,  the  evidence  is  not  sufficient  for  a
    finding of real and committed ties over and above the  norm  for  adult
    siblings and their families.  The  evidence  suggests  that,  were  the
    appellant able to work, he  would  live  independently  as  he  did  in
    Bangladesh before his arrival in this country.  The  evidence  suggests
    the current arrangement is no more than a temporary one  brought  about
    by the appellant's current immigration and  health  situation.  As  was
    said in MM (Article 8 - family life - dependency) Zambia  [2007]  UKAIT
    00040 the assessment is one to be made in the round, taking account  of
    past, present  and  likely  future  circumstances:  the  fact  that  an
    appellant is economically dependent on adult children (as in that case)
    whilst in the United Kingdom under immigration conditions which prevent
    her from working was not determinative of the question of  whether  she
    was in a position of real dependency.

34. For these reasons, there is no material error  of  law  in  the  FTTJ's
    decision. It must stand.

35. Even if Article 8 were engaged, the interference with  the  appellant's
    and his family's protected rights is in accordance with the law,  being
    in accordance with the Immigration Rules.   The public interest factors
    in s117A-s117D of the 2002 Act include a provision that the maintenance
    of effective immigration control is in the public interest  (s117B(1)).
     The  appellant  speaks  English  (s117B(2));  he  is  not  financially
    independent, being dependent on his family in  the  UK  (s117B(3));  he
    would be a burden on the taxpayer were he to  remain  in  the  UK.  His
    financial dependence would impact on  his  ability  to  integrate  into
    society.

36. The appellant's personal circumstances are summarized at [3] -  [5]  of
    the FTTJ's decision and unchallenged by the  appellant.  The  appellant
    has medical issues which have been resolved  but  he  continues  to  be
    monitored in respect of his hepatitis and his hips.  He has  family  in
    Bangladesh. His dependence on his family in the  UK  has  developed  at
    least in part as a result of his illness. He is now  at  the  stage  of
    being monitored, rather than receiving intervention treatment. Thus his
    dependence on his family for practical support will reduce over time.

37. The appellant's sister has paid for his education here.  He lives  with
    family in the UK. He has a very  close  relationship  with  all  family
    members.  The appellant came to the UK as a student at the age  of  27;
    he is now aged 40.   He has only ever been granted (apart from a  short
    period which was granted to enable him to re-apply as a student)  leave
    to remain as a student. His  ties  with  his  family  in  the  UK  have
    developed in the knowledge of the adult parties that he would  have  to
    leave the UK once his leave to remain  expired.  Neither  they  nor  he
    could have had any expectation of his being granted leave to remain  on
    any other basis.

38. In assessing proportionality, regard should be had to the  interference
    with the protected rights of the appellant's family members.  There  is
    little evidence on the issue. In his letter of 16  September  2015  the
    appellant's nephew gives no evidence as to the impact on family members
    of the appellant's return. This includes the  children  of  the  family
    whose best interests are a primary consideration.  There is no evidence
    of detriment to the children as a result of the appellant's  return  to
    Bangladesh.  That said the appellant has a close relationship with  all
    family members including the children. They would miss him  on  return,
    as would other family members.  The children live  with  their  parents
    who would continue to support them on the  appellant's  departure  from
    the UK; there is no evidence he has a caring role in the lives  of  the
    children. According to the appellant's nephew, the appellant  is  "very
    generous and affectionate towards them ... regularly spend[s] time with
    them and buys them gifts and presents at special occasions".   It would
    be in the best interests of the children  for  the  status  quo  to  be
    maintained.

39. The nature of the bond between the appellant and his family in  the  UK
    is relevant to the issue of proportionality.  He is a man of  40  whose
    health has stabilized, albeit  it  requires  monitoring.  There  is  no
    evidence that he could not receive  appropriate  monitoring  and,  when
    required, treatment in Bangladesh, paragraph 15 of the FTTJ's  decision
    refers).  While the appellant told the FTTJ his  family  in  Bangladesh
    (he has a sister, brother  and  daughter  there)  would  not  help  him
    financially, the evidence suggests his family in the UK would  continue
    to support him financially as they  have  done  here.  The  FTTJ  found
    accordingly at [12] and that finding is sustainable on the evidence.

40. The appellant's financial dependence on his  family  in  the  UK  could
    continue on return to Bangladesh.  Contact can be maintained  by  means
    of the internet, telephone calls and visits by family from  the  UK  to
    Bangladesh.  Significant weight should be given to the appellant's lack
    of immigration status and his failure  to  meet  the  criteria  in  the
    Immigration Rules.  The maintenance of effective immigration control is
    in the public interest: the appellant's  leave  to  remain  expired  in
    January 2008 (although he was  permitted  a  short  further  period  of
    remain  to  apply  for  further  leave  as  a  student);  his   further
    application for leave to remain as a student was refused and he has not
    had leave to remain since. His applications  for  leave  to  remain  on
    grounds of long residence  and  human  rights  grounds  were  similarly
    refused.  There are not very significant obstacles to  his  integration
    on return to Bangladesh (paragraph 12 of  the  FTTJ's  decision).   The
    appellant is not financially independent.


41. For these reasons, even if Article 8 were engaged, the public  interest
    outweighs the degree of interference in the appellant's and his  family
    members' family lives.

42. Irrespective of the error of law in the  FTTJ's  decision,  the  appeal
    would have been dismissed in any event.   The  error  of  law  was  not
    material to the outcome.

Decision

43. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law, as set out above.


44. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appeal. That decision stands.

45. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed      A M Black                        Date 17 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      A M Black                        Date 17 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black







