
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/05742/2015
                                                               HU/05745/2015
                                                               HU/05750/2015
                                                               HU/05756/2015
                                                               HU/05763/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th January 2018                          |On 22nd February 2018         |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Noor [A] (first Appellant)
                       Shamima [S] (second Appellant)
                         Alif [M] (third Appellant)
                        Salmon [M (fourth Appellant)
                           [I T] (fifth Appellant)
                          (NO aNONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe
For the Respondents:   Mr Taj Shah, instructed by Taj Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but for the purposes of this appeal I shall refer to the  parties
    as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal, that is  Mr  [A]
    and his family as the appellants and the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.  The Secretary of State challenges the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Metzer who on 10th April 2017 allowed  the  appeals
    of the appellants under Article 8 save for the  fifth  appellant  whose
    appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.  The  first  two  appellants
    are husband and wife born on [ ] 1961 and  [  ]  1970  and  the  third,
    fourth  and  fifth  appellants  are  the  children  of  the  first  two
    appellants.  Those children were born on [ ] 1992 and [ ] 1994 and [  ]
    2005 respectively.  They appealed  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  It should be  noted  that  the  third  and
    fourth appellants are the adult sons of the  first  appellant  and  yet
    their claim was considered  and  has  been  considered  together.   The
    decision under challenge by the first, second and fifth appellant was a
    composite decision for all three appellants dated  2nd  September  2015
    and there was two separate decisions made with respect to the third and
    fourth appellants also dated 2nd September 2015.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed on the following grounds

      1) the judge had failed to give adequate reasons.  He failed  to  give
         consideration to the possibility of  the  appellants  returning  to
         Bangladesh as a family unit and allowed the appeal primarily on the
         basis of the fifth appellant's  "Section  55  rights".   There  was
         inadequate reasoning; the fifth  appellant  was  still  in  primary
         school and was unlikely to have developed  a  strong  private  life
         outside her immediate family structure.  It was submitted it  would
         not be unreasonable or unduly harsh for her to return to Bangladesh
         where she speaks Bengali, as found at paragraph 10  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal decision and she would benefit from the emotional and
         financial support provided by the  wider  family.   The  children's
         interests were not a trump  card.   The  judge  had  erred  in  his
         approach by failing to look at the evidence holistically and giving
         adequate weight to the public interest in maintaining  a  fair  and
         effective immigration system;

      2) There was a material misdirection of law.  The judge considered the
         two adult sons as dependants.  They  were  aged  21  and  23  years
         respectively and therefore should be treated as adults and had  not
         shown any element of enhanced dependency upon their father over and
         above normal emotional ties. The judge had  not  appeared  to  have
         considered that as adults there was no reason why  they  could  not
         return to Bangladesh independently.  They were  educated  and  have
         good prospects of finding work.   In  the  alternative  they  could
         assist and contribute financially to the wider family if they  were
         removed as a unit.  There was no reason why family members  in  the
         UK who support the appellants financially could not continue to  do
         so and the judge had failed to  examine  this  as  an  option  thus
         rendering the proportionality assessment flawed.  Four of the  five
         appellants as adults would be eligible  to  work  and  provide  for
         themselves more independently.

      3) It is submitted that a balancing exercise  had  not  been  properly
         performed and the judge had failed to address Section 117B and  the
         public interest in  maintaining  immigration  control.   The  judge
         found that the family had not been a burden on the taxpayers  while
         in the UK unlawfully and yet already noted  at  paragraph  10  they
         have all registered with the NHS, GPs and dentists  and  access  in
         care to which they were not entitled.

      4) The judge failed to consider that Section 117B provided that little
         weight should be given to a private life established whilst in  the
         UK.  It was submitted that aside from their first year together  in
         the UK from 2008 to 2009 the whole of their stay in the UK had been
         unlawful.   Any  private  life  had  been  developed  in  the  full
         knowledge of this.  Further the  appellants  gave  evidence  via  a
         Sylheti interpreter and the first appellant  spoke  little  English
         despite having resided in the UK for thirteen years.  Had the judge
         undertaken a proper balancing exercise he would not have arrived at
         the conclusion that he did.

Error of Law

 4. The circumstances are that  the  first  appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 13th September 2003 on a visit visa and  was  then  granted
    permission to take employment and had  lawful  leave  to  remain  until
    August 2009.  On 20th January 2008 his wife and three  children  joined
    him as his dependants and had lawful leave to remain until August 2009.
     The appellant sought an extension for leave in August 2009 as  a  work
    permit holder but was refused and has made further  applications  which
    were refused but he accepted he has had no  further  leave  to  remain.
    None of these appellants have had leave to remain.  The fifth appellant
    the first appellant's daughter arrived in the United Kingdom, she was 2
    years old and by the time of the appeal was 8 years and 9 months.   The
    two sons entered the United Kingdom when they  were  15  and  13  years
    respectively.

 5. Despite Mr Shah's valiant attempts at the hearing to persuade  me  that
    the decision was sound, in that the judge had  applied  MA  Pakistan  v
    SSSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705,  I  conclude  that  the  objections  to  the
    decision raised by the  Secretary  of  State  have  force.   A  further
    Robinson obvious point is that the fifth appellant cannot appeal  under
    the immigration grounds and her appeal  was  on  human  rights  grounds
    only.  Her appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.  That avenue
    of appeal has been amended and appeal under the Immigration  Rules  was
    not open to the appellant. That the fifth appellant may  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules  would have an impact  of  the  assessment  under
    Article 8 but depends on whether as at the date  of  application  under
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) she had lived continuously in the UK for at  least
    seven years and it would not be reasonable to expect her to  leave  the
    UK.  Both those provisions needed to be satisfied and the  question  of
    whether it was reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the  UK  was
    not adequately reasoned by the judge.  Despite the ability of the fifth
    appellant to be able to satisfy on the  face  of  it  paragraph  276ADE
    (iv), (apart from the lack  of  reasoning  regarding  reasonability  of
    removal) the judge made no attempt to apply Section 117B as a whole and
    that in my view is a material error of law.  It is clear  that  Section
    117B(1)  to  (5)  applies  to  adults  and  children  equally.  I  have
    highlighted the above where in the section  that  is  made  plain.  The
    statutory provision clearly makes no exception for  children.  Further,
    the judge failed  to  address  the  fact  that  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants were adults and has merely treated them as dependants of the
    first appellant.  I thus find errors of law which were material to  the
    decision.

Conclusions

 6. I advised the parties that I concluded that the  Secretary  of  State's
    assertion that there was an error of law was indeed  made  out  because
    the judge had failed to apply Section 117 in its  entirety  as  he  was
    obliged to do and failed to give adequate reasoning  as  to  why  there
    were no countervailing reasons that the family could not  return.   The
    judge also indicated that the  fifth  appellant  succeeded  within  the
    Immigration Rules  and  the  other  appellants  succeeded  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  It was clear that as the  decisions  were  made  in
    September 2015 the only appeal to be considered  was  on  human  rights
    grounds.  Whether the applicant  can  succeed  within  the  Immigration
    Rules may have an effect  on  the  proportionality  and  the  balancing
    exercise to be undertaken with respect to  Article  8  but  it  is  not
    determinative of the appeal.

 7. In conclusion I invited  any  further  evidence  and  received  only  a
    document in relation to the transfer of the youngest child to secondary
    school.  I preserved the evidence recorded by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and will draw on that in my consideration of this appeal.

 8. I incorporate the previous findings of the judge into my decision

         2. 'The first Appellant gave evidence  with  the  assistance  of  a
             Bengali  (Sylheti  dialect)  interpreter.   He  confirmed  the
             contents of his witness statement dated  27  March  2017  were
             true.

         3. In summary, he confirmed he entered the  United  Kingdom  on  13
             September  2003  on  a  visit  visa.   He  was  then   granted
             permission to take employment and had lawful leave  to  remain
             until August 2009.  On 20 January 2008,  his  wife  and  three
             children joined him as his dependants and had lawful leave  to
             remain until the same time.

         4. The Appellant sought an extension for leave in August 2009 as  a
             work permit holder  but  was  refused  and  has  made  further
             applications but accepted he had no further leave  to  remain.
             The fifth Appellant, the first Appellant's  daughter,  arrived
             in the United Kingdom when she was two years old and  has  now
             lived in the United Kingdom for eight years, nine months.  His
             two sons are now aged twenty-three and twenty-one  years  old.
             The Appellant's daughter is in full-time education at Crowland
             Primary School and has made many friends and classmates.   She
             is progressing well.  She has very little recollection of  her
             time and life in Bangladesh.  She speaks English and does  not
             speak Bengali fluently.

         5. The first Appellant has no network of support in Bangladesh  and
             has been in the United Kingdom  for  thirteen  years.   Before
             that he worked in a medicine factory in Bangladesh  and  lived
             in rented accommodation.  His parents are  now  deceased.   He
             has one sister who is a British citizen who provides  for  the
             family financially.

         6. In oral evidence, the Appellant confirmed that  his  family  are
             close and loving and all live together.  His  sister  and  her
             husband live with  one  child.   She  looks  after  the  whole
             family.  The Appellant when he was able to work was a chef and
             believes he could continue  to  do  so  and  also  potentially
             obtain retain jobs.

         7. In cross-examination, the  first  Appellant  stated  he  reached
             intermediate level at college in  basic  subjects  and  speaks
             little English.  When he worked in Bangladesh in the  medicine
             factory he was packaging products in a production  department.
             He has no previous retail experience.

         8. The Appellant confirmed that he had been in the  United  Kingdom
             since 2003 and has no one  in  Bangladesh.   There  is  a  job
             crisis in Bangladesh and he does not believe he would be  able
             to get work given his age were he to return.  Whereas  in  the
             United Kingdom,  he  considered  the  opportunities  would  be
             available particularly  in  Indian  restaurants.   His  sister
             cooks for the family and he does not know how much she  spends
             on them as she would pay for the shopping and  groceries  from
             her own money.

         9. The Appellant also has a sister-in-law in the United Kingdom who
             they visit once every one to two years and when they do so she
             would give gifts and some money to help them and for  the  Eid
             festival.

         10.      The first Appellant confirmed nobody would be able to help
             in Bangladesh.  He  has  a  brother-in-law  and  mother-in-law
             there but they live in  a  rented  very  small  flat  and  his
             brother-in-law has a very low income.   The  fifth  Appellant,
             the first Appellant's daughter has spoken  English  since  the
             age of two and talks to them in both English and Bengali.  She
             does not receive free meals.  The family are now registered on
             the NHS with a GP and a dentist.

         11.      Witness statements from  the  second,  third  and  fourths
             Appellants all dated 27 March 2017 were adopted  and  largely
             repeated what  was  contained  within  the  first  Appellant's
             statement and oral evidence.

         12.      There  was  also  a  supporting  letter  from  Mrs  Marzia
             Sultana, the first Appellant's sister confirming that she is a
             British and has looked after the Appellants who live with  her
             in her accommodation and  she  provides  them  with  financial
             support and has formed  close  relationships  with  the  whole
             family.

         13.       There  were  also  supporting  letters  from  the  second
             Appellant's sister who is also a British citizen and  evidence
             in respect of  the  fifth  Appellant's  attendance  at  school
             showing good school reports as well as evidence concerning the
             third and fourth Appellants showing their  qualifications  and
             examinations passed which include some impressive  results  in
             various diplomas particularly concerning the fourth  Appellant
             but also in regard to the third Appellant.   There  were  also
             character  references  from  various  friends  of  the   first
             Appellant'.

 9. I turn to consideration of the fifth appellant, the youngest  daughter.
    I set out paragraph 276ADE for clarification

    'Requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of private life

    276ADE (1).  The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
                  remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that
                  at the date of application, the applicant:

                  (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
                      Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to  S-
                      LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and

                  (ii) has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on
                      the grounds of private life in the UK; and

                  (iii)      has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least
                      20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or



                  (iv)  is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has   lived
                      continuously  in  the  UK  for  at  least   7   years
                      (discounting any period of imprisonment) and it would
                      not be reasonable to expect the  applicant  to  leave
                      the UK; or

                  (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and  has
                      spent at least half of his life  living  continuously
                      in the UK (discounting any period  of  imprisonment);
                      or

                  (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is  aged  18  years  or
                      above, has lived continuously in the UK for less than
                      20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
                      there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
                      applicant's integration into the country to which  he
                      would have to go if required to leave the UK'.

10. The application for leave to remain was  made  on  6th  May  2015.   As
    accepted by the decision letter the fifth  appellant  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 20th January 2008 and it was accepted  that  she  had
    resided here for seven years and  seven  months  by  the  date  of  the
    application.  It was not accepted however that it would be unreasonable
    to expect her to leave the United Kingdom as she would be returning  to
    Bangladesh within a family unit with her parents and siblings where  it
    was concluded that she would have the necessary  support  available  to
    her to assist her integrating into the Bangladesh community and  assist
    her with any language issues.  Within the policy guidance which was  in
    force as at the date of the  decision  in  September  2015,  namely  an
    Immigration Directorate  Instruction  Family  Migration,  at  paragraph
    11.2.4 it states with regards reasonability of removal of a non-British
    child from the UK, as follows

         "The requirement that a non-British citizen child has lived in  the
         UK for a continuous period of at least the seven years  immediately
         preceding the  date  of  application,  recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to  the  extent  that  being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
         unreasonable.  The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it  being  unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and  strong  reasons  will  be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence  of
         more than seven years.

         The  decision  maker  must  consider  whether,  in   the   specific
         circumstances of the case, it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to live in another country.

         The decision maker must consider the facts relating to  each  child
         in the UK and the family individually, and also  consider  all  the
         facts relating to the family as a whole.  The decision maker should
         also engage with any  specific  issues  explicitly  raised  by  the
         family, by each child on behalf of each child.

         Relevant considerations are likely to include

         (a)      whether there would be significant  risk  to  the  child's
             health ...

         (b)      whether the child would  be  leaving  the  UK  with  their
             parents ...

         (c)      the extent of wider family ties in the UK ...

         (d)      whether the child is likely  to  be  able  to  reintegrate
             readily  into  life  in  another  country.   Relevant  factors
             include:

             .   whether the parents and/or child  are  a  citizen  of  the
                  country and so are able to enjoy the full rights of  being
                  a citizen in that country;

             .   whether the parents and/or child have lived in or  visited
                  the country before for periods of more than a  few  weeks.
                  The question here is whether, having visited or  lived  in
                  the country, before, the child would  be  better  able  to
                  adapt, and/or the parents would be  able  to  support  the
                  child in adapting, to life in the country;

             .   whether the parents and/or child have existing  family  or
                  social ties with the country.  A person who  has  extended
                  family or a network of friends in the  country  should  be
                  able to rely on  them  for  support  to  help  reintegrate
                  there;

             .   whether the parents and/or child  have  relevant  cultural
                  ties with the country.  The caseworker must  consider  any
                  evidence of exposure to, and a level of understanding  of,
                  the cultural norms of the country.  For example, a  period
                  of time spent living mainly amongst a  diaspora  from  the
                  country may give a child an awareness of  the  culture  of
                  the country;

             .   whether the parents and/or child can speak, read and write
                  in a language of that country, or are  likely  to  achieve
                  this within a reasonable  time  period.   Fluency  is  not
                  required - an ability  to  communicate  competently  with
                  sympathetic interlocutors would normally suffice;

             .   whether the child has  attended  school  in  that  country



         (e)      any country specific information, including  as  contained
             in relevant country guidance

         (f)      other specific factors raised  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
             child.

         Parents or children may highlight the differences in the quality of
         education, health and the wider public services or in  economic  or
         social opportunities between the UK and the country of  return  and
         argue that these would work against the best interests of the child
         if they do leave the UK and live in that country.   Other  than  in
         exceptional circumstances, this will not  normally  be  a  relevant
         consideration, particularly if the parents or wider family have the
         means or resources to support the child on return  or  the  skills,
         education or training to provide for their family on return  or  if
         assisted    voluntary     return     support     is     available".



11. With the above evidence in mind I note  that  the  youngest  child  and
    fifth appellant has now lived in the UK for nine years. Following Azimi-
    Moayed and others decision affecting  children  onward  appeals  [2013]
    UKUT, I accept that with regards children seven years from the age of 4
    is likely to be more significant to a child than the first seven  years
    of their life but in the circumstances of the family as a  whole  I  am
    not persuaded that the fifth appellant cannot  reasonably  relocate  to
    Bangladesh. There would appear to be no significant risk to her health,
    she would be leaving  the  UK  with  her  parents  and  brothers  whose
    applications, for the reasons  given  below,  cannot  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules.  The parents and child  and  her  brothers  are  all
    citizens of Bangladesh and able to  enjoy  the  full  rights  of  being
    citizens in that country and have access to that culture and education.
     The parents are clearly familiar with  the  culture  and  language  of
    Bangladesh and indeed evidence was given that the fifth appellant talks
    in both English and Bengali.  I am not persuaded the parents and  child
    have no relevant cultural ties with Bangladesh (or indeed  family)  and
    certainly conclude that as the language of Bengali has been  spoken  at
    home and it is clear that the parents are familiar  with  the  language
    and culture in Bangladesh, there is exposure to and an awareness of the
    culture of Bangladesh by the fifth appellant.

12. I appreciate that the  fifth  appellant  has  not  attended  school  in
    Bangladesh and has  now  transferred  into  secondary  school  but  the
    information from the school indicated that she  is  obviously  a  child
    without any special needs and indeed showed good school  reports  which
    suggested that she would be adaptable on return to  Bangladesh  to  the
    education system which is clearly available  there.  Although  she  has
    been in full-time education at Crowland  Primary  School  and  has  now
    transferred to secondary school and has made friends and classmates and
    may recall little of her time and life spent in Bangladesh, she will be
    returning with her family unit of parents and  two  brothers.   It  was
    confirmed in the oral evidence that the family are close and  all  live
    together.

13. I appreciate that the standard of education and  the  standard  of  the
    health facilities may not be of a similar standard in Bangladesh as  in
    the United Kingdom but I do find that the best interests of the  child
    would be to return to Bangladesh with her  whole  family  even  if  her
    educational best interests are to remain in the UK with her family.   I
    find that the  third  and  fourth  appellant  cannot  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules and are assessed as independent adults and the  fifth
    appellant would be deprived of their close family  relationship  should
    she remain here without them.

14. As such I am not persuaded that the fifth  appellant  can  comply  with
    paragraph 276ADE(iv).  Even if the fifth appellants best interests  are
    to remain in the United Kingdom for the reasoning given above I am  not
    persuaded that it is not reasonable to expect the child to relocate  to
    Bangladesh.

15. I turn to consideration of the fourth appellant, he is now 23 years old
    and entered the United Kingdom when he was 17 years old.  Although like
    his brother who was subject to a separate  decision  he  cannot  comply
    with paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) because although he is under the age of  25
    years he has not spent half his life living continuously in the  United
    Kingdom and nor has he lived in the UK for twenty years.  Similarly his
    brother entered the United Kingdom in January  2008.   He  entered  the
    United Kingdom when he was 13, some nine years ago (less than half  his
    life) and therefore he too cannot comply with paragraph  276ADE(v).  At
    present both brothers live as a family  unit  with  both  the  brothers
    hoping to go to college.

16. I turn to consideration of the parents in respect  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and note that they cannot comply with paragraph 276ADE as neither
    has lived in the United Kingdom for twenty years and  on  the  evidence
    there are no significant obstacles to their return to Bangladesh.   The
    father has worked their previously and has had work experience  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The parents have each other and can return together to
    live with their sons if they choose.   There  were  no  indications  of
    significant health problems in the family.

17. I find  therefore  that  in  relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    paragraph 276ADE it would be reasonable  for  the  fifth  appellant  to
    return to Bangladesh with her parents and brothers (bearing in mind her
    two brothers will have no leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    would be expected to depart to Bangladesh).

18.  On  consideration  of  the  appellants'  human  rights   outside   the
    Immigration Rules,  I apply the principles in relation to Razgar v SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27. I  conclude  that  the  proposed  removal  will  be  an
    interference by a public authority with the exercise of the applicants'
    right to respect for their private lives and will have consequences  of
    such gravity as to engage the operation of Article 8.  The decision is,
    however, in accordance, on my findings, with the Immigration Rules  and
    thus the law.  The interference is  necessary  for  the  protection  of
    rights  and  freedoms  of  others  but  the  question  is  whether  the
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved.

19. I factor in my findings in relation to the Immigration Rules to express
    the position of the Secretary of  State  in  the  Article  8  balancing
    exercise.  On consideration of the  wider  aspects  of  Article  8  the
    Immigration Rules are an expression of the Secretary of State's view of
    the public interest and  none  of  this  family  can  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules.

20. I accept that the family have developed a private life  in  the  United
    Kingdom but their family  life  is  predominantly  amongst  themselves,
    (save for the sister who has established her life clearly prior to  the
    family coming to the United Kingdom), and the family  will  be  removed
    together.  I have noted the youngest child's best  interests  and  bear
    those in mind.  The two brothers are now adults and have lived  in  the
    UK for only a limited time and can be expected to have a  knowledge  of
    the culture of Bangladesh and the advantages of having had exposure  to
    an education system in the UK.  I  have  had  no  specific  independent
    evidence  before  me  to  suggest  that  there   are   any   particular
    difficulties in the removal of any of the appellants to  Bangladesh  or
    that the sons are anything other than healthy.  The fifth appellant  is
    not about to take formal  exams  and  indeed  the  older  children  are
    prevented from  attending  university  which  they  could  do  if  they
    returned to Bangladesh.  I accept that  the  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom might cause some dislocation and discomfort but I have in  mind
    ZH Tanzania and the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2011]
    UKSC 4 that the best interests of children is  that  they  remain  with
    their parents and are not  necessarily  a  trump  card.   There  is  no
    question other than the fifth appellant would remain at home  with  her
    family unit and I have no doubt that the family would  wish  to  remain
    together.  Her education may be of a lower standard in  Bangladesh  but
    it is not the case that she would be without her  parents,  a  home  or
    education or healthcare on removal to Bangladesh.   To  continue  their
    lives in the  United  Kingdom  will  indeed  deprive  them  of  further
    knowledge of their own customs and traditions there..

21. I must in the balancing exercise specifically apply Section 117 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act.

    PART 5A

    Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

    117A   Application of this Part

           (1)   This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
                determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-



                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                    family life under Article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                    Human Rights Act 1998.

           (2)   In considering the public interest question, the court  or
                tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                    117B, and

                (b)     in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                    criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.



           (3)   In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
                the question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's
                right to respect for private and family  life  is  justified
                under Article 8(2).

    117B   Article 8: public  interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
           cases

           (1)   The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
                the public interest.

           (2)   It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons  who  can
                speak English-

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)   It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)   Little weight should be given to-

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                that is established by a person at a time when the person is
                in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)    Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
                established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                immigration status is precarious.

           (6)   In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
                the public interest does not require  the  person's  removal
                where-

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                    leave the United Kingdom.

                ...

    117D   Interpretation of this Part

           (1)   In this Part-

                "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
                Human Rights;

                "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18
                and who-

                (a)    is a British citizen, or

                (b)    has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
                    period of seven years or more; ...

22. Specifically it is in the public interest and the economic wellbeing of
    the United Kingdom that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom are financially  independent  because  they  are  not  a
    burden on the taxpayers.

23. At present the family is not contributing to the  tax  coffers  of  the
    United Kingdom as none of the adults is in the position of working.   I
    note that  the  sister  provides  accommodation  but  the  family  have
    accessed education and indeed the fifth appellant is  at  school.   The
    family are also clearly registered on the NHS with a GP and  a  dentist
    and are accessing free medical care.  There was no  indication  of  any
    payment for the care.  I am not persuaded that this  family  is  not  a
    burden on the public purse.

24. I am also cognisant of  Section  117(5)  which  states  "little  weight
    should be given to a private life established by a  person  at  a  time
    when the person's immigration status is precarious".  Not only  is  the
    maintenance of immigration control in the public interest and those who
    seek to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  should  not  be  a  burden  on
    taxpayers but further none of these appellants have had lawful leave to
    remain since August of 2009.  The further human rights application  was
    made on 3rd June 2010 and was outside the validity of the  then  extant
    leave and the family were notified in May 2011 that the refusal of  the
    human rights application was maintained.  Indeed  in  2013  the  family
    were served their notice of liability to detention and removal. The two
    older children were brought here as  minors  (as  indeed  the  youngest
    child) but have had some years since their majority  to  address  their
    immigration  status.  Caselaw  has  confirmed   that   not   only   the
    establishment of private life but also the development of private  life
    should  be  given  little  weight  when  the  immigration   status   is
    precarious. I have already set out  my  findings  in  relation  to  the
    child's best interests and the reasonableness of  relocation  from  the
    United Kingdom under the Immigration  Rules  but   I  turn  to  Section
    117B(6) and  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  fifth
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom as she has lived continuously  in
    the UK for at least seven years having arrived at  the  age  of  2  and
    having attended school on a full-time basis.  In this instance the fact
    is that the child has been in the UK for seven years both at  the  time
    of the application and at the date of the hearing before  me.   I  have
    found that it is reasonable for the child to  remove  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

25. In MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705  Elias LJ held at paragraph 17  that
    in relation to Section 117(6)

         'once those conditions [Section 117 (6) (a) and (b)] are satisfied,
         the public interest will not require the applicant's removal. Since
         the interference with the right to private  or  family  life  under
         article 8(1) can only be justified where there  is  a  sufficiently
         strong countervailing public interest falling within article  8(2),
         if the public interest does not require removal, there is no  other
         basis on which removal could be justified'.

    The question hangs on the reasonableness test.  At paragraph  45  Elias
    LJ reasoned

         "that wider public  interest  considerations  must  be  taken  into
         account when applying the 'unduly harsh' criterion.  It seems to me
         that it must be equally  so  with  respect  to  the  reasonableness
         criterion in 117B(6).".

    In other words the focus is not on the child  alone.   However  it  was
    recognised that where a child has been in the UK  for  seven  years  it
    must be given significant weight in the proportionality exercise.

26. Paragraph 53 of MA Pakistan states in effect that a child should not be
    blamed for matters for which he or she is not responsible such  as  the
    conduct of the parents, and emphasises that the best interests  of  the
    child are to be determined by reference  to  the  child  alone  without
    reference to the immigration history or status of the parent,  but  the
    reasonableness of removal nevertheless must include a reference to  the
    wider public interests and thus the conduct of the parents.

27. I have considered  the  full  witness  statements  of  the  first  four
    appellants who protest they cannot return to Bangladesh as they have no
    one to provide for  their  family  and  no  support  available.   Those
    witness statements did acknowledge the fact that there  was  family  in
    Bangladesh.  The wife clearly has one sibling and that is  one  brother
    in  Bangladesh,  and  some  of  the  family  there  do  have  work.   I
    acknowledge in relation to Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39  that  the
    sister of the second appellant accommodates them and  it  will  disrupt
    their family life but as a core unit this family of five they  will  be
    returning to Bangladesh together.  I have no doubt that the sister  set
    up her life in the United Kingdom separately from the  appellants.  The
    witness statement of the second appellant states "my family and I  have
    carried out a peaceful life in the UK without recourse to public  funds
    and maintain good characters."  I do not accept  this  statement.   The
    family have indeed had recourse to public funds and it is expected that
    they would remain of good character whilst being in the United Kingdom.



28. I also take into account Patel and Others and the  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 that the older  sons  the  third
    and fourth appellants wished to partake of adult education but  Article
    8 does not encompass a right to education as such and without more. The
    family life of these appellants is with their parents  and  sister  and
    with each other.  They were brought here as minors  and  have  had  put
    down some roots here  but  they  equally  have  had  the  advantage  of
    education in the Untied Kingdom which they can use to  their  advantage
    on return.   The first appellant had the benefit of work experience  in
    the UK which he can put to use on return to Bangladesh  and  where  the
    parents have lived most of their lives and where they will be returning
    to a culture and language with which they are familiar and where indeed
    they have family.

29. EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874, a prior Court of Appeal case to  MA
    Pakistan, explained how a Tribunal  should  apply  the  proportionality
    test where the wider public interest considerations  are  in  play  and
    where the best interests of the child are such that he  or  she  should
    remain in the UK.  As noted in EV Philippines at paragraph 37

         "In the balance of the other side there  falls  to  be  taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
         country and the fact that  ex  hypothesi  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain.  The immigration history of the parents  may
         also be relevant  e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers  or  have  acted
         deceitfully".

30. Jackson LJ  also stated at paragraph 59 of EV Philippines

         'the assessment of the best interests of the children must be  made
         on the basis that the facts are as they are in the real  world.  If
         one parent has no right to remain, but the other parent does,  that
         is the background against which the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
         neither parent has the right to remain, then that is the background
         against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  Thus  the  ultimate
         question will be: is it reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow
         the parent with no right to remain to the country of origin'?

31. I cannot see that the desirability of being educated at public  expense
    in the United Kingdom can outweigh the benefit to the  fifth  appellant
    remaining with her whole family unit, including her parents. Nor was  I
    persuaded on the evidence before me that the removal  would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences Agyarko & Ors v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11.

32. Further to Huang and the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2007] UKHL 11

         "the ultimate question for the appellate immigration  authority  is
         whether the refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances
         where the life of the family cannot reasonably be  expected  to  be
         enjoyed  elsewhere,  taking  full  account  of  all  considerations
         weighing in favour of the refusal, prejudices the  family  life  of
         the applicant in a manner  sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a
         breach of the fundamental right protected by article 8'.

33. In the light of my findings above I am not  persuaded  that  the  child
    cannot reasonably be relocated to Bangladesh. As  such  Section  117(6)
    does  not  outweigh  the  remaining  considerations  in  the  balancing
    exercise. I do not find that the family and private life of any of  the
    members of the family would be  prejudiced  in  a  manner  sufficiently
    serious to amount to a breach of their protected rights.

34. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision  under  section
    12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007

35. No anonymity direction is made.

ORDER

I dismiss the appeal of all five appellants on human rights grounds.


Signed Helen Rimington                       19th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed Helen Rimington                       19th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
