
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/05185/2015
                                                               HU/05191/2015
                                                               HU/05196/2015
                                                               HU/05193/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th January 2017                 |On 2nd February 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            AAO (first Appellant)
                           TCA (second Appellant)
                            FO (third Appellant)
                           AWO (fourth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mrs Gore
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellants' appeal against the decision of  Judge  Goodrich
    made following a hearing at Taylor House on 30th June 2016.

Background

 2. The appellants are all Nigerian citizens.  The first appellant came  to
    the UK in July 2007 and, in December 2007 applied with  his  wife,  the
    second appellant and eldest child, the third appellant,  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules.  The application was refused on 17th  October
    2009.  In a decision promulgated on 4th August 2011, their  appeal  was
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules  and  on  human  rights  grounds.
    There was no appeal against that determination.

 3. On 17th August 2015 the appellants made another application  for  leave
    to remain in the UK on the basis of their private and family life  here
    and were refused on 26th August 2015.

 4. The judge set out the evidence in detail, recorded the submissions made
    on behalf of the appellant and respondent, and set out the  legislation
    and leading case law  which  had  to  be  considered  when  making  her
    decision.  She concluded that the first and second appellants could not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules with respect to  private
    life because they had not lived in the UK for twenty years and had  not
    established that there would be very significant difficulties affecting
    their reintegration into Nigeria.  The fourth appellant could not  meet
    the requirements because he has not lived in the UK for at least  seven
    years.

 5. The judge considered the position of the  third  appellant,  who  is  a
    qualifying child having lived in the UK  for  over  seven  years.   She
    reminded herself of the duty imposed by  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act and concluded that it was in  F's  best
    interests, viewed through the prism  of  her  private  life,  that  she
    remains in the UK.  She then said  that  her  evaluation  of  the  best
    interests of F was not dispositive and, having considered the  evidence
    as a whole, was not persuaded that F would not be  able  to  adjust  to
    life in Nigeria.  It was reasonable to expect her to be able  to  leave
    the UK and live there with her parents and brother.

 6. She dismissed the appeal both within and outwith the Immigration Rules.



The Grounds of Application

 7. The appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    original decision had been made on the basis that the adult  appellants
    were not in a genuine and subsisting relationship, which the judge  had
    not found to be correct.  The only conclusion open  to  the  judge  was
    therefore that that finding had been made in bad faith and the decision
    was not in accordance with the law.

 8. Second, the judge had not taken all relevant matters into account  when
    considering the question of reasonableness of F's removal  to  Nigeria.
    The family had never lived there together as a family and had  no  home
    and no savings and weak personal and family connections there.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Chohan who observed that  the
    original judge had concluded that it was not in F's best  interests  to
    be removed from the UK but had then gone on to make  contrary  findings
    and to dismiss the appeal.

10. On 21st December 2016 the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination,  arguing that the best interests of a child was not  the
    only factor to weigh into the relevant balancing exercise.

Submissions

11. Sensibly, Mrs Gore did not pursue the bad faith argument. She submitted
    that, given the judge's finding that it was not in F's  best  interests
    to be removed to the UK, she had then placed too much weight  upon  the
    public interest factors. There were no cogent reasons not to allow  the
    appeal given the appellants' ties to the UK.

12. A decision which was not in a child's best  interests  was  effectively
    one which would harm  her  -  she  had  never  lived  in  Nigeria.  The
    circumstances were such that F's appeal ought to have been allowed even
    if the others were not.

13. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge was perfectly entitled to  reach  the
    decision which she did.  This  case  fell  far  short  of  establishing
    irrationality, and should be maintained.

Findings and Conclusions

14. This is a meticulously detailed decision.

15. The judge recorded that F is very well settled at school, and  has  won
    many  awards,  and  the  school  report  confirmed  that   she   is   a
    conscientious pupil who is making very good progress.

16. F has a particular relationship with a Mrs O at church, whom she refers
    to as grandma and the judge accepted that F's  relationships  with  her
    friends and the community were important to her; their severance  would
    be detrimental to her  welfare.   On  the  other  hand  there  was  the
    potential for contact  with  her  maternal  grandmother  who  lives  in
    Nigeria with whom she speaks on the  phone  and  it  would  be  in  F's
    interests to have a closer relationship with  her.   There  is  also  a
    large extended family in Nigeria with whom F could form bonds.

17. The judge considered it  likely  that  F  was  familiar  with  Nigerian
    customs and culture since the evidence was that many of  her  community
    friends were of Nigerian origin.

18. The judge did not accept that F would be unable to form new friendships
    in a new school or new church in Nigeria which was the country  of  her
    nationality and that of  her  parents  and  brother.   English  is  the
    official language there and the country  has  a  well  developed  state
    education system.  She did not accept the  evidence  that  F  would  be
    unable to access suitable education and  she  rejected  the  submission
    that schooling was generally inadequate  there.   She  noted  that  the
    first appellant attended school and went to university in  Nigeria  and
    the second appellant was also qualified to degree level.

19. The judge also rejected the evidence  that  there  was  any  particular
    health risk  to  F.   She  concluded  that  F's  emotional  health  and
    educational needs and general welfare could be met by  her  parents  in
    Nigeria.

20. It is quite wrong to equate the judge's findings about  the  scope  and
    depth of F's ties with the UK with an  acceptance  that  she  would  be
    harmed on removal to Nigeria. Indeed she specifically considered all of
    the arguments and concluded that she would not be.

21. The question before the judge, as set out in  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act is whether it would be  reasonable  for  F,  as  a  qualifying
    child, to leave the UK.

22. The judge's statement that her evaluation of F's best interests was not
    dispositive is unimpeachable.  She  said,  correctly,  that  it  was  a
    strong factor when assessing the  issue  of  reasonableness  under  the
    Rules.

23. The judge recorded that, whilst F had been born in the UK and  knew  no
    other life, she would be with her family in Nigeria.  She was not at  a
    critical stage in her education or development.  She would be  able  to
    adapt to a new school and life there.  She was entitled to weigh in the
    balance that her parents had decided to remain despite the refusal of a
    previous human rights claim and subsequent dismissal of their appeal in
    2011.

24. The judge set out the test to be applied in EV Philippines and Others v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  The Court of Appeal observed that if it  was
    overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that she should not return
    the need to maintain immigration control may well not tip the  balance.
    By contrast if it was in the child's best interests to remain but  only
    on balance, with some factors pointing the other way, the result may be
    the opposite.

25. This is just such a case.  There are clear factors in the  respondent's
    favour here,  in particular the fact that F would be returning  to  her
    country of nationality and where  she  has  a  large  extended  family,
    including her maternal grandmother with whom she  speaks  regularly  on
    the telephone.  She would be able to access education  in  Nigeria  and
    the disruption was not at a particularly critical stage.

26. It was plainly open to the judge to conclude that it was reasonable  to
    expect F to live in Nigeria with her parents and brother.

27. The  grounds  and  submissions  fall  far  short  of  establishing  any
    irrationality in the decision which shall stand.

Notice of Decision

28. The appellants' appeal against the decision of the Immigration Judge is
    dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed[pic]                             Date 31 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

