
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/05038/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16 January 2018                         | On 15 February 2018             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                     R K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel, instructed by Sky Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a 27 year old woman who entered the UK lawfully  as  a
    student.  In time, her student leave was extended  by  the  Respondent,
    and when that period of extension drew to an end she made  an  in  time
    application for a further grant of leave to remain on the basis of  her
    Article 8 rights. That application was refused on 2 April 2015, and her
    appeal against that refusal  came  before  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  at
    Newport on 9 February 2017. The appeal was dismissed by way of decision
    promulgated on 16 February 2017. The  Appellant  sought  permission  to
    appeal from the First-tier Tribunal on  grounds  drafted  by  different
    Counsel to the one who had attended the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and that application was refused  by  Judge  Gillespie  on  1
    September  2017.  The  Appellant  then  renewed  her  application   for
    permission to the Upper Tribunal on different  grounds  that  had  been
    drafted by her solicitors. That application  was  granted  in  part  by
    decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul  of  17  October  2017,  which
    cautioned that although the  Appellant  may  face  little  prospect  of
    overall success the arguable error of law was such as  to  require  the
    grant of permission. So the matter comes before me today.

 2. The Appellant did not suggest before the First-tier Tribunal  that  she
    had an established "family life" in the UK for the purposes of  Article
    8 as at the date the hearing. She had been married, and her  ex-husband
    was in the UK, but that marriage had been terminated by divorce in 2014
    and she did not suggest she had any ongoing relationship with him.  Nor
    did she suggest that she had formed a new settled relationship with any
    other person. The Article 8 appeal therefore fell to be considered only
    as a "private life" appeal. The human rights appeal may not  have  been
    well argued before the Judge,  since  there  appears  to  have  been  a
    failure to engage with the relevant jurisprudence, however it is  plain
    that there was an underlying disputed assertion that the Appellant  had
    no family support in India as a result of a falling out with her family
    resulting from her divorce.

 3. The Judge contrasted the Appellant's oral evidence about the  state  of
    her relationship with her family in  India  with  the  content  of  the
    written evidence before her, which included references  to  information
    given by the Appellant to those providing her medical  care.  To  those
    carers she had accepted that she had a very good relationship with  her
    parents. Thus the Judge concluded that the Appellant  had  deliberately
    sought to  mislead  the  Tribunal  as  to  the  true  state  of  family
    relationships with her family in India, and, the level of support  that
    she would enjoy from them in the event of her return to India.

 4. The Appellant's health needs appear to  have  been  relied  upon  as  a
    "trump card" before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  her
    removal from the UK would result in a breach of her Article  3  rights,
    and/or a disproportionate breach of her Article  8  rights.  The  Judge
    rejected that first argument on the basis that although  the  Appellant
    was indeed  unwell,  and  did  face  the  possibility  of  serious  and
    significant surgery by way of a possible hysterectomy, the level of ill-
    health that she was able to evidence was not such as  to  approach  the
    tests set out in N [2005]  UKHL  31.   The  grounds  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal application for permission to appeal  do  not  challenge  that
    finding.

 5. Where the Judge undoubtedly went wrong was in the  self-direction  that
    she gave for the proper approach to the Article 8 appeal  in  a  health
    case.  It appears that the Judge may have considered that this  was  an
    appeal under the Immigration Rules when it was not. She also offered to
    herself in relation to Article 8 a direction [45] which was undoubtedly
    wrong. The proper approach was to be found in GS  (India)  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 40 to which no reference was made. The starting point had to be  to
    ask whether Article 8 was engaged at all, because it  was  not  engaged
    simply by virtue of health care need. In my judgement the question  for
    me is really whether a different Tribunal properly directing itself  as
    to the relevant Article 8, and health jurisprudence, could be  expected
    to have a realistic prospect of allowing the Article 8  appeal.  If  it
    could not, then the Judge's errors were immaterial.

 6. In my judgment there is no such prospect, even if I  were  to  approach
    the appeal on the assumption that Article 8 is engaged, as  a  "private
    life" appeal. The Appellant faced a need for  surgery  on  the  Judge's
    findings, and had significant health issues which that  surgery  sought
    to address. However the Judge also found  that  the  surgery  could  be
    provided in India, and that these health needs could be met  in  India,
    with the support and care available to the Appellant from her family in
    India. It was not only  theoretically  available  in  India,  but  also
    accessible in India. The grounds  of  the  application  for  permission
    identify no arguable challenge to those findings.

 7. In those circumstances, there is in my judgment no  realistic  prospect
    of a different Tribunal concluding that the Article 8 appeal should  be
    allowed, even  if  the  Appellant's  private  life  circumstances  were
    considered sufficient to engage Article 8 (a point  that  is  far  from
    clear given the absence of evidence of the nature  of  the  Appellant's
    "private life"). The true situation is that she  can  get  all  of  the
    medical care  and  support  that  she  requires  in  India.  Given  the
    legitimate public interest in her removal it is not disproportionate to
    expect her to seek that support and medical care in India. Accordingly,
    notwithstanding the error  of  law  in  the  Judge's  self-direction  I
    dismiss the appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 13 February 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes


To the Respondent
Fee award


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 13 February 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
