
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05304/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2018                             |On 2nd May 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                        MISGANA TEKLEAB GEBREMICHAEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chohan of Citadel Immigration Lawyers Limited
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Eritrea born on 8th  August  1999.
    She applied to the  British  High  Commission  in  Pretoria  for  entry
    clearance as the dependent daughter of her father, the Sponsor  Tecklab
    Hidru Gebremichael, a British citizen.  That  application  was  refused
    for the reasons given in a Notice of Refusal dated 25th  January  2016,
    which decision was confirmed by an Entry Clearance Manager on 24th  May
    2016.  The Appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Hussain (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham  on  13th
    June 2017.  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given  in
    his Decision dated 4th July 2017.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal
    that decision and on 9th January 2018 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    297(i)(e) of HC 395 on the basis that he was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Sponsor had had sole responsibility for the Appellant.   That  decision
    has not been challenged in this appeal.  The Judge also  dismissed  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Judge took into account the best interests of the Appellant as a  minor
    and treated those as a primary consideration.  However, he  found  that
    there were no serious and  compelling  circumstances  relating  to  the
    Appellant and that  on  balance  the  public  interest  outweighed  any
    consideration due to the Appellant.  The decision of the Respondent was
    therefore proportionate.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Chohan argued that the Judge had erred  in
    law in coming to this conclusion.  He submitted that the Judge had used
    the wrong test in assessing the Article 8 ECHR issue.  He had applied a
    serious  and  compelling  test  rather  than  the   correct   test   of
    proportionality.  The Judge had further erred  by  referring  to  South
    Sudan whereas the Appellant had never lived there.  Further, the  Judge
    had failed to consider the best interests of the Appellant as a  child.



 5. In response, Mrs Aboni argued that there was no such material error  of
    law.  She conceded that the Judge's reference to  South  Sudan  was  an
    error, but the Judge had directed himself appropriately concerning  the
    Article 8 ECHR issue and had considered all the relevant circumstances.
     He had made findings of fact open to him on the  evidence  before  him
    and had been entitled to find that the public interest  outweighed  any
    other consideration.

 6. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.   It  is  true  that  the  Judge  erred  by
    referring to South Sudan, but this is not a material error since all of
    the Judge's comments concerning the Appellant's life before she came to
    the UK are equally applicable to Eritrea.  I agree with the  submission
    of  Mrs  Aboni  that  the  Judge  took  into   account   all   relevant
    circumstances and gave adequate reasons for his decision  at  paragraph
    26 of the Decision.  The Judge demonstrated in that paragraph  that  he
    had carried out the balancing exercise necessary for any  consideration
    of proportionality, and came to a decision open to him.  I find  it  is
    not the case that the Judge applied a wrong test.   He  did  find  that
    there were no compelling or exceptional circumstances allowing  him  to
    consider  the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  rights  outside  of   the
    Immigration Rules, but in the same paragraph he clearly carries out the
    balancing exercise referred to above and makes  a  decision  concerning
    the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    At paragraph 25  of  the  Decision  the  Judge  referred  to  the  best
    interests of the Appellant as a child and took them into account  as  a
    primary consideration.  However,  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  attach
    considerable  weight  to  the  public  interest  particularly  as   the
    Appellant  had  failed  to  satisfy  the  criteria  of   the   relevant
    Immigration Rule.  It was said by Mr Chohan that the Judge had erred in
    law by taking into account the expense to  the  Appellant's  father  of
    supporting the Appellant in Eritrea, but this was not a  matter  argued
    before the Judge in the context of Article 8 ECHR.

 7. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date 2nd May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
