
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
HU/05621/2018

                                               HU/05624/2018

                                               HU/05627/2018

                                               HU/05629/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th December 2018                   | On 13th March 2019                |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                    MR Rajeev Mohan de Silva Sandaradura
            mrs Theilathalapititiyage Choleka Rukshani Gunasekara
                                master N M S
                                master N N S
                       (anonymity directions not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H Kannangara of Counsel instructed by Jade Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Taylor promulgated on 23 August 2018 dismissing  the  appeals  on
    human rights grounds.


2.    The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Sri  Lanka.   They  are  a  family
    comprising father  and  mother  and  two  minor  children.   The  minor
    children were both born in the United Kingdom, on 4 September 2010  and
    31 January 2016 respectively.


3.   The adult Appellants' immigration histories are a matter of record  and
    are set out in the papers, including in the Decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal at paragraph 4.  I do not repeat the entirety of the histories
    here, but note that the Appellants have not had  any  formal  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom since mid-2013.  Since that time they have
    pursued a number of successive unsuccessful applications  and  appeals,
    culminating in the most recent application made on human rights grounds
    on 1 July 2017.  The application was refused on 11 December 2017; it is
    this decision against which the Appellants have appealed to the IAC.


4.   The linked appeals were advanced before the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
    primary reference to the circumstances of the Third Appellant.  By  the
    date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the Third  Appellant
    had passed his 7th birthday - and had accordingly been present  in  the
    United Kingdom for more than 7 years.  It was essentially  argued  that
    such a factor, together with his own  particular  circumstances,  meant
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the Third Appellant to  leave
    the United Kingdom - and that in turn there would be no public interest
    in requiring his parents to leave, and necessarily  it  would  also  be
    appropriate pursuant to Article 8 for his younger sibling to remain  in
    the United Kingdom.


5.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept the primary submission  in
    respect of the Third Appellant, and dismissed the appeals.


6.   The Appellants sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    which was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Haria  on  23  October
    2018.


7.   The Respondent filed a Rule 24  response  on  28  November  2018.   The
    response indicated that the Secretary  of  State  did  not  oppose  the
    Appellants' application, and "invite[d] the Tribunal to  determine  the
    appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing to consider whether  the
    [Appellants'] Article 8 cases is made out with reference  to  the  best
    interests of the children".


8.   Before me Mr  Jarvis  has  in  substance  maintained  the  Respondent's
    position as stated in the Rue 24 response, and does not seek to  defend
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


9.   In the circumstances I say very little as to the details and  substance
    of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, except to acknowledge
    that I accept the joint position of the parties that the Judge did fall
    into material error of law in the evaluation of the issues  in  respect
    of the Third Appellant.


10.  In particular it seems to me that there is a confusion on the  face  of
    the Decision as to the approach adopted by the Judge to an extent  that
    it is unclear whether the correct approach was followed.


11.  At paragraph 13 the Judge states:

         "...it is generally the case that it is in a child's best interests
         to remain with their parents and unless special  factors  apply  it
         will generally be reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK with
         their parents particularly if their parents have no right to remain
         in the UK."


12.  At paragraph 20 further to citing  -  seemingly  with  approval  -  the
    relevant Home Office guidance and the case of MA (Pakistan), the  Judge
    states:

         "Strong reasons will be required in order to refuse  a  case  where
         the outcome will be removal of a child with continuous UK residence
         of seven years or more".




13.  It seems to me that there is a confusion as to whether  the  Judge  was
    seeking to identify 'special factors' to justify an  exception  to  the
    'generalisation' expressed at paragraph 13 - which carries  with  it  a
    notion of the onus being on the Appellants, or was seeking to  identify
    'strong reasons' that might justify a refusal - which carries with it a
    notion of the onus being on  the  Respondent.   It  is  the  apparently
    irreconcilable  tension  between  these  passages  that   informs   the
    Respondent's concession.


14.   The  Respondent's  concession  having  been  made  and  accepted,  the
    discussion before me focused primarily on the best way forward, and the
    extent to which the primary findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal
    could or should be preserved.


15.  The Respondent urged that notwithstanding his acknowledgement of  error
    on the part of the First-tier Tribunal, adverse features of the Judge's
    evaluation of the facts might yet be preserved.  It was  otherwise  the
    Respondent's position that the Appellants' case would need  to  be  re-
    evaluated against the framework of KO (Nigeria)  and  the  Respondent's
    new guidance pursuant to KO (Nigeria) published  on  19  December  2018
    (the day before the hearing).


16.  Although a copy of the Respondent's new guidance was not before  me  at
    the  time  of  the  hearing,  it  was   common   ground   between   the
    representatives that some of its features directed focus in  evaluating
    'reasonableness' to a consideration of the circumstances to  which  the
    relevant  child  might  be  returning.  Mr  Kannangara   disputed   the
    appropriateness of such an approach, arguing that the focus  should  be
    limited to the extent of any disruption of the  private  and/or  family
    life enjoyed in the United Kingdom which did not require  consideration
    of the circumstances  likely  to  be  encountered  in  the  destination
    country.


17.  For present purposes it is not  necessary  for  me  to  determine  this
    issue. It is open to the Appellants to pursue such a submission in  due
    course if they so wish.


18.  More particularly,  in  respect  of  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Mr Kannangara acknowledged that  there  were  essentially  two
    matters that the Appellants would wish to revisit as being  potentially
    adverse: the economic opportunities for the principal Appellant were he
    to return to Sri Lanka, and the Judge's finding in respect of the Third
    Appellant's  language  abilities  ("I  don't  accept  that  the   third
    Appellant only speaks English in a household that is  likely  to  speak
    Sinhalese" - paragraph 21).


19.  The findings in neither of these matters have  been  directly  impugned
    in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal; Mr Jarvis  invites  the
    Tribunal's consideration to whether in all of  the  circumstances  such
    findings should be preserved.


20.  I note that the Appellants have now filed some  further  evidence  that
    relates to  the  circumstances  of  the  Third  Appellant.   There  are
    concerns that the Third Appellant may be suffering from autism spectrum
    disorder and/or Asperger's syndrome. Such concerns  were  aired  before
    the First-tier Tribunal by reference the opinion  of  a  SENCO  at  the
    Third Appellant's school,  but  the  Judge  noted  that  there  was  no
    specific diagnosis (paragraph 19).  The Appellants  have  now  filed  a
    copy of a letter prepared by a  consultant  paediatrician  based  on  a
    clinic date of 23 October 2018.  Whilst this letter does  not  reach  a
    diagnosis that the Third Appellant is suffering from ASD, it does  note
    the  problems  as  being  "concerns  around  social  communication  and
    interaction skills", and indicates that a care plan is  to  be  put  in
    place.  In my judgement the extent to  which  the  consultant's  letter
    takes matters  further  than  the  information  from  the  SENCO  ought
    properly to be part of a careful and  nuanced  reconsideration  of  the
    facts in the appeal informing the basis upon which the Appellants  seek
    to find  their  submissions  in  respect  of  the  'reasonableness'  of
    expecting the Third Appellant to leave the United Kingdom.


21.  Further, in so far as the Respondent contends that  an  exploration  of
    the circumstances on relocation to Sri Lanka  is  required,  the  Third
    Appellant's educational needs and any issues that  may  relate  to  his
    ability to adjust may be informed by consideration  of  the  up-to-date
    evidence provided by the consultant. For example it may be necessary to
    revisit the issue of the level of the Third  Appellant's  comprehension
    of the Sinhala language and his ability to learn or improve -  although
    I note that there  is  nothing  immediately  overt  in  the  consultant
    paediatrician's report that suggests any developmental delay physically
    or in respect of intellectual or cognitive functioning.


22.   In  due  course  Mr  Jarvis  acknowledged  that  it  would  likely  be
    impracticable to approach the issues in the  appeal  on  the  basis  of
    'adding' the new evidence to the findings based on previously available
    evidence. What is required is a fresh 'in the round' approach to all of
    the available evidence.


23.   As  regards  the  economic  potential  of  the  First  Appellant,   Mr
    Kannangara  acknowledged  that  it  was  not  realistic  to  advance  a
    submission that the he would be unable to find paid employment  in  Sri
    Lanka at all. Rather the Appellants would seek to emphasise the  likely
    income level and the concomitant affordability of education,  it  being
    their case that it is necessary - or highly desirable - that the  Third
    Appellant  be  educated  privately  because  it   is   only   in   such
    circumstances he would be able to be educated in the  English  language
    medium.  It is said that the state schools in Sri Lanka  teach  through
    the medium of either Sinhalese or Tamil, and it is necessary to pay for
    private education if one  wishes  to  be  educated  in  the  medium  of
    English.  This necessarily relates back to the assertion that the Third
    Appellant does not speak Sinhalese, or alternatively does not speak  it
    to any adequate standard, and cannot reach an  acceptable  standard  to
    continue his education in  this  medium.   (The  Appellants  have  also
    suggested  that  there  would  be  difficulties  accessing  the   state
    educational system in Sri Lanka because of a shortage of places and the
    claimed circumstance that persons returning from abroad are  given  low
    priority.)


24.  Again, these matters are going to require  some  careful  fact-finding.
    It may also be the case that the Respondent  will  wish  to  file  some
    evidence as to economic and/or educational opportunities in  Sri  Lanka
    in the context of the matters identified in the new policy with  regard
    to focus on the circumstances in the location of return.


25.  In all of the circumstances it seems to me  that  the  appropriate  way
    forward is for this matter to go back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    the decisions in the appeals to be remade with all issues at large.   I
    so conclude.


Notice of Decision

26.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal in these  linked  appeals  are
    vitiated for error of law. The decision are set aside.


27.  The decisions in the appeals are to be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor.


28.  No anonymity directions are sought or made.



Signed:
  Date: 10 March 2019




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
