

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05553/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard in Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 5 June 2017                     |On 14 June 2017                         |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                             MRS THI HUE NGUYEN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson, Counsel instructed by A G I solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was not granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  reason
in this case to make an anonymity direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Birrell  promulgated  on  31  October  2016  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeals against the Secretary of  State's
       decision dated 9 September 2015 refusing her leave to  remain  based
       on her private life and her family life  with  her  British  citizen
       partner, Nhieu Qang Nguyen and their two children who are  now  aged
       two years and under one year.  Both children are British citizens by
       virtue of their father's status.


    2. The Appellant met her partner in Vietnam in 2012.  She came  to  the
       UK two years later as a visitor.  She claims to have discovered that
       she was pregnant after her arrival  here.   An  airline  refused  to
       allow her to fly back when she tried to return to Vietnam  when  she
       was twenty-eight weeks pregnant.  She has not returned  since.   The
       Appellant is therefore an overstayer. Both children were born in the
       UK.


    3. The Appellant's partner  claims  to  earn  a  sufficient  income  to
       maintain the Appellant and their children for the  purposes  of  the
       Immigration Rules ("the Rules").  The Appellant is though unable  to
       meet the Rules because of her immigration status.  She is unable  to
       meet EX.1 as she had not been cohabiting with her  partner  for  two
       years as at date  of  application  and  cannot  therefore  meet  the
       eligibility requirements as a partner.  The  Appellant  cannot  meet
       the Rules in her capacity as the children's parent as she  does  not
       have sole parental responsibility for the children  (E-LTRPT.2.3  of
       the Rules refers).


    4. The Appellant says that she does not wish to return  to  Vietnam  in
       order to apply for entry clearance in accordance with the  Rules  as
       she fears that her immigration history would lead to refusal of  her
       application.  Since the Appellant cannot meet the  Rules,  her  case
       was considered by the Judge outside the Rules applying section  117B
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("section 117B").   The
       Appellant relies in particular on section 117B(6).


    5. The Judge found that the Appellant could return to Vietnam,  leaving
       the children in the care of their father,  in  order  to  apply  for
       entry clearance under the Rules to return as a partner  and  parent.
       She found that temporary removal would therefore be proportionate.


    6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker
       on 20 April 2017 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-


            "[2] It is clearly arguable,  if  the  concession  recorded  at
           paragraph  47  of  the  Decision  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
           Respondent, that having regard to s117B  of  the  2002  Act  the
           appeal should have been allowed.   The  Upper  Tribunal  may  be
           assisted in its consideration of the matter by the  guidance  in
           the case of NR (Jamaica) [2009] EWCA Civ  856  because  arguably
           the judge has gone behind the concession."


    7. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.



      The grounds and submissions


    8. Mr Timson relied heavily on the Respondent's concession as  recorded
       at [47] of the Decision which I set out below.  He  submitted  that,
       based on the concession and the Respondent's policy  on  which  that
       concession is based it was not open to  the  Judge  to  dismiss  the
       appeal.  He accepted that the Respondent's policy (to which  I  also
       refer below) does permit the Respondent to refuse leave  even  where
       there are British citizen children involved but only where there  is
       a very poor immigration history and Mr Timson  submitted  that  this
       case does not warrant a refusal on that basis.


    9. The case of MA (Pakistan) and others v Secretary of  State  for  the
       Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 ("MA  (Pakistan)")  is  of  some
       relevance.  The Appellant's  case  is  that  the  judgment  was  not
       something to which the Judge should have referred in  light  of  the
       Respondent's concession.  Mr Timson  submitted  in  any  event  that
       those cases concerned children who had been resident in the  UK  for
       seven years and not British children.  The position is different for
       British children, particularly in light of the Respondent's  policy.
       That policy  is  not  confined  to  the  application  of  "Zambrano"
       criteria.


   10. In response, Mr Kotas pointed out that the Judge dealt with the  way
       the Appellant put her case at [48] of the  Decision.   There  is  no
       error therefore in the Judge's approach.


   11. Mr Kotas accepted that  the  concession  recorded  at  [47]  of  the
       Decision  had  been  made.   The  Respondent's  position  though  as
       accepted by the Judge is that it is  not  disproportionate  for  the
       Appellant to return to Vietnam in order properly to apply for  entry
       clearance.  Although Mr Kotas accepted that  the  children  in  this
       case are very young and at an age where separation from their mother
       might not generally be appropriate, he submitted that the  Appellant
       can take the children with her to  Vietnam  while  she  seeks  entry
       clearance if she decides to do so.  That is not an  acceptance  that
       the Respondent's decision forces the children to leave  the  UK;  it
       would be a matter of choice for the Appellant and her partner.


   12. In reply and in  discussion,  Mr  Timson  accepted  that  the  issue
       whether it is reasonable for a child to  leave  the  UK  in  section
       117B(6) imports consideration also of a parent's immigration history
       (following MA (Pakistan)).  He submitted,  however,  that  once  the
       issue of reasonableness under that sub-section is disposed of, it is
       no longer appropriate to bring into the equation  the  remainder  of
       section 117B in order to determine the issue of proportionality.  He
       submitted that it is this approach which led the Judge into error.


   13. I reserved my decision in relation to whether there is an  error  of
       law in the Decision.  In discussion with the representatives, it was
       agreed that if I found an error of law I could re-make the  decision
       on the papers before me.  Mr Kotas accepted  that  if  I  found  the
       concession dispositive of the appeal, the appropriate outcome  would
       be to allow the Appellant's appeal.


    Policy and Legal Framework


   14. Before turning to deal with the concession recorded at [47]  of  the
       Decision, it is necessary to set  out  the  Respondent's  policy  on
       which that concession relies (so far as relevant).  That  is  to  be
       found in a document entitled Appendix  FM  1.0  Family  Life  (as  a
       Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes  (August  2015).
       Although that document deals largely with  leave  sought  under  the
       Rules and as I observe at [3] above, the Appellant does not  qualify
       on  that  basis,  at  [9.1]  of  the  document  under  the   heading
       "Exceptional Circumstances", the  Respondent  notes  that  the  best
       interests of the child remain relevant in determining whether  there
       are exceptional circumstances to justify a grant  of  leave  outside
       the Rules and that this entails consideration of section 11  of  the
       guidance.


   15. Section 11 then deals with the best interests of  children  affected
       by the relevant decision and at [11.2.3] deals with the position  of
       British citizen children under the heading "Would it be unreasonable
       to expect a British citizen child to leave the  UK?".   Having  made
       reference to the ECJ judgment in Zambrano, the guidance says this:-


           "Where a decision to refuse  the  application  would  require  a
           parent or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,
           the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be
           unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave  the  EU
           with that parent or primary carer.


           In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant  leave  to
           the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the  UK
           with the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence  of
           a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.
           It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant  leave  where
           the conduct of  the  parent  or  primary  carer  gives  rise  to
           considerations of such weight as to justify separation,  if  the
           child could otherwise stay with another  parent  or  alternative
           primary carer in the UK or in the EU.


            The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:
            - Criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph
              398 of the Immigration Rules;
            - a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
              repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.


           In considering whether refusal may be appropriate  the  decision
           maker must consider the impact on the child of  any  separation.
           If the decision maker is  minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances
           where separation would  be  the  result,  this  decision  should
           normally be  discussed  with  a  senior  caseworker  and,  where
           appropriate, advice  may  be  sought  from  the  Office  of  the
           Children's Champion on the implications for the welfare  of  the
           child, in order to inform the decision.
           Where the applicant has made an  application  under  the  family
           and/or private life Immigration Rules, the application must:
           a) be considered under those Immigration Rules first;
           b) where the applicant falls for  refusal,  the  decision  maker
              must go on to consider  whether  there  are  any  exceptional
              circumstances that would warrant a grant of leave  to  remain
              outside the Immigration Rules; and
           c) where the applicant falls for refusal under  the  Immigration
              Rules and there are no exceptional circumstances,  and  where
              satisfactory evidence has been  provided  that  all   of  the
              following criteria are met, the  case  must  be  referred  to
              European Casework for review:
                 i) the child is under the age of 18; and
                ii) the child is a British Citizen; and
               iii) the primary carer.... of the child is a non-EEA national
                    in the UK; and
                iv) there is no other parent/guardian/carer  upon  whom  the
                    child is dependent or who could care for  the  child  if
                    the primary carer left the UK to go to a country outside
                    the EU.
                 ....."


   16. It is next necessary to set out  section  117B(6)  as  this  is  the
       source of the requirement for determination of the reasonableness of
       a British child going to live abroad.   That  sub-section  reads  as
       follows:-


            "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal  where
           -
                  a) the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                     relationship with a qualifying child, and
                  b) it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
                     leave the United Kingdom"


       As British  citizens,  the  Appellant's  children  are  "qualifying"
       children.


   17. In reaching her Decision, the Judge also had regard to the  case  of
       MA (Pakistan) and it is therefore necessary to  say  something  more
       about those  cases.   The  Court  of  Appeal  there  considered  six
       individual cases all concerning children who had  been  resident  in
       the UK for more than seven  years  and  therefore  fell  within  the
       definition of "qualifying" children.  The Court held, following  the
       Court of Appeal's judgment in MM (Uganda) v Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450 that  the  consideration  of
       "reasonableness" for the purposes of section 117B(6)  imports  other
       public  interest  considerations  including  such  matters  as   the
       parent's immigration history.   The  focus  of  section  117B(6)  is
       however the best interests of the child and, as such,  those  are  a
       primary consideration. Moreover, section 117B(6) provides  that  the
       fact of the child being resident for more than seven years or  being
       a British citizen is a factor to be given some weight in  favour  of
       leave to remain being granted (see [45] of MA (Pakistan) as cited at
       [12] of the Decision).  As such, as noted at [49] of MA  (Pakistan),
       section 117B(6) "establishes as a starting point that  leave  should
       be granted unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary."






    Discussion and conclusions


   18. As  the  permission  grant  makes  clear,  the  starting  point  for
       determination whether there is an error of  law  is  the  concession
       recorded at [47] of the Decision.  That is in the following terms:-


           "I accept  that  the  Respondent's  policy  was  adopted  by  Mr
           Harrison in conceding that it would not be reasonable to  expect
           these children to leave the UK."


       I do not need to refer to case law concerning whether  and  in  what
       circumstances a Judge can depart from a concession made by a  party.
       The Respondent accepts that the concession was made.  She  does  not
       seek to withdraw it. The extent of the  concession  is  clear.   The
       Judge does not say that she does not accept the concession nor  does
       she purport to depart from  it.   She  simply  does  not  appear  to
       appreciate the impact of the concession.


   19. The error of law made by the Judge then appears from  the  paragraph
       immediately following:-


            "[48]      I do not  accept  Mr  Timson's  argument  that  this
           results in automatic success for the Appellant without  more  as
           this is made clear at paragraph  47  of  MA.   While  Mr  Timson
           sought to distinguish the case on the basis of the fact that the
           children in MA were not British citizens I am satisfied that the
           test of reasonableness applies  to  'qualifying  children',  and
           children qualify by virtue of length of  residence  or  being  a
           British citizen.  As is made clear in MA the application of  the
           reasonableness test requires me to  have  regard  to  the  wider
           public  interests,  and  they  require  consideration   of   the
           immigration history and status of the parents while nevertheless
           giving weight to the  fact  that  the  children  are  qualifying
           children and in this case they are British citizens."


   20. Had it not been for the concession made by the  Presenting  Officer,
       that paragraph would be  unobjectionable.  Similarly,  if  the  only
       concession made  by  the  Presenting  Officer  were  that  the  best
       interests of the children as British citizens would be to remain  in
       the UK but leaving open the question whether  those  best  interests
       could be outweighed by other  factors  in  order  to  determine  the
       reasonableness  of  return,  the  Judge's  analysis  could  not   be
       criticised.


   21. Nor do I  accept  Mr  Timson's  submission  that  MA  (Pakistan)  is
       distinguishable from this case because the children in  those  cases
       were not British citizens and that a different approach is  required
       in relation to British citizen children.  True it is that  a  parent
       cannot be removed if the effect would be to force a British  citizen
       child to leave (per Zambrano) but that is not otherwise the case. As
       the Judge herself observed at [45] of the Decision, the  nationality
       of the children is an  important  consideration.   However,  as  the
       Court of Appeal noted in MA (Pakistan), the same is  true  of  seven
       years' residence for a child as  after  that  period  of  residence,
       Parliament has decreed that a child becomes a "qualifying child"  in
       the same way as a child who is a British citizen at birth.


   22. Of course, a British citizen child cannot be removed.   Instead,  as
       Mr Kotas submitted, it would be for the parents to determine whether
       the children should leave with their mother  or  remain  with  their
       father (or whether the family should relocate  as  a  unit,  whether
       temporarily or permanently). Once it is accepted though that  it  is
       not reasonable for a child to return with the person to be  removed,
       the position is, applying section 117B(6), that the public  interest
       does not require that person to be removed.


   23. In this case, the Judge not only failed to appreciate the importance
       of the concession made by the Presenting Officer  but  also  herself
       reached a conclusion which was not open to her on her own  findings.
       The Judge appears to accept from [49] onwards of the  Decision  that
       the children should not be removed  but  should  remain  with  their
       father while their mother returns to obtain entry  clearance.   That
       may well be a factor which weighs in the overall assessment  of  the
       proportionality balance if that assessment is at large. However,  in
       light of the statutory considerations to which the Judge is bound to
       have regard, that would first require  a  finding  that  it  is  not
       unreasonable for the children  to  leave  the  UK  applying  section
       117B(6) and having regard to  their  best  interests.   Once  it  is
       accepted that the children cannot be expected to  leave  with  their
       mother,  a  finding  that  temporary  removal  is  proportionate  is
       inconsistent with the statutory guidance.


   24. I note in this regard that section 117B(6) is different from section
       117C(5) (which was considered also in MA (Pakistan)  with  reference
       to the case of MM  (Uganda)).   That  latter  section  requires  the
       Tribunal to consider whether the "effect of  deportation"  would  be
       unduly harsh which imports consideration  not  only  of  whether  it
       would be unduly harsh to require a child to leave with the parent to
       be deported but whether it would also be unduly harsh for the  child
       to remain in the UK without that parent.  That is  not  the  way  in
       which section 117B(6) is drafted and no doubt that  is  deliberately
       so in light of the different levels of public interest in play.   If
       section 117B(6) were drafted in the same way as section 117C(5), the
       Judge's analysis might have been  open  to  her.   As  it  was,  her
       conclusion based on a finding that the children could remain in  the
       UK while their mother returned to Vietnam fails  properly  to  apply
       section 117B(6).


   25. For those reasons, I am satisfied  that  the  Decision  involves  an
       error of law and I set aside the Decision.


   26. In light of my findings  in  relation  to  the  error  of  law,  the
       Respondent's concession has the effect of  determining  the  central
       issue for the purposes of section 117B(6) namely that it  would  not
       be reasonable  to  expect  these  children  to  leave  the  UK.   It
       therefore follows that section 117B(6) is satisfied and since  there
       is no issue concerning the remainder of  that  section,  the  public
       interest does not require the Appellant's removal.  Accordingly, the
       appeal is allowed.

      DECISION


    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of  law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Birrell promulgated on 31 October
    2016 is set aside. I re-make the decision by allowing  the  Appellant's
    appeal on the basis that removal would breach her human rights.


      Signed           [pic]      Dated:   13 June 2017
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
