
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/05767/2018
     HU/05762/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2019                            |On 29 January 2019            |
|(delivered ex tempore)                        |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                           Adeyanju Mojisola Lewis
                              Temitope Ibiyemi
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellants in this appeal are citizens of Nigeria.  They are a married
couple who were born respectively on 25 January 1981 and 27 October 1977.
They have both been in the United Kingdom for some time and their most
recent immigration history and dealings with the government started in 2017
when the first appellant made an asylum claim on 31 January 2017.  That
claim was refused by the Secretary of State and an appeal was heard by the
First-tier Tribunal, Judge Real, on 23 January 2018.  She dismissed the
appeal.

Subsequently, a further application was made for leave to remain by both
appellants based on their human rights.  Those applications were refused on
13 February 2018.  The appellants then appealed again to the First-tier
Tribunal.  The appeal on this occasion was heard by Judge Page.  Judge Page
dismissed the appeals, based exclusively upon Article 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights.

The appellants sought permission to appeal and permission was granted by
the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Gibb, on 8 October 2018.  The appellants
were not legally represented and their grounds were self-prepared.  Judge
Gibb recognised an arguable error of law in that the appellants have, and
had at the time of Judge Page's decision, a daughter who was born on 25
October 2017.  Judge Page made no reference to the existence of the
appellants' daughter and did not consider her best interests as part of the
Article 8 assessment which, as I have already said, he eventually rejected
in respect of both appellants.

At the hearing, Mr Howells, who represented the Secretary of State,
accepted that Judge Page had materially erred in law by failing to have
regard to the best interests of the appellants' daughter.  The existence of
the appellants' daughter was disclosed in the bundle of documents before
Judge Page both in the first appellant's statement and also by the birth
certificate of the appellants' daughter.  I was told by the appellants that
their daughter was present at the hearing before Judge Page and therefore
her presence was a very real one no doubt at that time.

In his determination, Judge Page, particularly at paragraph 10, concluded
that there was nothing new raised in the appeal before him different from
that considered by Judge Real in her determination.  That was clearly wrong
in that, as Mr Howells accepted, the best interests of the appellants'
daughter were a legally relevant factor in assessing their Article 8 claims
and they was not considered by Judge Page.

I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in
dismissing the appellants' appeals under Article 8 and I set aside the
decision of Judge Page.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a new hearing on all
matters before a judge other than Judge Page or Judge Real.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             24 January 2019
