

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05242/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2018                      |On 10 December 2018                |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                Duplay Biswas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik of Counsel, instructed by Chancery
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh who was born on 20 May  1988.
    He appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fox
    promulgated on 23 May 2018 in which he considered  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant against the decision of the respondent made on 15 March  2017
    to refuse the appellant leave to remain on  the  basis  of  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence.

 2. The decision was made and communicated to the  appellant  by  a  letter
    dated 15 March 2017.  It records that the  appellant  had  entered  the
    United Kingdom sometime on 1 March 2007 following an earlier  grant  of
    permission and on 23 April 2010 he was granted further leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a student until 30 November 2012.  Then, on 12
    February 2013, he was granted yet further leave to remain as a  student
    until 28 January 2014.  There were then subsequent grants of leave.

 3. The point made by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter is  that
    on 16 October 2012 the appellant purported to  take  a  TOEIC  speaking
    test with Educational Testing Services, universally referred to as ETS.
     It then went on to say that ETS had a record of his speaking test and,
    using verification software as well as other means, it  took  the  view
    that the certificate had been fraudulently obtained by  the  use  of  a
    proxy test taker.  In particular, it noted that  the  scores  from  the
    test taken on 16 October 2012 indicated that  he  had  established  his
    ability to pass the necessary grade.  However, as a result of what  ETS
    considered to be the use of a proxy test taker,  the  test  result  had
    been cancelled by ETS.  The letter goes on to make a further  reference
    to a test taken on 21 November 2012.  It is not explained why he should
    have taken that second test.  No evidence was supplied in  relation  to
    it.  It is therefore the test of 16 October 2012 which is the  relevant
    factor as far as this appeal is concerned.

 4. The letter goes on to say, in what are fairly conventional terms,  that
    the use of fraudulent test certificates undermines the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control and is a matter of grave public  concern.



 5. That was the basis upon which  the  decision  maker  made  his  or  her
    decision.  It was in due course supported by  a  bundle  served  on  25
    April 2018 in  support  of  the  appeal.   It  consists  of  a  witness
    statement of Hilary Rackstraw in which she says in paragraph 4 that the
    appellant had been identified as a person  who  had  sought  to  obtain
    leave by deception through the use of a fraudulently  obtained  English
    language test certificate provided by ETS.  That was, as  a  matter  of
    fact, wrong.  The appellant had  not  used  that  certificate  at  all.
    Instead he had gone to another test provider and he had used that other
    certificate.  Consequently, the case advanced by the Secretary of State
    at the hearing was never, as far as I am aware, that the appellant  had
    used this certificate; rather, that he had gone through  a  process  of
    obtaining a certificate, presumably on  the  basis  that  it  might  be
    necessary to use it or that it might be convenient to use  it  at  some
    future date if the situation arose.

 6. The further evidence consists of the material in Annex A.  That records
    that the certificate which had been issued, bearing  the  number  25015
    was invalid as a result of the test taken on 16 October 2012.   On  the
    date in question some 45% of the tests taken at the centre were said to
    be invalid.  That totalled 72 applications in all and  I  suspect  this
    rendered the further 87 applications questionable.  There is a  further
    spreadsheet which deals with the results in rather greater detail  than
    we need go into.  The additional evidence provided by the Secretary  of
    State was in the conventional form of the statements made  by  its  two
    witnesses, that is the evidence of Mr Peter Millington as well  as  the
    evidence of Miss Rebecca Collings.

 7. This was the material that was before the Secretary of  State  and  was
    also the material that was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge when he
    came to consider the appeal.  His approach to  the  appeal  is  clearly
    revealed in the determination.  He considered the burden  and  standard
    of proof and went on to consider the requirements of the relevant  case
    law in appeals of this nature.  He  then  went  on  to  deal  with  the
    evidence that was provided.  The appellant's case was that, although he
    had applied for and obtained an appointment to sit the  relevant  test,
    he did not in fact do so.  He accepted that the  appointment  had  been
    made by him but he then decided  to  abandon  the  ETS  examination  in
    favour of another test provider and that he therefore neither used  nor
    had any reason to use the test which had been provided  and  which  was
    the subject of the challenge by the Secretary of State.

 8. The judge recorded the evidence  that  was  provided  as  well  as  the
    appellant's assertion that he had nothing to do with the use of a proxy
    test taker.  However, when he received the  respondent's  decision  the
    appellant made no effort to contact ETS to tell them that a mistake had
    occurred in his particular case.

 9. It was therefore the task of the judge to consider, on  the  one  hand,
    the claim that was advanced by the Secretary of State imposing upon the
    Secretary of State an evidential, but not at this stage a legal burden,
    and then to consider the explanation that was provided by the appellant
    as to whether or not  there  was  another  reason  explaining  why  the
    Secretary of State may have been mistaken about his assessment  of  the
    evidence.  Then,  as  a  result  of  balancing  those  two  sources  of
    material, to decide whether the legal burden had been discharged by the
    Secretary of State; that legal burden being upon the Secretary of State
    throughout the process.  The judge accepted that the appellant was  not
    required  to  prove  his  innocence.   The  judge  recorded  that   the
    respondent had the burden upon her.  In paragraph 29 he said

         The respondent had satisfied the burden upon  her.   The  appellant
         has failed to satisfy the shifting burden upon him.

    In my judgment that was clearly the operation of the process which  the
    judge had clearly identified from such cases as SSHD v Shehzad and anor
    [2016] EWCA Civ 615.   What it demonstrates is that the  judge  had  in
    mind whether or not the explanation provided by  the  appellant  was  a
    plausible, satisfactory or credible one so that the  evidential  burden
    established primarily by the respondent had not been outweighed by  the
    appellant's explanation, such that the respondent was entitled  to  say
    that the evidential and legal burden had been established.

10. The reasoning of the  judge  is  found  principally  in  paragraphs  34
    onwards.   He  recorded  that  the  appellant  accepted  that  he   had
    registered for the ETS examination and then considered the  claim  made
    by the appellant that he had abandoned the test in  favour  of  another
    test provider.  He therefore considered his explanation that he did not
    attend the examination.  However, the judge looked at the evidence  and
    considered that there was a proxy test taker  used.   That  meant  that
    somebody, a proxy test taker, had attended at the  examination  centre,
    had sat the examination and had produced a result as  recorded  in  the
    paperwork.   The  judge  therefore  found  that  the   respondent   had
    demonstrated what he described as a nexus between the  ETS  examination
    and the appellant.  Indeed, it must be a matter of simple common sense.
    But what the judge had to consider was whether there could have been  a
    third party who attended at the centre using the name of the  appellant
    and the appellant's reference number, who then sat the test, obtained a
    test certificate and had done all of this without the appellant knowing
    it.  That would require the proxy text taker  to  have  a  considerable
    amount of information.  It would need information about the date of the
    test, information about the time of the  test,  information  about  the
    venue of the test, information about the appellant,  information  about
    his name and  his  identification  number.   All  of  those  pieces  of
    information would be required in order for this charade to  have  taken
    place and it is, (it appears to me, at any rate, to be) incredible that
    this could have been arranged without  the  appellant's  complicity  in
    some way or another.  Nor of course, would it answer  the  question  of
    why the proxy test taker would be involved in this charade  if  he  was
    not being paid for his services; if  he  was  simply  doing  it,  as  a
    joyride of his own, without any reference to the appellant.  The  judge
    considered these matters in paragraphs 35 and 36 and said:

         35.  Therefore I turn  to  consider  the  appellant's  explanation.
             Simply stated he claims that he abandoned the ETS  examination
             in favour of another test provider.  He claims that he had  no
             need to engage in deception or dishonesty as  he  had  a  good
             command of English and relied upon another test certificate to
             continue his studies.

         36.  This does not address the active involvement of an  individual
             who assigned their examination contribution to the appellant's
             candidate  number.   Nor  [does,  sic]  is  this   explanation
             supported by the available evidence.

    In my assessment of the judge's approach, he was exactly  applying  the
    correct analysis of the material  before  him.   He  first  considered,
    whether or not on its face, the evidence adduced by  the  Secretary  of
    State was sufficient to establish the evidential burden placed upon the
    Secretary of State.  He then went on to consider the evidential  burden
    placed upon the appellant to  provide  an  innocent  explanation  which
    would undermine the weight that is to be attached to the  Secretary  of
    State's material, often in generic form, such  that  having  looked  at
    both sides of the argument together, the judge might then conclude that
    the Secretary of State had failed to establish the  legal  burden.   He
    was clear, and properly so, as to the  evidential  burden  having  been
    discharged by the respondent.  He was also clear, and properly so, that
    the appellant had failed to discharge the evidential burden  placed  on
    him to provide a plausible explanation as to how  the  situation  arose
    that a proxy test taker had been engaged.  Accordingly,  he  was  fully
    entitled to reach the conclusion that the legal burden, placed upon the
    Secretary of State, had been discharged by him.

11. The submissions made  this  morning  by  Mr  Malik  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant with the degree of lucidity with which  I  am  very  familiar
    were several in number.  The first matter that he drew to my  attention
    was the position dealt with by Beatson LJ in Shehzad  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    615, a decision that was made on 29 June 2016.  In his judgment,  which
    was the subject of an agreement by Lady Justice King and  Lady  Justice
    Black, he stated in paragraph 3

         ... if the Secretary of State  provides  prima  facie  evidence  of
         deception, the burden 'shifts' onto the  individual  to  provide  a
         plausible innocent explanation and that if the individual does  so,
         the burden 'shifts back' to the Secretary of State".

12. Mr Malik submits that the Secretary of State failed to provide evidence
    as to the primary evidential burden and that the judge  did  not  fully
    engage with the question  of  whether  the  appellant  had  provided  a
    plausible explanation. In particular, he relies upon the evidence  that
    was provided in the respondent's bundle, to which I have referred.   He
    did so by reference to the decision of the President and Upper Tribunal
    Judge Rintoul in the case of MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450
    (IAC).  He referred in particular to the evidence that  was  summarised
    in paragraph 15 of its  decision  and,  specifically,  in  subparagraph
    (xiv):

         A study of the spreadsheets attached to the witness statements of
         the Home Office employee, Mr Sewell reveals a lack of any nexus
         between the data supplied to him by ETS and the unique ID of
         individual candidates.  As a result, the experts say 'We do not
         know the process by which the candidate's name is linked to each
         test'.

13. That is a reference to the spreadsheet that we see in Annex A and  more
    fully  in  the  spreadsheets  that  follow.   Annex  A  states  that  a
    certificate 0044202171025015 was invalid.  Mr Malik submits that  there
    is no evidence of the process by which the candidate's name  is  linked
    to that test.  The candidate's name is given as that of this appellant,
    Duplay Biswas, and it also makes reference to his date of  birth  being
    given as 20 May 1988, the same date of birth as is attributed  to  this
    appellant by the appellant himself.  It mentions his  nationality.   It
    mentions the relevant test centre.  It also mentions the  date  of  the
    relevant test which was 16 October 2012.  On that material, it was open
    to the judge (and indeed to the decision maker and  ETS)  to  link  the
    relevant certificate number to this appellant.  Of course,  we  do  not
    know the precise process by which the candidate's  name  is  linked  to
    each test but the matter that was before  the  judge  was  to  consider
    whether, on the basis  of  the  material  which  was  advanced  by  the
    Secretary of State, this was as a matter of  fact  a  test  certificate
    which had been issued to the appellant as a result of a test.

14. It was also submitted by Mr Malik that there was no evidence that there
    was a proxy test taker.  In my judgment that is  unsustainable  because
    what is marked in Annex A is the word 'invalid' and we know  that  this
    is a term of art attributed to a situation where there is an electronic
    consideration of the voice records followed by a double  assessment  by
    human  ears  as  to  the  invalidity  of  the  test  result.    It   is
    inconceivable in my judgment that there was no proxy test  taker,  that
    no test took place, that no certificate was issued as a result of  that
    test, that there was no speaking score of 180 nor a  writing  score  of
    150, that therefore was no adequate  evidence  to  suggest  that  these
    events took place.  The word 'invalid' meant that there  had  to  be  a
    process by which a voice record was considered and that can  only  mean
    that a voice record was created and assessed by those in  the  position
    of doing so.  For these reasons, I am entirely satisfied  that  it  was
    open to the judge to find that the appellant was linked  to  this  test
    certificate, was linked to a proxy test taker and  was  linked  to  the
    provision of a certificate which was subsequently rendered invalid.  It
    does not matter that this certificate  was  not  used  because  it  was
    obtained with a potential use in mind albeit a use which  was  not,  in
    the end, taken up.

15. The third point that is made by Mr Malik is upon a consideration of the
    decision in the Court of Appeal in Majumder and Qadir [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    1167 in which Beatson LJ once again gave the judgment of the court  (to
    which Lord Justice Sales and Lady Justice Black agreed).  In that  case
    the Secretary of State herself had submitted that when  considering  an
    allegation of  dishonesty  some  seven  factors  at  least  had  to  be
    considered.  I do not suppose for one moment that that is an exhaustive
    list but it is a helpful list of factors which  should  be  taken  into
    account.  I shall recount them now:

      1) what the person accused had to gain from being dishonest;

      2) what he had to lose;

      3) what is known about his character;

      4) the cultural environment in which he operated;

      5) how the individual accused of  dishonesty  performed  under  cross-
         examination;

      6) whether the Tribunal's assessment of that person's English language
         proficiency is commensurate with his or her TOEIC scores;

      7) whether his or her academic  achievements  are  such  that  it  was
         unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated.

    It is said on behalf of the appellant by Mr Malik that that process  of
    going through each of the seven requirements to consider dishonesty was
    not the approach that was adopted by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in
    his determination.  However, a consideration of the determination makes
    it plain and clear that the test certificate was not used.  It was  not
    therefore necessary, as a matter of fact, for this test certificate  to
    have  been  obtained.   Secondly,  the  judge  considers   the   cross-
    examination of the appellant, (who refers to this in  paragraph  17  of
    the determination).  It was for the  judge  to  determine  whether  the
    cross-examination provided evidence that was material.

16. In fact, the point in the cross-examination noted by the judge is  that
    the appellant stated that he did not contact the ETS when  he  received
    the respondent's decision.  It is therefore necessary to  consider  the
    respondent's decision made on 15 March  2017  in  which  it  explicitly
    stated that on 16 October 2012 the appellant  had  used  a  proxy  test
    taker and had done so in a way which was  fraudulent.   If  this  grave
    allegation had been made, and the appellant had not sat  the  test  and
    knew nothing about the sitting of the test and was at a  complete  loss
    to understand how it came about that a certificate had been issued,  it
    was open to the judge to consider whether the appellant would not at an
    early stage have made written protestations of innocence either to  ETS
    or to the Secretary of State.  What the judge records is that, although
    the appellant was not required to pursue ETS for an explanation, it was
    submitted on the appellant's behalf that he had  no  awareness  of  the
    allegation before 23 April 2018 when the respondent's bundle was filed.
     That surely is not correct.  He knew of the  allegation  on  15  March
    2017 when the refusal letter was made.  It was therefore a  point  that
    the judge was entitled to take into account that  no  action  had  been
    taken earlier.

17. The other factors, which it is said the judge should  have  taken  into
    account, were that the certificate was of  no  use  to  the  appellant,
    there was no need for him to engage in deception or  dishonesty  as  he
    had a good command of  English  and  was  able  to  rely  upon  another
    uncontroversial test certificate.  It cannot properly be said that  the
    judge was not looking at the fact  that  there  was  no  need  for  the
    appellant to use dishonesty, but it was part of the  explanation  which
    in the event the judge found wanting.  He did so by reason of  what  he
    subsequently said, namely that the appellant did not address the active
    involvement  of  an   individual   who   assigned   their   examination
    contribution to the appellant's candidate number.

18. Consequently, I do not accept that the judge  failed  in  his  duty  to
    consider  the  position  of  the  appellant  in  the  round,  which  is
    effectively what was being said by the Court of Appeal in  setting  out
    its list of material factors in the consideration of  a  case  such  as
    this.

19. Finally, it is said that the judge did not  properly  engage  with  the
    discretionary nature of paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules.   It
    clearly contains a discretionary element.  So much is  clear  from  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in R  (on  the  application  of  Charly
    Ngouh) [2010] EWHC 2218.  This case was  heard  in  the  Administrative
    Court and came before Mr Justice Foskett, who  said  in  paragraph  120
    that there was a large range of  context  which  might  or  might  not,
    depending on the circumstances of the  case,  render  it  desirable  to
    permit the applicant for indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He said:

         "In some instances the offence may be so serious that little by way
         of explanatory justification for relying on this paragraph  may  be
         required: the answer may be obvious. Where, however, the offence is
         in a different part of the criminal  spectrum,  certainly  if  very
         much at the lower end, then  far  greater  justification  would  be
         required, particularly if it is the only occasion where the  person
         concerned has broken the law."

    That passage graphically describes the range of circumstance where  the
    decision may or may not be justified on the basis of a discretion.

20. Mr Malik submits that the judge did not go on to deal with the positive
    factors in favour of the appellant: his long  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom; the fact that he was able to obtain a legitimate  test  result
    not using deception; the fact that he did not use deception;  the  fact
    that he is a man of good character and has studied hard.  All of  these
    factors should have been taken into account and, had  they  been  taken
    into account, then it may well, or would indeed,  have  resulted  in  a
    decision that, although deception had been used, it was  not  deception
    of a degree that merited the refusal of his grant of further  leave  to
    remain.

21. It is true that the judge did not go through the discretionary elements
    in a separate part of his judgment but what the  determination  reveals
    is that he knew very well what the  factors  were  in  the  appellant's
    immigration history and those had to be balanced against the fact  that
    an act of dishonesty had been committed and that the appellant  himself
    was complicit in that act  of  dishonesty;  otherwise,  it  would  have
    required the judge to find that it  was  possible  and  plausible  that
    there had been this unidentified proxy test taker who had gone  through
    the necessary machinations in order to sit a  fraudulent  test  without
    the appellant's knowledge.

22. Consequently, having found that the appellant had used  dishonesty  and
    that his involvement in the obtaining of a fraudulent test  certificate
    justified in principle the refusal of indefinite leave to remain, there
    was no room for a further  exercise  of  discretion  to  say  that  the
    conduct of the appellant was not such  as  to  render  the  refusal  of
    indefinite leave to remain unlawful.

23. It seems to me that, once the appellant had been found  to  have  acted
    with dishonesty and had not conceded that he had acted with  dishonesty
    and advanced a case which was implausible and indeed incredible,  those
    were factors which gravitated heavily in favour of  the  refusal  of  a
    grant of ILR.  That was in fact the point that was made in the  refusal
    letter expressly where the Secretary of State says,

         Although you did  not  rely  on  your  TOEIC  certificate  for  the
         purposes of your application for leave to remain,  your  complicity
         in the fraud  nevertheless  contributed  to  an  extremely  serious
         attack on the maintenance of effective immigration control and  the
         public interest generally.

    It seems to me that  this  thinking  permeates  the  determination  and
    consequently there was no need for the judge to make explicit reference
    to the fact that there was a discretionary element but that he was  not
    going to give the benefit of the exercise of that discretionary element
    to the appellant.

DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error of law and accordingly  his
    decision should stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

