
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05538/2015

                                         HU/07580/2015

                                                 HU/07585/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House                                       Decision and
Reasons Promulgated
On 4th September 2018                                     On 9th October
2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                               MR JOHN MATHEW
                            MRS GRACE JOHN MATHEW
                            MISS JISA GRACE JOHN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                 Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                 Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant: Ms M Gherman, Counsel, instructed by Masters Solicitors.
For the respondent:  Mr E Tefan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




Introduction

   1. The second appellant came to the United Kingdom on 2 February 2010
      with leave as a student. The first appellant, her husband, came with
      their daughter, the third appellant, the following year, on 10
      February 2011. All are nationals of India. The third appellant was
      born on 26 September 2000 which means she was 10 years of age when she
      arrived.


   2. Applications were made on their behalf on 21 July 2015 for leave to
      remain on the basis of their family and private life. Those
      applications were refused on 26 August 2015. They could not meet the
      eligibility requirements as they were not British or settled and at
      that stage the third appellant had not lived in the United Kingdom for
      at least seven years.

   3. Regarding their private life they had not been here the necessary
      length of time and very significant obstacles to their integration
      into life in India was not identified. At the time of application the
      third appellant had been in the United Kingdom for four and half
      years.

   4. No exceptional circumstances were identified. The respondent had
      regard to the section 55 duty and concluded that her best interests
      were to be with her parents who could care for her in India. There she
      would have access to education and healthcare albeit to a different
      standard than that in the United Kingdom.

   5. Their appeals were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain at
      Hatton Cross on 27 February 2017. In a decision promulgated on 24
      April 2017 the appeals were dismissed.

   6. The appellant was represented by Counsel at that hearing and it was
      accepted that the requirements of appendix FM could not be met.
      Rather, reliance was placed upon the provisions of paragraph 276 ADE
      (vi). The focus was upon the third appellant, with her mother stating
      that she her daughter could no longer adequately converse in her first
      language, Mayalam.

   7. Under the heading `Findings' the judge at paragraph 14 set out what
      the second appellant said in her statement about her daughter's
      ability to adjust to life in India. She referred to her having formed
      friendships in school here and that she was doing well and becoming
      more independent. At paragraph 15 the judge recorded that they had no
      reason to doubt the truthfulness of this evidence. The judge
      considered whether there would be very significant obstacles to their
      reintegration into India.

   8. The judge acknowledged that the third appellant in particular would
      have adjustment issues but concluded she could adapt. The judge also
      acknowledged that she might lose out on education as she would have to
      make a fresh start in India. However, India has an education system
      and English is widely spoken. The judge felt that her time here might
      place her at an advantage. The judge referred to the statements of the
      appellants and did not find very significant obstacles to their
      reintegration. Regarding any claim outside the immigration rules, the
      judge recorded the length of time the family had been here and
      accepted they would have friends here and had put down roots. However,
      they were aware their leave did not mean they could stay permanently.
      The conclusion was at the decision was proportionate.

The Upper Tribunal

   9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the assessment
      outside the rules was inadequate. There was no reference to the
      criteria set out in section 117 B. Whilst the policy reflected in
      section 117 B in relation to children is seven years (which the third
      appellant had not achieved at that stage) it was arguable the judge
      had not fully analysed her integration.

  10.  Ms Gherman pointed out that there was no reference in the judge's
      decision to the section 55 duty or the considerations in section 117
      B. There was no consideration of the third appellant's best interests
      before the proportionality exercise was undertaken. The judge at
      paragraph 50 had accepted the account given by the child's mother
      about likely problems with reintegration.Ms Gherman initially argued
      that the judge did not have proper regard for the fact the third
      appellant was a qualifying child. However she had miscalculated her
      age and accepted that at the time of the hearing before the First tier
      judge she had been here six years and so was not a qualifying child.

  11. She also argued that the article 8 rights of the first and second
      appellant had not been properly considered. The family have
      integrated. The first appellant was involved with the church and thy
      would pay him a salary. The second appellant could be engaged as a
      nurse which is a sector in need.

  12. In response, Mr Tefan accepted that the judge had not identified the
      child's best interests before undertaking the proportionality
      exercise. There was also an absence of reference to section 55 albeit
      the judge does make some comments about her being in education. He
      submitted it was unbelievable that the third appellant would forget
      her mother tongue.

  13. I reserve my decision on the error of law issue. Ms Gherman said that
      an appeal bundle had been prepared so that if a material error were
      found I could go on to remake the decision without hearing further
      evidence. Mr Tefan indicated no objection to this.

Consideration

  14.   The decision is brief but in itself this is not a fault. However,
      the analysis of the article 8 issues arising is very limited. The
      approach is incorrect and lacks structure. The starting point is to
      determine the child's best interests. This is to be done aside from
      any question of proportionality. It is only when this is determined
      that the proportionality question arises. Thereafter there is an
      obligation to consider the factors in section 117 B. The judge has not
      followed this sequential procedure.

  15.  The respondent took the decision on the application on 26 August
      2015. The reasons for refusal at paragraph 69 referred to an earlier
      human rights application which was refused on 12 August 2013 with no
      right of appeal. The respondent acknowledges that this was in error.
      The application for permission suggests this error and subsequent
      delay meant the family's greater integration as a consequence should
      have been taken into account in assessing the proportionality of the
      decision.

Error of law

  16. I find that the decision does materially err in law and cannot stand.
      The judge's findings are brief and are directed towards paragraph 276
      ADE (vi) of the immigration rules and whether there would be very
      significant obstacles to the family's reintegration into India. The
      judge concluded that very significant obstacles had not been
      established but did not go into any details. In particular there is no
      proper consideration of the best interests of the child involved.
      There is also no reference to the considerations in section 117 B.


  17. The parties before me agreed that if an error were found I was in a
      position to remake the decision without hearing further evidence. The
      main thrust of the appeal has been the position of the child who now
      in fact is a young woman. She entered the United Kingdom when she was
      10.

  18. I would agree with the presenting officer that is not credible she
      would not have some understanding of the language of her home country.
      She would be in a position to adapt to the language and customs. She
      will have been influenced by her parent's background in growing up and
      she did lead the early part of her life in India. I also agree that
      time in the United Kingdom would be of benefit to her on return to her
      home country. However, as the judge acknowledged, there would be
      issues of adjustment for her and she will lose out in terms of
      education because of the disruption.

  19. She is now almost an adult. Most significantly at this point she has
      been in the United Kingdom over 7 years. She has also integrated into
      life here. She is living in a settled home environment. She, along
      with her parents, want to remain here and see their future is being
      here. Time has moved on. There was a delay of almost 2 years when the
      respondent did not deal correctly with an earlier application. The
      longer the family have remained here the greater the ties.

  20. In MT and ET (child's best interests; extempore pilot) Nigeria [2018]
      UK UT 88 the Upper Tribunal reiterated the proposition that a pre-
      school child would have difficulty establishing article 8 rights
      outside that with their parents. The position changes over time and an
      assessment of the best interests must adapt to a wider focus, for
      instance, on the child's position in the wider world including their
      schooling.

  21. The respondent's own guidance requires decision-makers to have regard
      to the best interests of the child and whether removal is appropriate
      in light of all the circumstances.

  22. It is my conclusion that the best interests of the 3rd appellant would
      be to remain here with her parents.


  23. I have considered the public interest as set out in section 117 B. The
      1st appellant is a Minister of religion and has references from his
      church. He is paid a stipend. The 2nd appellant trained as a nurse in
      India and has obtained NVQ qualifications here. The family do not have
      a poor immigration history. There is no criminality. They speak
      English. They are likely to be self-sufficient. There is evidence of
      integration. There is no dispute that they are living as a family unit
      with the 3rd appellant. If they returned to India they would have to
      start their life over again.

Conclusion

  24. Having regard to all the circumstances it would be a disproportionate
      interference with the established article 8 rights of the family to
      expect them to leave. I remake the decision allowing the appeals under
      article 8 .

Decision


   The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain materially errs in law
   and is set aside. I remake the decision allowing the appeals on the basis
   of article 8.


Francis J Farrelly
 Deputy Upper Tribunal
 Dated 02 October 2018
