
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/05625/2015
     HU/05628/2015
     HU/05636/2015
     HU/05656/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th December 2017                     |On 17th January  2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            WAM (first Appellant)
                            MG (second Appellant)
                            kam (third Appellant)
                           HAW (fourth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Maqsood of Counsel, instructed by Blackrock
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are the appellants' appeals against the decision of Judge O'Garro
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 31st January 2017.

Background

 2. The appellants are citizens of Ghana.  The first appellant came to  the
    UK illegally in 1999 and  has  remained  here  ever  since.   His  wife
    entered the UK on a visit visa in 2003 and has also  overstayed  since.
    The third appellant is a British national, as a consequence  of  having
    lived in the UK for ten years.  The fourth appellant  is  a  qualifying
    child.

 3. The family have, over the years, made a number of applications, firstly
    for EEA residence cards and then under the family and private life  ten
    year route and Article 8.

 4. The judge accepted that the first appellant had lived away  from  Ghana
    for seventeen years, and  the  second  for  thirteen  years.   He  also
    accepted that the third appellant was a British national and the fourth
    a qualifying child.  He concluded however that it would  be  reasonable
    for them to return with their parents to Ghana, which was in their best
    interests and having  regard  to  the  parents'  appalling  immigration
    history the public interest required their removal.

Submissions

 5. The appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had not properly applied the relevant case law.

 6. Permission to appeal was initially refused but subsequently granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on 5th October 2017.

 7. Mr Duffy said that he could not defend the  determination  and  he  was
    happy for me to set it aside and  remake  the  decision,  allowing  the
    appeal.

Findings and Conclusions

 8. The judge erred in law.

 9. He did not properly apply the relevant case law set out  in  R  on  the
    application of MA and Others [2016] EWCA Civ 705  where  the  Court  of
    Appeal held that strong countervailing factors are required to  justify
    an interference with a child's private life where there has been  seven
    years' residence, the more so where, as here one  of  the  children  is
    British.

10. There is also  a  failure  to  consider  the  respondent's  policy  and
    guidance set out in  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family
    Migration: Appendix FM, Section 1.0b  Family  Life  (as  a  Partner  or
    Parent) and Private Life: Ten Year Routes which reads:

         "11.2.3  Would it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen child
                to leave the UK?

                Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must
                not take a decision in relation to  the  parent  or  primary
                carer of a British citizen child where the  effect  of  that
                decision would be to force that British child to  leave  the
                EU, regardless of the age of that child.  This reflects  the
                European Court of Justice judgment in Zambrano.

                Where a decision to refuse the application would  require  a
                parent or primary carer to return to a country  outside  the
                EU, the case must always be assessed on the  basis  that  it
                would be unreasonable to expect a British citizen  child  to
                leave the EU with that parent or primary carer."

11. It was on that basis that Mr Duffy very properly  made  the  concession
    that the appeal ought to be allowed.

Notice of Decision

12. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appellants' appeals are allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 13 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor







