
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05378/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th November 2019                |On 2nd December 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    r m m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Shaw, instructed by North Kensington Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Zambia born on 11 May 1972.   He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A M Black promulgated
    on 31 July 2019 dismissing his  appeal  against  deportation  on  human
    rights grounds.

Immigration history

2.   The Appellant, his wife and son arrived in the UK on  23  January  2001
    on a six-month visit visa. They remained in the UK after the expiry  of
    their visas. On September 2003 the Appellant's daughter, L,  was  born.
    On 28 February 2008, the Appellant applied for discretionary  leave  to
    remain on the basis of the Respondent's policy,  the  seven-year  child
    concession. This application was refused on 11 March 2008 due  to  non-
    payment of fee.

3.   On 18 March 2008, the Appellant was convicted at Guildford Crown  Court
    of the possession of a false instrument (a false work permit).  He  was
    sentenced to imprisonment for fifteen  months.  On  7  April  2008  the
    Appellant was included in a family application for indefinite leave  to
    remain based on the seven-year concession.  In view of the  Appellant's
    conviction, this was refused.

4.   On 11 April 2008 the Appellant was served with notice of  liability  to
    deportation. On 21 October 2008, the Appellant, his wife  and  children
    were served with a decision to make a deportation order. The  Appellant
    made further representations. He was notified on 16 August 2010 of  the
    decision to make a deportation order.  The  Appellant  and  his  family
    appealed against this decision and  the  appeal  was  dismissed  on  24
    January 2011. On 3 October 2011  a  deportation  order  was  signed  in
    respect of the Appellant, his wife and two children.

5.    On  18  January  2013,  further  representations  were  received.  The
    Respondent then revoked the deportation order against  the  Appellant's
    wife and son and declared the deportation order against the Appellant's
    daughter to be invalid, as  she  had  been  naturalised  as  a  British
    citizen on 9 December 2003.  The  Appellant's  further  representations
    were refused as a fresh claim, which was subsequently reconsidered  and
    refused on 9 March 2017 and  20  December  2017,  the  decisions  under
    appeal.

Judge's findings

6.   The judge made the following relevant findings:

         "63. I give considerable weight to the evidence of the  Appellant's
             daughter.  She gave oral evidence. She has three close friends
             who supported her in settling into her  new  school.  She  has
             moved home about four times since birth  because  her  parents
             could not afford the rent and were forced to do so. She  found
             these  moves  extremely  unsettling.  The   latest   move   to
             Wolverhampton from London was very emotional and life changing
             because she had to leave her  childhood  friends.  She  visits
             them in London.  She has settled well in Wolverhampton and has
             friends there. She does not wish to live in Zambia.  Her  life
             is in the UK. She enjoys living here and her education is very
             important to her. She is top  of  the  class  in  English  and
             maths. She plans to study midwifery. She has  no  interest  in
             Zambia.  She  previously  had  contact   with   her   maternal
             grandparents there but no longer has  such  contact.  She  has
             never met them. She would not want to live without her  father
             who does a lot for her. He  collects  her  when  she  goes  to
             friends' parties in the evenings. She  feels  safe  with  him.
             When she feels sad and upset her  father  cheers  her  up.  He
             spends time with her. He has taught her many life  skills.  He
             attends parents' evenings at school, helps with  her  homework
             and communicates with teachers when necessary. When her mother
             was in hospital with a heart condition  he  looked  after  her
             ensuring her needs were met including that she was  ready  for
             school with  the  support  of  her  brother.  The  Appellant's
             daughter told me she would be lost without her father  in  the
             UK. She was trying not to think about it. If he  was  deported
             she was not sure if she would visit him in Zambia  because  it
             was not a holiday type of country."

         "65.     I accept it will be very difficult indeed for this  child
             to remain in the UK if her father were deported. However,  she
             is settled in school, has friends there and is doing well. She
             is on course to achieve her ambition  of  studying  midwifery.
             While her studies would undoubtedly be affected by the absence
             of the Appellant, she is aged 15 and clearly  focused  on  her
             ambitions for her future career. She would have the support of
             her mother and brother. I find therefore that with the support
             of her teachers, her extended family in London and her friends
             locally, she will remain on course to  achieve  that  ambition
             notwithstanding the absence of her  father.   While  I  accept
             that family life cannot be continued through social  media  or
             the Internet, the Appellant would remain in contact  with  his
             daughter via such means and will be able to  maintain  contact
             with her teachers by email as he does now. He  could  continue
             to provide some guidance and support for his daughter by those
             means. I do not accept she  would  not  visit  her  father  in
             Zambia. Whilst she is doubtful about this, I find she would do
             so if he were deported. Given my findings below as regards the
             ability of the Appellant's wife to work in the UK, I find that
             flights to Zambia for the Appellant's child and wife would  be
             affordable. In so finding, I fully  accept  that  family  life
             cannot be maintained through such  visits  and  telephone  and
             Internet contacts alone. Nonetheless it is  a  means  for  the
             Appellant and his daughter and wife to remain in contact."

         "67. I have heard little evidence relating to the  Appellant's  son
             save that  he  has  recently  been  referred  by  his  GP  for
             psychiatric assessment. He is described by his mother as being
             in low mood.  There  is  no  formal  diagnosis.  There  is  no
             evidence  that  he  is  currently  working  or  in  school  or
             education and I find that this is due to a lack of immigration
             status. He has spent some time in a youth offender institution
             but I have received little information about  the  reason  for
             this. For the reasons I set  out  below  the  Appellant's  son
             would have the option of remaining lawfully in the  UK  if  he
             wished to do so. Thus, he would be able to continue to provide
             practical support to his mother and sister,  as  he  does  not
             according to his father.

         68.  Thus the impact of the Appellant's deportation on his daughter
             would in simple terms  be  a  reduction  of  personal  contact
             between the Appellant and his family; it would be  limited  to
             the visits during school holidays and on other  occasions,  as
             and when the Appellant and his wife could afford it.  In  that
             regard, I do not accept the Appellant's evidence that he would
             not be able to find work in Zambia. He has worked there in the
             past before coming to the UK. He has worked in the UK for five
             or six years as a carer.  He was promoted  in  that  role.  He
             told me most jobs in Zambia were  for  professionals  such  as
             doctors. I do not  accept  that.  There  is  likely  to  be  a
             requirement for carers who are less qualified such as  in  the
             case for the Appellant. He has extensive experience of working
             in the caring profession albeit not recently.  He  studied  in
             the UK for three years before his arrival here in 2001. He has
             transferable skills and qualifications, which he could utilise
             to find work in Zambia. This would enable him to  support  his
             wife, son and daughter in Zambia on their visits to  see  him.
             His evidence is that his life in Zambia was comfortable before
             he came to the UK; it would be so again on his return  (albeit
             without his family)."

         "71. I  bear  in  mind  the  opinion  of  Ms  Christine  Brown  the
             independent social worker. I give it  significant  weight  but
             cannot ignore that it was written  in  2013.  The  Appellant's
             daughter is healthy and settled  in  the  UK.  She  excels  at
             school. She is capable of continuing to focus on  her  studies
             with remote support from her father in Zambia. I do not  doubt
             or minimise the extent  of  the  disruption  to  this  child's
             emotional  wellbeing  but  I  am  unable  to  find  would   be
             significant, in the long term, given her reaction to past life
             changing events, such  as  leaving  her  previous  school  and
             moving to the West Midlands. Ms  Brown  has  not  taken  these
             positive  factors  into  account  in   her   assessment.   The
             Appellant's daughter has shown a level of  maturity  which  is
             impressive. I do not doubt she will bring this to bear in  the
             absence of her father. In summary, I give some weight  to  the
             opinion of Ms Brown but I do so in the context of the evidence
             of more recent events which have impacted on the wellbeing  of
             the Appellant's daughter.

         72.   The  Appellant's  children  were  living  in  a  stable  home
             environment when the Appellant was in prison and there  is  no
             evidence of his  daughter's  development  being  significantly
             undermined or damaged in the long term by his  absence  during
             that period. That said I recognise she was very young  at  the
             time. If the Appellant were to  be  deported  the  Appellant's
             daughter would continue to live in a stable  home  environment
             albeit with only her mother and brother with a  greater  input
             from family members and friends.  She  would  no  longer  have
             physical contact with her father on a regular basis but  while
             this would cause her distress and upset  in  the  short  term,
             this is capable of being resolved with support, assistance and
             counselling. She would no doubt receive support  from  friends
             and teachers at school and this would minimise the  disruption
             to her schoolwork. The contemporaneous evidence is not such as
             to suggest that she would suffer significant detriment in  the
             long term.

         73.   By  its  nature  deportation  separates  parents  and   their
             children. The Appellant's daughter's daily  life  outside  the
             home will not be altered significantly by the  deportation  of
             the Appellant. He can remain in email contact with her  school
             as now. I do not accept that the Appellant's  wife  and  child
             would not visit  Zambia  to  see  the  Appellant.  His  wife's
             employment would enable her to funds for such trips  as  would
             the Appellant's  own  employment  in  Zambia.  He  would  have
             accommodation there  once  he  has  found  a  job  to  support
             himself. Thus the  Appellant  will  be  able  to  support  his
             partner and children during their visits to Zambia."

         "75. The Appellant's  daughter  has  adapted  without  longstanding
             detriment to previous significant changes  in  her  life,  her
             home and her schools. She has resettled in due course with the
             assistance and support of friends  and  family.  That  support
             will continue to be available to her. She would remain in  the
             UK with her mother and brother, she has a stable home life  in
             this country and that will continue albeit in the  absence  of
             her father."

    Grounds of appeal

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
    on 12 September 2019 on the basis that the  judge  made  the  following
    arguable errors of law:

      1) The judge's findings were based on assumptions rather than facts.

    (2)   The  judge  made  contradictory  findings  in  relation  to   the
         appellant's criminality.

    (3)  The judge came to incorrect findings as to the lack of significant
         harm to the appellant's daughter.

    (4)  The judge made  assumptions  relating  to  the  appellant's  son's
         mental health.

    (5)  The judge made a mistake of fact in relation  to  the  deportation
         orders in respect of the appellant's family.

    (6)  The judge made a mistake of fact in finding that the appellant had
         spent the majority of his life in Zambia when he had  been  in  the
         United Kingdom for half his life.

Submissions

8.   Ms Shaw relied on the six grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's daughter, a British  citizen,
    to remain in the UK when the Appellant was deported.  The  judge  found
    that matters had not deteriorated since the social worker's report five
    years ago. The judge was not able to do so.  At  the  time  the  social
    worker's report was compiled, the  Appellant's  daughter,  L,  was  not
    aware of the Appellant's  imprisonment  or  deportation.  The  evidence
    before the judge showed that the Appellant played a significant part in
    L's life. They had moved house four  times  and  she  had  become  very
    unsettled. The judge acknowledged that the Appellant provided stability
    for the whole family and was a positive influence on L's  education.  L
    needed the  Appellant  in  her  life  during  her  GCSE  year  and  his
    deportation would have an unduly harsh effect on her.

9.   On the evidence before the judge the Appellant's son had mental  health
    issues. Ms Shaw submitted that they now had a diagnosis and  should  an
    error of law be found there was further evidence to be  submitted.  She
    submitted that the judge had not properly considered the effect of  the
    Appellant's deportation on his  children  and  had  made  a  number  of
    assumptions in her decision. L was at a critical time of her  education
    and had struggled with moving house. She was settled with the Appellant
    in her life and was now thriving. It was important that  the  Appellant
    remained with his family unit at the most critical time  in  L's  life.
    The judge failed to take into  account  the  support  provided  by  the
    Appellant at paragraph 71.

10.  Mr Kotas submitted that the  issue  in  this  appeal  was  whether  the
    Appellant's deportation would have unduly harsh  consequences  for  his
    British citizen daughter or whether they were compelling reasons  which
    outweighed his  deportation.  The  judge  had  not  made  contradictory
    findings. It was clear that she had assessed the case on the basis that
    there was no risk of reoffending.  Further,  the  judge  had  not  made
    assumptions or speculative findings. The judge was not required to look
    into the future and had to decide the appeal  on  the  evidence  before
    her. It was not submitted that the judge  had  left  out  any  material
    considerations.

11.  At paragraph 50, the judge acknowledged that the transition  to  living
    in Wolverhampton had been difficult, however, L was  now  excelling  at
    school. When the social worker's report was compiled, L was  told  that
    her father was working away and she was unaware he was in  prison.  The
    judge had taken into account the stability provided by the Appellant to
    the family unit and it was not submitted that the judge had misdirected
    herself in law. There was nothing going beyond what  would  necessarily
    be expected when a family is split by deportation. The judge considered
    the best interests of the  children  as  a  primary  consideration  and
    attached considerable weight to L's evidence at paragraph  63  and  the
    support provided by the Appellant.

12.  The judge accepted that it would be very difficult for L to  remain  in
    the UK without the Appellant and that her studies  would  be  affected.
    However, the judge's finding that L could  remain  on  course  was  not
    speculative. It was a conclusion based  on  the  evidence  before  her.
    Although there would be a reduction of personal contact, which would be
    limited to school holidays, the Appellant could still  play  an  active
    part in L's life.

13.  At paragraph 71, the judge took into account the opinion of the  social
    worker. She took  into  account  all  relevant  evidence  and  provided
    reasons why it would not be unduly harsh. She acknowledged L's level of
    maturity and the fact that the Appellant's absence,  while  he  was  in
    prison, was not detrimental to L's education however, she was young  at
    the time. The judge's finding  that  L  would  not  suffer  significant
    detriment was open to her on the evidence before her.

14.  It was clear from paragraph 102, that the Appellant had  to  show  that
    he met the elevated threshold and the evidence before the judge  failed
    to meet that test. The judge accepted the  detrimental  impact  of  the
    Appellant's deportation on  L  and  took  into  account  factors  which
    militated the other way. The high threshold was  not  met.   There  was
    nothing in this case which rendered the separation  unduly  harsh.  The
    judge had done a thorough job. There were no material facts  which  had
    been  overlooked  and  the  judge  had  reached  findings  which   were
    rationally open to her.

15.  At paragraph 104, the position of the Appellant's  son  was  considered
    and there were no compelling  circumstances.  The  judge  rejected  the
    Appellant's evidence that he would be unable to  obtain  employment  in
    Zambia because he had transferable skills and the judge was well  aware
    that the Appellant had been in the UK since 2001.

16.  In response, Ms Shaw stated that there  were  four  factors  which  the
    judge had failed to take into account. Firstly, the impact on L and her
    history of not coping with change as evidenced in the  social  worker's
    report. Deportation was  a  major  change  and  L  was  currently  more
    vulnerable because she was going through puberty and was at  a  crucial
    stage of her education. Secondly, the Appellant's wife's medication had
    increased and she had undergone heart surgery. Thirdly, the offence was
    not the most serious offence. Fourthly, the  circumstances  when  taken
    together, including the passage of time, the  Appellant's  remorse  and
    lack of reoffending, and his son's  referral  to  a  psychiatrist,  all
    amounted to compelling circumstances over and above those described  in
    the Immigration Rules. The Appellant  was  the  primary  carer  of  his
    children and L was thriving with the Appellant as part of her life.

17.  There was a contradiction at paragraphs 63 and 65 in  relation  to  the
    weight to be attached to the daughter's evidence and the  finding  that
    the judge did not accept she would not go to Zimbabwe.

Conclusions and reasons

Ground 1

18.  I am not persuaded that the judge's findings were based on  assumptions
    rather than facts. The Appellant's immigration history  set  out  above
    shows that the  Appellant's  wife  and  children  are  not  subject  to
    deportation. The judge proceeded on the basis that the Appellant's wife
    and children would remain in the UK. The Appellant's daughter,  L,  was
    naturalised as a British citizen and it was likely that the Appellant's
    wife was entitled to a Zambrano right  of  residence.  Given  that  the
    Appellant's son was now 19 years old and came to the  UK  when  he  was
    around a year old, it was likely that he could succeed under  paragraph
    276ADE having spent more than half his life in the  UK.  There  was  no
    clear evidence of criminality before the  judge  to  indicate  that  he
    could not meet the suitability requirements. In any  event,  the  judge
    considered his relocation to Zambia.

19.  The Appellant's wife and son have not made applications  for  leave  to
    remain, but it was clear on the evidence  before  the  judge  that  the
    Appellant's deportation was considered on the basis that  he  would  be
    deported and his family would remain in  the  UK  (paragraph  62).  The
    issue before the judge was whether the consequences of  separating  the
    family would be unduly harsh. That is the test the judge  applied.  The
    grounds and submissions  do  not  assert  that  the  judge  misdirected
    herself in law.

20.  There was insufficient evidence to show  that  the  Appellant's  wife's
    medical condition was likely to deteriorate or that she  would  not  be
    able to obtain employment. There was no up to date medical evidence  of
    her condition. There was insufficient evidence of the Appellant's son's
    mental health condition. At the date of hearing he had been referred to
    a psychiatrist by his GP. The evidence of the Appellant's mental health
    did not show that he was unable to work and  the  judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for the weight she attached to Ms Malkin's report.

21.  The alleged assumptions set  out  at  paragraph  2(a)  to  (m)  of  the
    grounds of appeal are findings or  inferences,  which  were  reasonably
    open to the judge on the evidence before her.

    Ground 2

22.  The judge did not make  contradictory  findings.  She  found  that  the
    Appellant's offence was committed over ten years ago  and  he  had  not
    reoffended since then. There was a low risk of reoffending.  There  was
    no material contradiction in the judge's findings at paragraphs 86  and
    89. She found that the Appellant maintained his innocence at  paragraph
    86 and rejected the psychologist's opinion that the  Appellant  had  an
    insight to his offence at paragraph 89.

Ground 3

23.  I am not persuaded that the judge's assessment of  the  best  interests
    of the children was flawed as alleged in the grounds. The judge did not
    assume the role of a social worker. The  judge  considered  the  social
    worker's report dated 24 April 2013 and the  oral  evidence  of  L,  to
    which she attached significant weight. She took into account  L's  age,
    that she was going through puberty and the stage of her education.  The
    judge also found that the Appellant  was  a  stable  influence  on  the
    family unit and he had been a positive influence for L when  they  were
    moving house.

24.  The  evidence  before  the  judge  did  not  demonstrate  a  degree  of
    harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child
    faced with the deportation  of  a  parent.  I  find  that  the  judge's
    conclusions were open to her on the evidence before her. There  was  no
    error of law in the judge's conclusion that  it  would  not  be  unduly
    harsh for L to remain in the UK without the  Appellant.  The  Appellant
    could not satisfy the Immigration Rules or the  exceptions  in  section
    117C.

Grounds 4, 5 and 6

25.  There was no evidence before the judge of the son's mental illness.  He
    had been referred to a psychiatrist, but no diagnosis  had  been  made.
    The judge was  well  aware  the  Appellant's  family  were  not  facing
    deportation. There was no arguable error of fact. The Appellant had not
    spent more than half his life in the UK. He came to the UK at  the  age
    of 29 and was 47 years of age at the date of  hearing.  The  judge  had
    considered all relevant matters. There is no error of law in the  judge
    failing to take into account evidence, which was not before her.

Conclusion

26.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 29 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 29 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
