
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05455/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th April 2018                          |On 8 May 2018                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     B W
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, instructed by Birch Tree Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  in  1989.   He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge R Sullivan,  dated  4
    October 2017, dismissing his appeal against the  refusal  of  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.

2.   The grounds submit that the judge materially erred in  law  in  placing
    reliance on what the parties had agreed  between  them  as  to  how  he
    should deal with matters which  were  in  issue  before  him.   By  not
    dealing with the matter of the risk that the Appellant said awaited him
    in Afghanistan, the judge failed to  give  full  consideration  to  the
    Appellant's claim to a right to remain in the UK as the grounds clearly
    set out protection claims. The judge failed to  decide  the  matter  of
    whether or not the Appellant  was  entitled  to  protection  under  the
    Refugee Convention and Article 3 of the ECHR.

3.   Further the judge erred in his treatment of Section  117A  to  117D  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge failed  to
    properly assess proportionality and failed to  take  into  account  the
    Appellant's English language certificate and the  grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain to his wife.

4.   Permission to appeal was originally refused on  the  grounds  that  the
    appeal before the judge was on human rights grounds only and the  judge
    was not in a position to consider protection in the absence of response
    by the Respondent to the asylum claim, which was still  outstanding  at
    the date of the hearing.  In addition, the  Appellant's  representative
    indicated at the hearing that the only issue was Article 8.  The  judge
    did not consider Section 117 to be determinative.  If the  judge  erred
    about the Appellant's English language ability it was not  material  as
    the financial requirements were not met.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  9  January
    2018 on the grounds that "As the judge recognised, proceeding with  the
    determination of the appellant's appeal in respect only of his  Article
    8 claim, his asylum claim having been unresolved and  outstanding  (for
    some considerable time) before the respondent for a decision,  was  far
    from ideal especially as his Article 8 claim was likely to be  informed
    to some extent by findings of  fact  to  be  made  in  respect  of  his
    protection claim. The judge recognised  also  that  he  was  likely  to
    'trespass' upon ground to be  covered  in  determining  the  protection
    claim and to some extent appears to have done so. I consider  that  the
    grounds, which may be argued generally, merit closer attention and  for
    that reason permission to appeal will be granted."

6.   Mr Aslam submitted that  there  was  no  decision  on  the  Appellant's
    asylum claim and Ms Pal confirmed that no decision would be forthcoming
    until the conclusion of the Appellant's human rights  appeal.  Although
    there seems to be no rational reason  for  why  the  Respondent  should
    await the decision of the human rights appeal before making a  decision
    on the asylum claim that was the factual situation which the judge  had
    to deal with and in that respect the appeal was rather unusual.

7.   It was agreed by the parties that the only issue before the  First-tier
    Tribunal was Article 8,  notwithstanding  the  asylum  claim  had  been
    outstanding for  some  considerable  time.   It  was  accepted  by  the
    Appellant's representative before the First-tier Tribunal that  if  the
    Appellant did not satisfy the suitability criteria in Appendix FM  then
    he was not entitled under the Rules for leave to remain on the basis of
    family and private life.

8.   The Appellant was refused leave to remain  under  Appendix  FM  on  the
    basis that he could not satisfy the suitability requirement because  of
    his involvement with the Taliban and that  he  could  not  satisfy  the
    financial requirement because his wife's income was below the  required
    threshold. It was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his wife, but since  the  Appellant  could
    not satisfy the suitability or the eligibility requirements,  paragraph
    EX.1 did not apply.



Submissions

9.   Mr Aslam submitted that  firstly,  there  was  a  procedural  issue  in
    relation to the  conduct  of  the  appeal  and  secondly,  the  judge's
    proportionality assessment was inadequate.  He submitted that the judge
    ignored a clear direction which was set out at [4g]:  "On  6  September
    2017, the Tribunal issued a direction 'Unless the  Respondent  notifies
    the Tribunal by 4 pm on 13/9/17 that an asylum decision had  been  made
    the Tribunal will proceed on 25/9/17 in relation  to  the  private  and
    family  life  claim  only.'  On  12  September  2017  the  Respondent's
    representative wrote that 'I can confirm  that  the  above  applicant's
    asylum claim will not be  decided  before  25/9/17  and  therefore  the
    appeal hearing on this day will proceed in relation to the private  and
    family life claim only.

10.  Further at [8] of the decision,  both  parties  agreed  that  the  only
    issue in the appeal was Article 8. Mr Aslam submitted  that  the  judge
    had  conflated  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim  with  the   issue   of
    suitability. The judge's findings on  suitability  were  confused.   At
    [21]  the  judge  went  through  the  Appellant's  asylum   claim.   He
    essentially assessed the credibility of the  Appellant's  asylum  claim
    when he should not have done so because there  was  a  clear  direction
    that only family and private life would be  dealt  with.   This  was  a
    procedural oddity in the appeal.  The judge should have stated  at  the
    outset of the appeal how he was going to approach suitability  so  that
    the parties could address the credibility of the asylum claim.  It  was
    not clear to what extent the parties should deal with  the  Appellant's
    screening interview and substantive  asylum  interview.   There  was  a
    procedural impropriety which had led to unfairness because it  was  not
    clear that the Appellant had had an opportunity to address the  judge's
    findings in respect of his credibility.  It was not apparent  from  the
    decision that the matters referred to in [24] of the decision had  been
    put to the Appellant in  order  for  him  to  be  able  to  provide  an
    explanation.

11.  Mr Aslam submitted that the conclusions  at  [34]  were  based  on  two
    errors of fact. At the time of the hearing, the  Appellant's  wife  had
    indefinite  leave  to  remain,  which  was  granted   in   July   2017.
    Confirmation of this fact was in the Appellant's supplementary  bundle.
    The judge was aware from the witness statement that in  any  event  the
    Appellant's wife was recognised as a refugee. Her status  was  material
    notwithstanding the  judge's  finding  at  [35]  that  the  Appellant's
    removal would separate him from his wife who showed no  sign  of  being
    willing to return to Afghanistan.  There was also a certificate in  the
    Appellant's bundle of the Appellant's English  language  ability  which
    the judge failed to take into account.  The  judge  failed  to  balance
    these two aspects in  the  Appellant's  favour  in  his  assessment  of
    proportionality and this was a key failing in the judge's assessment of
    the public interest.

12.  Ms Pal submitted that the judge had properly directed himself  at  [18]
    when he stated: "I am not required in this appeal to assess whether the
    Appellant  would  be  at  real  risk  of  persecution  on   return   to
    Afghanistan. However, I am required to consider  the  evidence  in  the
    screening and substantive interviews and in the witness statement which
    form part of his asylum claim. I am also required to make  findings  as
    to:

      a) the Appellant's past association (if  any)  with  the  Taliban  (in
         order to assess his suitability for leave to remain);


      b) the existence of any obstacles to his reintegration in Afghanistan;
         and


      c) any circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the Rules.


13.  The judge had properly considered the relevant  issues  in  the  appeal
    and properly assessed suitability.  The Appellant  was  represented  by
    Counsel who had submitted a skeleton argument dealing with  submissions
    on suitability.

14.  At paragraph 8 of the skeleton  argument  it  was  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's previous work for the Taliban did not make  it  undesirable
    to allow him to remain in  the  UK.  The  Appellant  explained  in  his
    witness statement that he was forcibly recruited by the Taliban due  to
    his father's and elder brother's roles in the organisation.  It was his
    unwillingness to comply with some of the Taliban activities that led to
    him first fleeing Afghanistan in 2008 after he was threatened. Upon his
    return to Afghanistan in 2010, the  work  the  Appellant  did  for  the
    Taliban was very low level and included the distribution  of  leaflets,
    the collection of money and the delivery of food.  Again, this work was
    undertaken out of necessity as the Appellant had few other options.  It
    was submitted  that  for  these  reasons  the  ground  for  refusal  in
    paragraph S-LTR 1.6 should not be applied to the Appellant's  case.  If
    the Tribunal accepted the Appellant met the  suitability  requirements,
    he could succeed under the Immigration Rules if one of  the  exceptions
    in paragraph EX.1 applied.

15.  Ms Pal submitted that the Appellant had ample  opportunity  to  address
    suitability and Counsel was well aware that this point  was  in  issue.
    If there had been any unfairness during the course of the hearing  then
    it would have been open to his representative to raise it, but no  such
    point was taken. The judge took into account the  screening  interview,
    asylum  interview  and  the  Appellant's  oral  evidence  to  which  he
    specifically referred at [21f].  The judge had to consider  suitability
    in accordance with Appendix FM.

16.  The judge found at [28] "Having considered all  the  evidence,  I  find
    that the Appellant has disclosed past  personal  involvement  with  the
    Taliban, including fund raising and facilitating communications between
    commanders (and other activities some of which he now denies). I am not
    satisfied that he acted only under compulsion. I find that the duration
    and nature of his participation in Taliban activities are sufficient to
    mean that by reason of past association and past conduct  his  presence
    in the UK is not conducive to the public good.  Consequently,  he  does
    not qualify by leave to remain under either paragraph 276ADE or Section
    LTRP of Appendix FM. This is a significant consideration in any Article
    8 assessment."

17.  Ms Pal submitted that these findings were open to the judge are on  the
    evidence before her. If the Appellant's representative considered  that
    the hearing was not fair he would have said so at the time and  it  was
    clear from the skeleton argument submitted on  the  Appellant's  behalf
    that suitability was an issue.

18.  It was agreed at the hearing that only  Article  8  was  in  issue  and
    suitability was properly addressed by Counsel. The Appellant failed  to
    demonstrate that he satisfied the financial requirement and  the  judge
    was entitled to find he was  not  financially  independent.  The  judge
    acknowledged that the Appellant's wife would not return  and  that  his
    removal would result in the separation of the Appellant from his  wife.
    The judge took  into  account  the  Appellant's  involvement  with  the
    Taliban and concluded that it was not in the public interest for him to
    remain.  This  finding  was  open  to  the  judge  notwithstanding  the
    Appellant had an English language certificate and  his  wife  had  been
    granted indefinite leave to remain.

19.  In response, Mr Aslam submitted that the procedure during  the  hearing
    had caused unfairness because  it  was  not  clear  from  the  decision
    whether the issues  referred  to  at  [18]  had  been  brought  to  the
    attention of the parties such that the Appellant had a full opportunity
    to deal with any points raised against  him.  The  judge's  failure  to
    recognise the status of the Appellant's wife was significant. The judge
    failed to consider the  Appellant's  private  life  and  the  delay  in
    deciding the Appellant's asylum claim.  This  amounted  to  a  material
    error of law such that the decision should be set aside and remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal with the direction that the  Respondent  decide
    the asylum claim prior to any subsequent hearing.



Discussion and Conclusions

20.  It is unfortunate that the Respondent has not decided  the  Appellant's
    asylum claim and there has been significant delay.  The grounds suggest
    that the judge erred in law in failing to be a primary fact-finder  and
    make findings on the asylum claim. The submissions made orally were the
    exact opposite to those relied on in the grounds.  Mr  Aslam  submitted
    that the judge was limited to deciding Article 8 only  and  should  not
    have trespassed on the issue of credibility of the asylum claim.

21.  I am not persuaded that the judge failed to follow  a  clear  direction
    or failed to adhere to the matters agreed by the parties. Article 8 was
    the only matter in issue. It is apparent from [9] that the  Appellant's
    representative accepted that, if the  Appellant  did  not  satisfy  the
    suitability criteria under Appendix FM, he was not entitled to leave to
    remain under the Immigration Rules. Accordingly, whether the  Appellant
    could satisfy the suitability requirement was a  crucial  issue  to  be
    determined in the appeal.   The  Appellant's  representative  was  well
    aware of it and addressed it  in  his  skeleton  argument.   The  judge
    adequately set out the remit of the appeal at [18].

22.  The submission that the  Appellant  did  not  have  an  opportunity  to
    respond lacks merit. There was nothing to suggest that the  Appellant's
    representative did not adequately represent the Appellant at the appeal
    hearing such that he could not put forward his case and deal  with  any
    of the issues therein. I am not  persuaded  by  Mr  Aslam's  procedural
    point. He has not established that the Appellant's hearing was  in  any
    way unfair because  of  any  lack  of  opportunity  to  deal  with  the
    credibility of the asylum claim. It was clear from the  refusal  letter
    that suitability was an issue and the Appellant's involvement with  the
    Taliban was a matter the judge had to address and assess. The judge did
    so setting out at [21] the Appellant's  evidence  and  making  findings
    which were open to him  at  [24].   The  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant's presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good was
    one which was open to him on the evidence before him and the  Appellant
    had ample opportunity to put forward his case in that respect.

23.  In relation to the  assessment  of  proportionality,  the  judge  quite
    properly took into account  the  Appellant's  failure  to  satisfy  the
    suitability  requirements  and  the  financial  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules. This would weigh heavily in  favour  of  the  public
    interest in refusing leave. Any error in relation  to  the  Appellant's
    English language ability and his wife's grant of  indefinite  leave  to
    remain was not material to the assessment  of  proportionality  because
    those factors were insufficient to outweigh the public interest on  the
    particular facts of the case. The judge  stated  that  the  Appellant's
    wife was not a qualifying partner as  defined  in  Section  117D.  This
    finding was not material to the overall assessment  of  proportionality
    because the Appellant could not satisfy either the suitability  or  the
    eligibility requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  he  never  had
    leave to enter or remain in the UK.  Little weight could be attached to
    his private life.

24.  In any event, the judge dealt with proportionality on  the  basis  that
    the Appellant's removal would separate him from his wife  who  was  not
    willing to return to Afghanistan. The judge concluded that this  was  a
    serious interference with his right to family  life,  but  it  did  not
    outweigh the public interest in the Appellant's removal.  This  finding
    was open to the judge on the evidence before him.  On  the  facts,  the
    Appellant's removal and permanent separation from his wife was  in  the
    public interest. He had participated in Taliban activities  such  that,
    by reason of past association and past conduct, his presence in the  UK
    was not conducive to the public good  and  he  could  not  satisfy  the
    financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.

25.  Accordingly, I find there was no procedural impropriety in the  judge's
    conduct of the appeal and there was no material error  of  law  in  the
    judge's assessment of proportionality.  There was no error  of  law  in
    the decision of 4 October 2017 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 4 May 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 4 May 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

