
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05388/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 January 2019                            |On 05 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

               LORD BECKETT SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
We  continue  the  anonymity  direction  which  was  made  earlier  in   the
proceedings because the case involves a child. Unless and until  a  tribunal
or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted  anonymity.  No  report
of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
member of his family. This direction applies both to the  appellant  and  to
the respondent.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Bond, Counsel, instructed by Freemans Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dated 19 November 2018 to  uphold  MA's  (the  claimant)
    appeal, on human rights  grounds,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decisions of 4 March 2017 to refuse his human rights claim  and  on  24
    March 2017 to sign a deportation order.

 2. The claimant is a national of  Bangladesh  born  24  October  1979  who
    entered the UK on 15 August 1986, aged 6, as a dependent of his mother.
    He was granted indefinite leave to enter on arrival.

 3. The Secretary of State seeks to deport the claimant on the  basis  that
    he is a foreign criminal within the meaning of  UK  Borders  Act  2007,
    section 32, and as such liable to automatic deportation. In particular,
    on 29 April 2010  at  Blackfriars  Crown  Court  he  was  sentenced  to
    imprisonment for 2 years for two charges of possessing  class  A  drugs
    with intent to supply.

 4. The Secretary of State also considered that deportation  was  conducive
    to the public good because of the claimant's persistent  offending,  he
    has a total of 24 convictions for 52 offences accrued between 1996  and
    2014, but this aspect did not  feature  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds of appeal or submissions at the appeal before us. In  light  of
    those convictions, the Secretary of  State  did  not  accept  that  the
    claimant was socially and culturally integrated into the UK, but in his
    grounds of appeal the Secretary of State has not challenged the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's (FtTJ) decision in that regard.

 5. The FtTJ found Exception 1 (private life) within section  117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to be met  and  deemed  it
    unnecessary to make a finding on Exception 2 (family life).

Determination of 19 November 2018

 6. At para 4 the FtTJ summarised the claimant's case and at paras 5-6  the
    Secretary of State's case which was that on the facts of the  case  the
    exceptions in section 117C (4) and (5) of the 2002 Act  were  not  met.
    The FtTJ set out the evidence before her at paras 7-19, summarising the
    testimony of the claimant, his sister and his brother. She recorded the
    Secretary of State's submissions at para  20  and  Ms  Bond's  for  the
    claimant at para 21. Between paras 23 and 32 she set  out  findings  in
    fact and associated reasoning. Relevant  law  including  the  terms  of
    section 117C of the 2002 Act and associated Immigration  Rules  is  set
    out between paras 33 and 37. From para 38 onwards the FtTJ applied  the
    facts to the law, stating her conclusion and decision at paras  53  and
    54.

 7. At para 2 the FtTJ records that between 1996 and 2014 the claimant  has
    24 previous convictions for 52  offences.  In  addition  to  the  drugs
    conviction in 2010 he was sentenced to imprisonment  for  16  weeks  in
    2014 for battery.

 8. At para 4 the FtTJ records that the claimant  has  lived  here  for  32
    years and has three children who are British citizens aged 14, 12 and 9
    who live with their  mother,  also  a  British  citizen,  and  maternal
    grandparents. The claimant does not live with them he  lives  with  his
    sister who is one of his four siblings who live in the UK and  who  are
    all British citizens by birth or naturalisation. At para  10  the  FtTJ
    noted and accepted the claimant's evidence that since  his  arrival  in
    the UK he has visited Bangladesh once, in  1997,  for  one  month.  She
    reminded herself of that fact in making her assessment at para 45.

 9. The claimant is said to be deeply remorseful for his offending which he
    associates with drug addiction and  mental  health  problems  which  he
    began to address in 2014. He  is  prescribed  methadone  and  is  on  a
    structured detoxification programme and his random drugs tests have all
    been negative. He has  long  term  depression  for  which  he  receives
    treatment and has suffered episodes of psychosis historically.

10. In para 25 the FtTJ summarised evidence, which she  accepted,  from  Dr
    John Dunn,  a  consultant  in  addiction  psychiatry  with  Camden  NHS
    Foundation Trust to which the claimant has been known since  2003  when
    he was referred at a time when he was hearing voices. This  is  one  of
    two  episodes  of  drug  induced  psychosis,  a  non-organic  psychotic
    disorder, the other being in  2014,  from  which  the  claimant  is  in
    remission. Dr  Dunn  proposes  that  the  claimant  has  a  mental  and
    behavioural disorder due to the use of opioids and clinical  depression
    since 2003 for which  he  takes  paroxetine,  an  anti-depressant.  The
    claimant is slowly having his methadone  prescription  reduced  with  a
    view to becoming drug free and he has made significant  progress  since
    2014. He was  engaging  well  and  had  improved  both  physically  and
    mentally. He has not taken illicit drugs since  2014.   The  FtTJ  also
    notes that he has  re-trained  as  a  plasterer  and  was  attending  a
    bricklaying course. In principle he has skills  which  could  help  him
    find work and support himself in the longer term. She  found,  in  para
    27, that he had made a conscious decision to turn his life around.

11. At para 28 she accepted that  the  claimant  is  the  father  of  three
    children and at para 29 she accepted that he had  close,  positive  and
    loving relationships with them. They live with  their  mother,  who  is
    their primary carer, but he lives nearby and sees  them  regularly.  He
    has not lived with them for many years, para 29. He has  not  told  his
    children that he will be deported and there was no specific evidence as
    to the impact on his children.  The  FtTJ  concluded  that  they  would
    profoundly miss the claimant who, particularly since 2014, has  been  a
    present, active and loving father in their lives. They would  not  move
    to Bangladesh so his  deportation  would  be  extremely  upsetting  and
    distressing for them.

12. At para 30, the FtTJ accepted that  the  claimant  has  not  personally
    retained any direct ties with Bangladesh. Having arrived here  aged  6,
    some 32 years ago, he speaks and writes limited Bengali. He  came  from
    Sylhet in Bangladesh where his siblings  do  have  ties  through  their
    spouses and his siblings visit every few years. She accepted  that  any
    financial support from the claimant's siblings was uncertain but it was
    likely that there would  be  some  modest  financial  support  for  the
    claimant from his family, but that there is no practical,  familial  or
    emotional support in Bangladesh, para 31, and she did not  consider  it
    reasonable to suppose that his siblings' parents-in-law could be  asked
    to support him emotionally  or  financially  as  they  have  no  direct
    relationship with him.

13. At para 36 the FtTJ noted the multi-dimensional aspects to  the  public
    interest in the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  and  that  whilst
    rehabilitation and risk of reoffending  are  relevant,  other  relevant
    considerations included deterrence and denunciation.  At  para  39  the
    FtTJ said that she was applying,

         "the core test as set out in R v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department ex parte Razgar [2004] UK HL 27 whilst reminding  myself
         of the core duty to strike a fair  balance  between  the  competing
         private and family life rights of the individual, the interests  of
         the community and the public interest by the state; Hesham Ali."

14. That somewhat unnecessary observation does not feature in  the  grounds
    of appeal and the FtTJ proceeded to charter the correct course  as  she
    confirmed, in para 42:

         "I  turn  thereafter  to  the  specific  public  interest   factors
         applicable in deportation appeals as per section 117C."

    She recognised that in the circumstances of this  case  the  claimant's
    offending weighed very heavily in the balance against him.

15. At para 44 the FtTJ examined the criteria within  section  117C(4)  and
    found that the claimant is socially and culturally integrated in the UK
    and has lived here lawfully for more than half of  his  life.  We  have
    already noted that these findings are not challenged in the grounds  of
    appeal. At para 45 she found that there is no evidence to suggest  that
    the claimant's siblings' relatives-in-law would welcome or assist  him,
    particularly where he  has  an  offending  history  and  mental  health
    problems. She found that he retains no familiarity with Bangladesh  and
    that the country would be alien to him. His siblings  could  offer  him
    only modest financial assistance. Whilst he would  have  skills  giving
    him the potential to support himself, his  ability  to  do  so  and  to
    integrate may be affected by his physical and mental health.

16. At para 47 the FtTJ considered  the  treatment  the  claimant  receives
    through  his  structured  drug  reduction  programme  with   associated
    counselling. He takes methadone in  a  controlled  setting  daily.  The
    Secretary of State had established that psychiatric treatment for  drug
    reduction with  methadone  is  available  in  Bangladesh  and  Dr  Dunn
    confirmed that this has been the position since 2010 although there are
    only 299 people taking  methadone  in  a  country  with  20,000  opiate
    dependent people. The FtTJ concluded that it was very unlikely that the
    claimant would be able to obtain the methadone he needs as a result  of
    which it was likely that he would "enter a detoxification  state  which
    itself carries debilitating physical symptoms, something that carries a
    high  risk  of  accidental  heroin  overdose,  with  potentially  fatal
    consequences."

17. At paras 48 and 49 the FtTJ considered  the  claimant's  mental  health
    which she described as very fragile. In a finding which  sits  somewhat
    uneasily with earlier references  to  two  historic  episodes  of  drug
    induced psychosis, she uncritically accepted evidence from Dr  Dunn  to
    the effect that  the  stress  of  deportation  raised  the  risk  of  a
    psychotic breakdown, supporting her conclusion  with  evidence  of  the
    claimant's fear and panic at the prospect  of  deportation.  She  noted
    evidence from Dr Ofori-Attah, psychiatrist, who supervises the claimant
    on his drug reduction programme, to the effect that  he  has  struggled
    with increased suicidal ideation  owing  to  his  possible  deportation
    which has caused him to engage  more  intensively  with  mental  health
    services. The FtTJ  considered  that  this  had  implications  for  the
    claimant's ability to cope and function in the  short  to  medium  term
    following his arrival in Bangladesh. She noted evidence procured by the
    Secretary of State to the  effect  that  mental  health  care  did  not
    function well there and was limited in its availability so that  access
    to necessary support and treatment would be highly  uncertain  for  the
    claimant. Amongst her conclusions is the following:

         "... The stigma attached to psychiatric  disorders  would  also  be
         relevant to this appellant's ability to  integrate  in  the  longer
         term, as he has in  the  past  experienced  a  psychotic  breakdown
         characterised by auditory hallucinations..."

18. At paras 50 and  51,  the  FtTJ  reached  her  conclusions  on  section
    117C(4):

         "50. In the light of these findings, his  mental  history  and  his
         opioid dependency, and having regard to the  opinions  of  both  Dr
         Dunn and Dr Ofori-Attah, I conclude that  deportation  will  likely
         trigger  a  mental  relapse  for  this  appellant,   separate   and
         additional to the risk of relapse caused by enforced detoxification
         due to lack  of  methadone  availability.  I  find  this  would  be
         exacerbated by the lack of any immediate emotional,  practical  and
         medical care or support awaiting him in Bangladesh, a country he is
         no longer familiar with or connected to in any active or meaningful
         way. Dr Dunn identifies his lack of  any  support  networks  as  an
         additional breakdown risk factor also.

         51.  For all these reasons, and after careful consideration, I find
         that the appellant meets the Exception set out  at  s117C  (4)  and
         paragraph 399A because he has shown that  there  are  very  serious
         obstacles to his integration into  Bangladesh  if  he  is  deported
         there now. This is owing firstly to  a  likely  lack  of  methadone
         treatment  and  the  consequent  risk  of  relapse  and  accidental
         overdose. He also faces a very real risk  of  psychotic  breakdown,
         triggered by the stress of deportation, whilst social stigma and  a
         lack of appropriate mental health care provision or in situ  family
         support are all additional, important contributory  factors.  These
         all  represent  very  serious  obstacles  to  his  integration   in
         Bangladesh both now and in the longer term."

    Whilst in  para  51  the  FtTJ  uses  the  word  "serious"  instead  of
    "significant," she had correctly directed herself  as  to  the  correct
    statutory criterion in quoting para 117C at para 34 and IR 399A at para
    35. At the conclusion of para 44 she  had  correctly  directed  herself
    that,

         "The critical question in this appeal is  whether  there  would  be
         very significant obstacles to his integration into Bangladesh."

    We note that in the grounds of appeal, at  para  2,  the  Secretary  of
    State refers to para 44 and appears to accept that the correct test had
    been applied and Mr Avery did not found on the use of the wrong word in
    para 51.

19. The FtTJ went on to state in para 52 that in light of the  decision  on
    Exception 1, it was not necessary to determine whether  the  claimant's
    deportation would be unduly harsh on the claimant's children.

The Secretary of State's Challenge

20. The grounds of appeal comprise 8 enumerated paragraphs. Para 1  of  the
    grounds focuses the challenge  exclusively  on  the  decision  made  in
    respect of  section  117C  (4).  Accordingly,  the  critical  issue  is
    identified as the FtTJ's finding that there would be  very  significant
    obstacles to the claimant's integration into Bangladesh.  The  FtTJ  is
    said to have erred in that regard with references  to  article  8  case
    law: Bensaid v United Kingdom (2001) 33  EHRR  10;  SL  (St.  Lucia)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1894;  MM
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ
    279. The Secretary of State's challenge is encapsulated in  para  6  of
    the grounds:

         "The fact  that  the  appellant  may  have  difficulty  in  getting
         treatment, may have to travel for it, may have to pay  for  it  and
         the fact that if he does not have the treatment his  condition  may
         conceivably deteriorate are not matters which show that his removal
         would be disproportionate and similarly would not  amount  to  very
         significant obstacles."

21. In paras 7 and 8 the Secretary of State sets out  other  considerations
    deemed relevant to the question  of  very  significant  obstacles:  the
    claimant has some extended family members in Bangladesh,  his  siblings
    travel there regularly, he has  transferable  skills  in  the  building
    trade and the possibility of some financial  support  from  family.  In
    para 8 the Secretary of State contends that  against  this  background,
    the obvious difficulties associated with removal  would  not  meet  the
    threshold of very significant obstacles.

Submissions for the Secretary of State

22. Mr Avery did not add a great deal to his grounds  of  appeal,  founding
    particularly on the decision of the Court of Appeal in SL (St.  Lucia).
    The FtTJ did not adequately address circumstances which  were  relevant
    to the claimant integrating in Bangladesh; his siblings  had  regularly
    travelled there; he has family contacts there; there is no  reason  why
    his family could not make arrangements for him  to  return  and  travel
    with him to help him get established; they could inquire as to  how  he
    may engage with facilities for his continuing methadone treatment which
    do exist. This was a family with continuing connections with people who
    had the wherewithal to assist the claimant financially which  the  FtTJ
    had not factored into her evaluation on the prospects for  integration.
    The FtTJ had failed properly to engage with the issues  highlighted  in
    the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department v Kamara [2016] 4 WLR 152.



Submissions for the claimant

23. In her skeleton argument, Ms Bond observed that the cases  of  SL  (St.
    Lucia) and MM (Zimbabwe) were  not  put  before  the  FtTJ  who  cannot
    therefore be in error in not referring  to  them.  In  any  event,  the
    FtTJ's decision was not undermined by the  decisions  or  reasoning  in
    those cases.

24. The claimant submits that his private and family life is of special and
    compelling character given that he has lived in the  UK  for  32  years
    since he arrived at the age of 6. He could not be enough of an  insider
    to develop a private life in  Bangladesh  in  the  sense  explained  in
    Kamara. He has a relationship with his three children. He is  receiving
    specialist support from Camden Specialist Drug Services  for  his  drug
    addiction and mental health problems.

25. His treating consultant  psychiatrist,  Dr  Dunn,  had  explained  that
    heroin addiction is widespread in Bangladesh and treatment  places  are
    only available in Dhaka and for only 400 people. A lack  of  access  to
    methadone would trigger a high risk of  relapse  to  heroin  use  which
    carried a high risk of accidental overdose according  to  Dr  Dunn.  Dr
    Dunn suggested that the claimant would have limited access to community
    mental health treatment services and he would have  to  pay  for  anti-
    depressant medicines privately. His situation would be  exacerbated  by
    isolation and stress which might  provoke  the  claimant's  non-organic
    psychotic  disorder.  With  family  and   professional   support,   the
    claimant's prognosis is good according to Dr Dunn.

26. In her response to Mr Avery,  Ms  Bond  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  had
    addressed the potential for family support in Bangladesh and found as a
    matter of fact it was absent which could be seen  in  para  31  of  the
    decision.

27. The medical  evidence  on  which  the  claimant  relied  had  not  been
    challenged before the FtT. Dr Dunn had explained  that  mental  illness
    was stigmatised in Bangladesh. The scarcity of methadone treatment, the
    scarcity of mental health treatment more generally and  the  claimant's
    longstanding addiction and mental illness gave rise to very significant
    obstacles in light of his very limited connections with  a  country  he
    had left at the age of 6. This  was  not  a  case  about  the  relative
    quality of medical treatment, it was a case about interference with  an
    established  private  and  family  life  in  the  UK  which  would   be
    disproportionate. There was no error of law and certainly there was  no
    material error of law and the decision of the FtTJ should stand.

Analysis

28. The 2002 Act provides in section 117 C:

         "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
             integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted."

29. In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  1
    WLR 207 the Court of Appeal explained that the words "unless there  are
    very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2" should be read in at the end of subsection 3, which
    has the effect of rendering subsection 3  consistent  with  Immigration
    Rule 398 (b). The FtTJ did not go on to consider that issue having been
    satisfied that Exception 1 was met.

30. In Kamara Sales LJ explained at para 14 of his judgment, with which his
    colleagues were in agreement:

         "14. In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's  "integration"
         into the country to which it is proposed that he  be  deported,  as
         set out in section 117C (4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad  one.
         It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or to  sustain
         life while living in the other country. It is  not  appropriate  to
         treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss and  it  will
         usually be sufficient for a court  or  tribunal  simply  to  direct
         itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea  of
         "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family life."

31. In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department, [2018]  1
    WLR 5273, whilst the Supreme Court was primarily examining  the  proper
    application of section 117C Exception 2,  Lord  Carnwath  explained  at
    para 14 of his judgment, that in Part 5A of the 2002 Act Parliament had
    expressed the intended balance of relevant factors under ECHR article 8
    in direct statutory form. At para 21 he was considering whether it  was
    appropriate to go outside the terms of the exceptions in  section  117C
    to assess the relative seriousness of an offence. He concluded that  it
    was not, Exception 1  was  to  be  treated  as  self-contained  in  its
    application and he put it this way:

         "21. ... Exception 1 seems to leave no room for further  balancing.
         It is precisely defined  by  reference  to  three  factual  issues:
         lawful residence in the  UK  for  most  of  C's  life,  social  and
         cultural integration into the UK, and "very significant  obstacles"
         to integration into the country of proposed  deportation.  None  of
         these turns on the seriousness of the offence; but, for a  sentence
         of less than four years, they are  enough,  if  they  are  met,  to
         remove the public interest in deportation. For  sentences  of  four
         years or more, however,  it  is  not  enough  to  fall  within  the
         exception,  unless  there  are   in   addition   "very   compelling
         circumstances"."

32. Having examined all of the evidence before  her,  the  FtTJ  determined
    that the claimant has lived lawfully for most of his life in the UK and
    that he is socially and culturally integrated.  Neither  conclusion  is
    subject of challenge. The FtTJ  also  determined  that,  in  the  whole
    circumstances, there were very significant obstacles to the  claimant's
    integration into Bangladesh where he would  be  deported.  If  she  was
    entitled to reach that conclusion and made no material error in law  in
    reaching it, the claimant was bound to succeed in  his  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision.

33. It is not contended that this was a conclusion which was not reasonably
    open on the evidence. The Secretary of State  contends  that  the  FtTJ
    erred in reaching  her  decision  only  on  the  two  grounds  we  have
    summarised at paras 20 and 21 above.

34. In Bensaid the ECtHR examined the circumstances of a proposed  removal,
    to Algeria, of a man who was considered to have entered a sham marriage
    in the UK. B was suffering from  schizophrenia,  a  psychotic  illness,
    which had been treated for several years in the UK. He had been present
    in the UK for 11 years, for most  of  which  time  the  government  was
    seeking to remove him.  B argued his case primarily under article 3  on
    the basis that there would be a  deterioration  in  his  mental  health
    which might occur in circumstances where appropriate medicine would  be
    less readily accessible.

35. Under article 8, B argued that in the absence of his  medication  there
    was a real risk that he would self-harm in response  to  hallucinations
    which would affect his psychological integrity. In addition to any ties
    deriving from his eleven years  in  the  United  Kingdom,  his  medical
    treatment there was all that supported his precarious grip on  reality,
    which allowed  him  some  level  of  social  functioning.  Without  his
    treatment, he  would  be  unable  to  interact  in  the  community  and
    establish or develop relationships with others.

36. In para 47 of its judgment, the ECtHR acknowledged:

         "47. ... Mental health must also be regarded as a crucial  part  of
         private life associated with the aspect of moral integrity. Article
         8 protects a right to identity and personal  development,  and  the
         right to establish  and  develop  relationships  with  other  human
         beings and the outside world. The preservation of mental  stability
         is in that  context  an  indispensable  precondition  to  effective
         enjoyment of the right to respect for private life."

37. Although the ECtHR was prepared to assume that B  would  have  acquired
    some private life over 11 years in the UK, the  judgment  discloses  no
    specific features of private life on which B had founded. Whilst he had
    undergone what was alleged by the Government to be a sham marriage,  it
    is not apparent that he founded on family life. He would  return  to  a
    village in Algeria where his parents and five siblings lived. His whole
    claim rested  on  his  mental  health  and  the  potential  for  it  to
    deteriorate. The evidence disclosed that the drug he was taking in  the
    UK to treat his schizophrenia was available  in  a  hospital  about  70
    miles away from his village in Algeria.

38. The ECtHR observed that whilst B feared he would have a relapse of  his
    illness in Algeria, he might also relapse if remaining in the  UK.  The
    ECtHR concluded that the fact that  the  applicant's  circumstances  in
    Algeria would be less favourable than  those  enjoyed  by  him  in  the
    United Kingdom was not decisive from the point of view of article 3  of
    the Convention. The problems he had identified in  obtaining  treatment
    in Algeria were not really vouched by evidence and largely speculative.
    The court was not persuaded that there was  a  sufficiently  real  risk
    that the B's removal would be contrary to the standards of article 3.

39. This decision was not noticed in SL (St. Lucia) but the court  examined
    some of the  same  case-law  which  influenced  the  ECtHR  in  Bensaid
    together with more recent examination of similar  issues  in  both  the
    Court of Appeal and ECtHR, notably Paposhvili v Belgium [2017]  Imm  AR
    867.

40. The appellant in SL (St. Lucia) was  seriously  mentally  ill  but  had
    little private life and no family life in the UK. It  was  proposed  to
    remove her to St. Lucia because she had overstayed. It was not  a  case
    involving deportation of a foreign criminal. Having  examined  relevant
    case law, Hickinbottom LJ  giving  judgment  in  the  Court  of  Appeal
    endorsed the judgments of the Court of Appeal in GS (India) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2015] 1 WLR 3312 and  MM  (Zimbabwe).
    The first passage quoted below is from GS (India) in  which  the  court
    quoted from MM (Zimbabwe):

         "86. If the article 3 claim fails (as I would hold it  does  here),
         article 8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
         factual element which brings the case within the article 8 paradigm
         - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships  -  or  a  state  of
         affairs having some affinity with the paradigm. That approach  was,
         as it seems to me, applied by Moses LJ (with whom McFarlane LJ  and
         the Master of the Rolls agreed) in MM  (Zimbabwe)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 279 at [23]:

             'The only cases I can foresee where the  absence  of  adequate
             medical treatment in the country to which a person  is  to  be
             deported will be relevant to article 8 , is  where  it  is  an
             additional factor to be weighed in  the  balance,  with  other
             factors which by themselves engage article  8  .  Suppose,  in
             this case, the appellant had established firm family  ties  in
             this country, then  the  availability  of  continuing  medical
             treatment here, coupled with his dependence on the family here
             for support, together establish 'private life' under article 8
             . That conclusion  would  not  involve  a  comparison  between
             medical facilities here and those in Zimbabwe. Such a  finding
             would not offend the principle expressed above that the United
             Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to  provide  medical
             treatment here when it is not  available  in  the  country  to
             which the appellant is to be deported.'

         87.  With great respect this seems to me to be entirely  right.  It
         means that a specific case has to be made under article 8 ...".

    Hickinbottom LJ continued:

         23.  To that, having also referred to  the  same  passage  from  MM
         (Zimbabwe), Underhill LJ added this (at [111]):

             "I think it is clear that two essential points are being made.
             First, the absence or inadequacy of  medical  treatment,  even
             life-preserving treatment, in the country of return, cannot be
             relied on at all as a factor engaging article 8:  if  that  is
             all there is, the claim must fail. Secondly, where  article  8
             is engaged by other factors, the fact  that  the  claimant  is
             receiving medical treatment in this country which may  not  be
             available in the country of return may  be  a  factor  in  the
             proportionality exercise; but that factor cannot be treated as
             by itself giving rise to a breach since that would  contravene
             the 'no obligation to treat' principle."

41. Hickinbottom LJ continued at para  27,  in  a  passage  quoted  in  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal:

         "27. ... As I have indicated and as GS (India) emphasises,  article
         8 claims have  a  different  focus  and  are  based  upon  entirely
         different criteria. In particular, article 8 is not article 3  with
         merely a lower threshold: it does not provide some sort  of  safety
         net where a medical case fails to satisfy the article  3  criteria.
         An absence of medical treatment in the country of return  will  not
         in itself engage article 8. The only relevance to article 8 of such
         an absence will be where  that  is  an  additional  factor  in  the
         balance with other factors which themselves engage article  8  (see
         (MM (Zimbabwe) at [23] per Sales LJ). Where  an  individual  has  a
         medical condition for which he has the benefit of treatment in this
         country, but such treatment may not be available in the country  to
         which he may be removed, where (as here) article 3 is not  engaged,
         then the position is as it was before Paposhvili ,  i.e.  the  fact
         that a person is receiving treatment here which is not available in
         the country of return  may  be  a  factor  in  the  proportionality
         balancing exercise but that factor cannot by itself give rise to  a
         breach of article 8 . Indeed, it has been said  that,  in  striking
         that balance, only the most compelling humanitarian  considerations
         are likely to prevail over legitimate aims of  immigration  control
         (see Razgar at [59] per Baroness Hale)."

42. Whilst SL (St. Lucia) provides a helpful contemporary review  of  ECtHR
    and Court of Appeal understanding of how Articles 3 and 8 may  bear  on
    decisions to remove a person who has no right of residence in the UK in
    the context of serious health problems and a lack of treatment  in  the
    country of destination, it was not a case involving a foreign  criminal
    liable to deportation. The Court of  Appeal  did  not  have  reason  to
    examine section 117C. However, the Court's analysis suggests  that  the
    type of evaluation considered where health  problems  are  proposed  to
    constitute relevant considerations under article 8  could  readily  fit
    within the framework of part 5A of the 2002 Act.

43. As we have noted above, the FtTJ  proposed  by  way  of  background  to
    perform a Razgar assessment  through  part  5A  of  the  2002  Act  and
    associated immigration rules, but omitted to refer to  what  Lady  Hale
    had to say at para 59 of the House of Lords judgment:

         "59. Although the possibility cannot be excluded, it is not easy to
         think of a foreign health care case which would fail under  article
         3 but succeed under article 8. There clearly must be a strong  case
         before the article is even engaged and then a fair balance must  be
         struck under article 8(2). In striking that balance, only the  most
         compelling humanitarian considerations are likely to  prevail  over
         the legitimate aims of immigration control or  public  safety.  The
         expelling state is required to assess the strength  of  the  threat
         and strike that balance. It is not required to compare the adequacy
         of the health care available in the two countries. The question  is
         whether removal to the foreign country  will  have  a  sufficiently
         adverse effect upon the applicant. Nor can the expelling  state  be
         required to assume a more favourable status in  its  own  territory
         than the applicant is currently entitled to. The applicant  remains
         to be treated as someone who is liable to expulsion, not as someone
         who is entitled to remain."

    However, such a balance has  been  struck  by  Parliament  for  foreign
    criminals in part 5A of the 2002 Act as Lord Carnwath explained  in  KO
    (Nigeria). We note also  that  the  ECtHR's  decision  in  Bensaid  was
    examined closely  by  the  House  of  Lords  in  Razgar,  Lord  Bingham
    describing it as the bedrock of B's claim which may have some relevance
    to a ground of appeal  based  on  failure  to  apply  the  decision  in
    Bensaid.

44. We consider that it  is  clear  from  the  post-Razgar  cases  we  have
    examined that, as a matter of generality, an article 8 claim based only
    on a claimant's ill health and the impact of removal on the  claimant's
    state of health cannot succeed if  it  is  the  only  basis  to  resist
    removal unless the impact was  such  as  to  reach  the  threshold  for
    article 3. The high threshold for an article 3  claim on health grounds
    was authoritatively determined by the House of Lords in N  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2005] 2 AC 296; and by the ECtHR in N
    v United Kingdom  [pic][pic](2008) 47 EHRR 39. As the Court  of  Appeal
    explained in SL (St. Lucia),  with  reference  to  GS  (India)  and  MM
    (Zimbabwe):

         "An absence of medical treatment in the country of return will  not
         in itself engage article 8. The only relevance to article 8 of such
         an absence will be where  that  is  an  additional  factor  in  the
         balance with other factors which themselves engage article 8."

45. As Lord Carnwath explained in KO (Nigeria)  at  paras  13  and  14  the
    version of Immigration Rules 398, 399 and 399A introduced in  2014  was
    intended to reflect  an assessment  of  all  factors  relevant  to  the
    application of article 8 and the amendment of the 2002 Act went further
    by expressing the  intended  balance  of  relevant  factors  in  direct
    statutory form.

46. We note that the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) at para 38 identified
    where  there  could   be   room   for   consideration   of   convention
    jurisprudence, for example in considering  the  provisions  of  section
    117C (5) and (6), whilst also explaining, at para 39:

         "39. Even then it must be borne  in  mind  that  assessments  under
         article 8 may not lead to identical  results  in  every  Convention
         contracting state. To  the  degree  allowed  under  the  margin  of
         appreciation and bearing in mind that the Convention is intended to
         reflect a fair balance between individual rights and the  interests
         of the general community, an individual state is entitled to assess
         the public interest  which  may  be  in  issue  when  it  comes  to
         deportation of foreign criminals  and  to  decide  what  weight  to
         attach to it  in  the  particular  circumstances  of  its  society.
         Different states may make  different  assessments  of  what  weight
         should be attached to the public interest in deportation of foreign
         offenders. In England and Wales, the weight to be attached  to  the
         public interest  in  deportation  of  foreign  offenders  has  been
         underlined by successive specific legislative interventions:  first
         by enactment of the 2007 Act, then by promulgation of the  code  in
         the 2012 rules and now  by  the  introduction  of  further  primary
         legislation in the form of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and the new code
         in the 2014 rules. Statute requires that in carrying out article  8
         assessments in relation to  foreign  criminals  the  decision-maker
         must  recognise  that  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is
         "conducive to the public good" (per section 32(4) of the 2007  Act)
         and "in the public interest"  (per  section  117C(1)  of  the  2014
         Act)."

47. Such authoritative statements render it abundantly clear that the  FtTJ
    was bound to determine this case within the framework of part 5A of the
    2002 Act.

48. We find no material inconsistency between how the task of balancing the
    public interest in removal was envisaged to proceed in SL  (St.  Lucia)
    and the approach taken by the FtTJ in this  case.  Even  if  there  was
    inconsistency, the FtTJ was bound to apply the provisions of part 5A of
    the 2002 Act.  Accordingly, the decisions and reasoning of the court in
    SL (St. Lucia) and MM (Zimbabwe), or omitting to refer to them, do  not
    demonstrate that the FtTJ erred.

49. We do not consider the decision or reasoning in Bensaid to  demonstrate
    that the FtTJ erred in her treatment of  the  issues  she  required  to
    resolve under part 5A of the 2002 Act.  Bensaid  does  not  demonstrate
    that no weight can be attached to medical circumstances  falling  short
    of article 3 as para 47 of the judgment seems to us to make  clear.  It
    appears to us that this was accepted by the majority of  the  House  of
    Lords in Razgar, where Bensaid was carefully examined, albeit  in  that
    case Lord Bingham (at para 10) envisaged that there  might  be  a  case
    where medical circumstances which fell short of the article 3 threshold
    might sound for article 8.

50. In any event, this was not a case in which the FtTJ was being asked  to
    determine a claim periled only on article 3 grounds  pled  as  such  or
    disguised as article 8 grounds. In this case the FtTJ had to  assess  a
    multi-faceted article 8 claim which fell to be  determined  within  the
    structure of part 5A. Notwithstanding her reference to Razgar, the FtTJ
    faithfully applied the approach laid down in part 5A, and  particularly
    section 117C.

51.  We  recognise  that  another  judge  might  have   reached   different
    conclusions on the same facts but that is not sufficient to demonstrate
    that the FtTJ erred in law. The Secretary of State has not  advanced  a
    ground of appeal contending that the decision reached by the FtTJ could
    not reasonably have been reached on the evidence. The assessment of the
    evidence before  her,  which  included  evidence  from  witnesses,  was
    primarily for the FtTJ to make.  We are not persuaded that the  grounds
    of  appeal  demonstrate  that  she  erred  in  making  her   evaluative
    assessment of the evidence as to the current state  of  the  claimant's
    connection with Bangladesh, the likelihood of his being offered support
    by members of his extended family,  the  modest  financial  support  he
    could expect from his immediate family, his very  limited  facility  in
    Bengali and the effect of his longstanding  mental  illness  and  drug-
    addiction on his ability to integrate into a country he left at the age
    of 6 in 1986. We are not persuaded that,  in  the  light  of  the  FtTJ
    making  findings  which  she  was  entitled  to  make,  it   has   been
    demonstrated that  she  erred  in  reaching  her  conclusion  that  the
    claimant met the criteria for Exception 1 in section 117C (4).

52. For these reasons we dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not involve the making of an error of law.

We uphold the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  promulgated  on  19
November 2018 with the consequence that MA's appeal remains allowed.


Signed
                                     Dated 4 April 2019

Lord Beckett sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge.

