
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
HU/05379/2018

                                               HU/08787/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                      |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15th November 2018                 |       On 20th December 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          VICE PRESIDENT M OCKELTON
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                          mr A A (first Appellant)
                         mrs A H (second Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Sharma, instructed by Anwan Legal Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1.  The  Appellants  born  on  10th  June  1982  and  4th  November   1989
    respectively are both citizens of Pakistan.   They  are  married.   The
    first Appellant had applied for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier  1
    Migrant on 19th April  2016  and  later  varied  that  application  for
    indefinite leave based on ten years' lawful residence.  The  Respondent
    had  refused  that  application  on  8th  February  2018.   The  second
    Appellant had applied for leave to remain on the basis of  family  life
    with the first Appellant and her application  was  also  refused.   The
    Appellants both appealed the Respondent's decision  and  their  appeals
    were consolidated and heard together at Newport on 2nd May 2018  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Powell.  The judge had  allowed  their
    appeals under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The Respondent had made application for permission to  appeal  on  21st
    May 2018 and that permission had been granted on 30th July  2018.   The
    grant of permission  noted  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  judge's
    generous  ultimate  conclusions  appear  to  run  counter  to   several
    justifiably adverse findings and it was not clear why the appeals  were
    allowed.  The Appellants had submitted  a  Rule  24  response  on  14th
    August 2018.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 3. Mr Howells made  submissions  in  line  with  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.
    Essentially he noted that in the judge's decisions at paragraphs 24  to
    44 he had made findings  unfavourable  to  the  Appellant  and  it  was
    submitted that the evidence  had  been  tested  before  the  judge  and
    although at paragraph 42 the judge had found  the  Appellant  plausible
    that was despite a number of other adverse  credibility  findings.   It
    was submitted the judge was wrong in the way that he had found innocent
    explanation  or  plausible   explanation   based   on   the   evidence.
    Essentially Mr Howells conceded whilst the Grounds of Appeal  were  not
    framed in such terms essentially his argument was that  the  judge  had
    acted irrationally in reaching his conclusion.

 4. It was further submitted that  the  judge  had  placed  weight  on  the
    position of  HMRC  and  that  a  refusal  under  paragraph  322(5)  was
    available to the Respondent even if HMRC had taken no action.   It  was
    accepted the judge was entitled to look at the action or inaction taken
    by HMRC but on the other hand there was  no  evidence  that  they  were
    aware the Appellant had given a  different  account  of  his  financial
    state to the Home Office.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellants

 5. Mr Sharma referred us to the Rule 24 response and adopted that  as  the
    basis of submissions.  It was submitted that the judge had  found  that
    the Appellant had not deceived the  Respondent  and  therefore  it  was
    unnecessary for the judge to decide  on  the  question  of  undesirable
    within the terms of paragraph  322(5).   It  was  said  the  judge  had
    directed himself properly to the burden of proof in this case  and  had
    found that the Respondent had  discharged  the  evidential  burden  and
    thereafter had looked at whether the Appellant's account was  basically
    plausible.  The judge had found that to  be  the  case  and  thereafter
    concluded the Respondent had not discharged the legal burden of  proof.
    It was submitted that was a proper course of action to have  taken  and
    matters were properly reasoned within the  decision.   Further  it  was
    said the judge had not relied totally on the position of HMRC  but  had
    looked at other factors.

 6. At the conclusion we reserved our decision  which  we  now  provide  in
    writing.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The Appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis
    of ten years' lawful residence  had  been  refused  by  the  Respondent
    essentially on the single ground under paragraph 322(1A) with reference
    to  paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  namely  that   the
    Appellant's presence in the UK was  undesirable  as  a  result  of  his
    alleged deception some years previously.  That related to the assertion
    that he had provided differing income figures in his tax return to HMRC
    and in his application for a visa to the Home Office.

 8. The judge had correctly identified the  issue  in  this  case  and  the
    relevant evidence in respect of that matter.  He had at some length set
    out the burden and standard of proof where such assertions of deception
    were made by the Respondent and the shift in such burden of proof.

 9. He had found at  paragraph  25  that  the  evidence  disclosed  in  his
    judgment, that the Respondent had discharged the evidential burden.  He
    had thereafter at  paragraphs  27  to  42  examined  the  evidence  and
    explanations  put  forward  by  the  Appellant.   At  paragraph  42  he
    concluded that "the Appellant has provided an innocent explanation that
    satisfies the minimum level of plausibility".

10. Thereafter he had examined whether the Respondent had shown  that  that
    innocent explanation should  be  rejected  and  whether  therefore  the
    Respondent discharged the legal burden.  He had looked at the  relevant
    evidence in not insignificant detail.  He concluded at paragraph 61:

         "Notwithstanding my suspicions and the rather  poor  state  of  the
         Appellant's case before me, mindful that  the  Appellant  does  not
         have any legal burden to discharge, I find that the Respondent  has
         not discharged the legal burden on the balance of probabilities.  I
         cannot reject the Appellant's minimally plausible explanations."

11. Mr Howells conceded before us that  his  submissions  were  essentially
    that it was irrational for the judge to have  reached  the  conclusions
    that he did based on the evidence.  An irrational  conclusion  was  not
    the conclusion in this case.  The judge was mindful of the legal  tests
    applicable.  He was aware of the salient  evidence  in  this  case  and
    whilst not required to deal with each and every matter  had  adequately
    considered all relevant facts and provided reasons  for  his  findings.
    He had approached that evidence with care and in a fair manner.  Whilst
    it could not be said that all judges would necessarily have reached the
    same conclusion it was not an irrational conclusion that was reached by
    the judge and does not disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

12. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this  case  and
    we uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



