
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/05169/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|London                               |                                     |
|On Monday 25 November 2019           |On Thursday 5 December 2019          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     K R
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms A Childs, Counsel instructed by CK solicitors

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  appeal
involves minor children, it is appropriate to continue that  order.   Unless
and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant  (as  he  was
in the First-tier  Tribunal)  is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                  DECISION

  BACKGROUND

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of  reference,
       I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       even though the Secretary of State is strictly the Appellant at  this
       juncture.  The Respondent appeals against a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Currie promulgated on 8  July  2019  ("the  Decision")
       allowing the Appellant's appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision
       dated 2 August 2018 refusing his  human  rights  claim  made  in  the
       context of a decision maintaining a deportation  order  against  him.
       The deportation order was made on 11 March 2008. Notwithstanding  the
       deportation order, the Appellant has remained in the UK and  has  not
       been deported to Jamaica.

    2. The Appellant came to the UK as a visitor on 31  January  2000,  then
       aged nearly twenty years.  His leave was extended to 23  August  2002
       and on 15 August 2002, the Appellant was granted indefinite leave  to
       remain as the spouse of a British citizen.

    3. The Appellant was convicted of possession of a Class  A  drug  on  31
       August 2004 and sentenced to five years in prison.   A  decision  was
       made to deport him on  that  account.   His  appeal  failed  and  the
       deportation order was signed on 11 March 2008.

    4. The Appellant is now in a relationship with another  British  citizen
       and they have three children - [K1] born in October 2012,  [K2]  born
       in June 2015 and [K3] born in September 2018.

    5. On 25 April 2018, the  Appellant  made  representations  seeking  the
       revocation of the deportation order against him which was refused  by
       the decision under appeal.

    6. The Judge concluded that the impact of deportation on the Appellant's
       partner and three children would be unduly harsh.  He  accepted  that
       the Appellant could not meet Exception 1 under the Immigration  Rules
       ("the Rules") or Section 117C (4) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
       Act 2002 ("Section 117C") because he had not been  lawfully  resident
       for more than half his life.   However,  the  Judge  found  that  the
       Appellant was socially and culturally integrated in the UK.  He  also
       said that "it could be argued" that there would be  very  significant
       obstacles to the Appellant's integration  in  Jamaica  ([43]  of  the
       Decision).

    7. The Judge recognised that it was not sufficient  that  the  Appellant
       meet either or both of the exceptions  under  the  Rules  or  Section
       117C.  Due to the length of his sentence, the Judge  noted  that  the
       Appellant must show that there  are  "very  compelling  circumstances
       over and above" the two exceptions.   In that regard, the Judge  took
       into account the period since the deportation order  was  signed  and
       that the Respondent had  not  enforced  the  order,  the  Appellant's
       rehabilitation (he had not offended since leaving  prison  in  2007),
       that the Appellant was exhibiting "positive good character"  and  had
       health  conditions  (a  kidney  condition  for  which  dialysis   was
       required) ([44] of the Decision).   The Appellant's family life  also
       went beyond a "bare case" ([45] of the  Decision).   Balancing  those
       factors against the public interest, the Judge concluded at  [45]  of
       the  Decision  that   deportation   of   the   Appellant   would   be
       disproportionate.

    8. The Respondent's grounds of challenge are, in summary,  a  submission
       that the  Judge  has  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  or  has
       misdirected himself when reaching the "unduly harsh" finding  or  the
       conclusion that there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
       above the exceptions under the Rules and Section 117C and  a  failure
       to consider all relevant factors and evidence.  The Respondent relies
       in particular on the Court of  Appeal's  judgments  in  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department v PF (Nigeria)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1139
       ("PF (Nigeria)") and Secretary of State for the Home Department v  PG
       (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 ("PG (Jamaica)").

    9. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Neville
       on 24 September 2019 in the following terms (so far as relevant):

           "... 2.     Not  all  judges  hearing  this  appeal  would  have
           reached the same decision.  But the Grounds fail to engage  with
           this Judge's impeccable self-direction at [22] - [34] as to  the
           relevant legal principles.  Before the Judge can be said to have
           erred  in  law  the  conclusion  reached  must  be  perverse  or
           irrational - JG  (Jamaica)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  982  at  [39]  is
           directly on point.  Such a challenge should be  clearly  pleaded
           and it is insufficient to simply rely on  'factual  precedents':
           RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence:  seriousness)  Iraq  [2019]
           UKUT 123 at [14].

           3.    At para 6 the  Grounds  assert  a  failure  to  take  into
           account the appellant having been an absconder since the  making
           of the deportation order.  I cannot see that the Judge has  made
           any such finding, nor that this submission was made at the time.
            It is for the Grounds to  set  this  out.   Nor  is  the  other
           challenge at para 6, asserting that the  Judge  placed  material
           weight on rehabilitation contrary to RA.  At [44(iii)] the Judge
           found the circumstances to go beyond what the Grounds call  'the
           expected norm'.  No legal error is disclosed by that then  being
           a 'pro' on the  balance  sheet  to  be  considered  cumulatively
           alongside all relevant factors, and certainly the  Judge  cannot
           be seen  to  treat  it  as  decisive  or  even  as  particularly
           significant.

           4.    Overall the Grounds fail to clearly and cogently  identify
           an arguable material error of law, and instead  simply  ask  the
           Upper Tribunal to disagree with the final result."

   10. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  on  16
       October 2019 in the following terms:

           "It is arguable that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Currie
           was not reasonably entitled to find:

             1. that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner to
                remain in the United Kingdom without him;

             2. that it would be unduly harsh for his children to remain  in
                the United Kingdom without him; and

             3. that there were very compelling circumstances over and above
                those described in paras 399 and 399A

           Findings 1 and 2 above appear to be  counter  to  the  Court  of
           Appeal authority, such as, for  example,  SSHD  v  PF  (Nigeria)
           [219] EWCA Civ 1139.

           Finding 3 appears to ignore the guidance  in  several  Court  of
           Appeal  cases  to  the  effect  that  rehabilitation  is  not  a
           significant factor, such as, for example, Danso [2015] EWCA  Civ
           596 and Binbuga [2019] EWCA Civ 551.

           All the grounds may be argued."

   11. The appeal comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains
       errors of law and if so whether the Decision should be set aside.

  DISCUSSION

   12. Mr Lindsay began by explaining the way in which the  Respondent  puts
       her case.  This is not, as the Appellant  suggests  in  the  Rule  24
       statement, intended to be a perversity or rationality challenge.   Mr
       Lindsay accepted that the pleaded case is not clear  but  pinned  his
       colours firmly to the mast of a material misdirection.   The  pleaded
       case is perhaps more indicative of a challenge  to  the  adequacy  of
       reasons, but Ms Childs did not object to the way in  which  the  case
       was argued.  In her submission, the Judge had not misdirected himself
       and had provided reasons for reaching what were rational findings  on
       the evidence.

   13. Mr Lindsay sought to persuade me that the  Judge  when  reaching  his
       findings had ignored binding case-law both of the Court of Appeal and
       of the Upper Tribunal.

   14. The Respondent's pleaded case refers to PG (Jamaica) as authority for
       the principle set out at [38]  to  [39]  and  [43]  to  [46]  of  the
       judgment.  Insofar as Ms Childs sought to argue that  the  Respondent
       relies on case-law as a factual precedent, I reject that  submission.
       The principles which can be gleaned from the relevant  parts  of  the
       judgment in PG (Jamaica) are as follows:

             a) The Judge must reach findings on undue harshness  which  are
                based on evidence;

             b)  The  degree  of  harshness  must  go  "beyond  what   would
                necessarily be involved  for  any  partner  or  child  of  a
                foreign criminal facing deportation"; the  impacts  must  be
                more than "commonplace";

             c) Distress of a child separated from his or her parent  is  to
                be expected but that is not the test - the issue is  whether
                the impact is unduly harsh.

   15. The Respondent's reliance placed on PF (Nigeria) is perhaps closer to
       a reliance on the facts as the case was quite similar in terms of the
       additional factors said to be at play.  There  the  Court  of  Appeal
       found that the impact on children having to face the potential  death
       of their father abroad was neither  unduly  harsh  nor  a  compelling
       circumstance.  However, I accept as Ms  Childs  submitted  that  each
       case turns on its own facts and assessment.

   16. Mr Lindsay also drew my attention to the Upper Tribunal's decision in
       MS (s.117C(6): "very compelling  circumstances")  Philippines  [2019]
       UKUT 122 (IAC) and in particular headnote (1) as follows:

           "In determining pursuant to section 117C (6) of the Nationality,
           Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  whether  there   are   very
           compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
           Exceptions 1 and 2 in  subsections  (4)  and  (5),  such  as  to
           outweigh the public interest in the  deportation  of  a  foreign
           criminal, a court or tribunal must take into  account,  together
           with any other  relevant  public  interest  considerations,  the
           seriousness of the  particular  offence  of  which  the  foreign
           criminal was convicted; not merely whether the foreign  criminal
           was or was not sentenced to imprisonment of more than  4  years.
           Nothing in KO (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2018] UKSC 53 demands a contrary conclusion."

   17. Finally, Mr  Lindsay  referred  to  the  Tribunal's  decision  in  RA
       (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019]  UKUT  123
       (IAC)  and  to  the  guidance   at   [4]   of   the   headnote   that
       "[r]ehabilitation will not ordinarily bear material weight in  favour
       of a foreign criminal".

   18. Turning then to the errors which Mr Lindsay submitted that the  Judge
       had made, he pointed first to [36] of the Decision  where  the  Judge
       said that the Appellant "had to first  satisfy  the  requirements  of
       either Exception 1 or 2".  This  is  a  case  where  the  Appellant's
       sentence was over four years and he has therefore to show that  there
       are very compelling circumstances over and above those exceptions (as
       the Judge rightly noted also at [36]).  Ms Childs accepted  that  the
       Judge was wrong to say that the Appellant had to  satisfy  either  of
       the exceptions before any assessment was made of the very  compelling
       circumstances but said it was not material.  Mr Lindsay accepted that
       this was so.  Whilst it goes too far to say that  an  appellant  must
       satisfy either of the exceptions in  an  over  four  years'  sentence
       case, it is undoubtedly a good discipline to start with consideration
       whether those exceptions are met before moving on to look at the very
       compelling circumstances.

   19. Next, Mr Lindsay argued that the Judge had misunderstood  the  nature
       of the offence at [2(iii)] and  [4(ii)]  of  the  Decision.   He  had
       considered that the offence was one only of  possession  of  class  A
       drugs whereas it was an offence of possession with intent to  supply.
       Whilst I accept that the Judge may have mischaracterised the offence,
       I do not consider this to be a material error not least  because  the
       Judge understood that this was a serious offence due to the length of
       the sentence, that it was one involving a kilo  of  heroin  and  that
       "the offence committed had many victims and was associated with  many
       other  criminal  activities;  it  resulted  in  significant  harm  to
       society" ([4(ii)]).  That is an indication that  the  Judge  did  not
       misunderstand the nature of the offence.  Mr Lindsay also raised this
       point, though, as a reason why the Judge had erred when he came on to
       balance the public interest against the impact on the  Appellant  and
       his family.  I deal with that point below.

   20. Turning then to the Judge's reasoning  in  relation  to  Exception  1
       based on the Appellant's private life, that appears at  [43]  of  the
       Decision as follows:

           "The issue of the deportation order invalidated the  Appellant's
           indefinite leave to remain therefore he could  not  be  said  to
           fall into Exception 1.  However, I found that at the date of the
           hearing he had been in the UK, admittedly some of that  time  in
           prison, for 19 years and 5 months of his 39 years, he  was  also
           socially and culturally integrated in the UK as  established  by
           his letters of support.  Additionally, it could be  argued  that
           there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration
           into Jamaica, practically all his adult life had been  spent  in
           the UK, he had no remaining family in Jamaica,  his  significant
           health problems would make finding work difficult  and  although
           renal dialysis was available in Jamaica, this was generally of a
           type not recommended for the Appellant and  there  were  serious
           questions as to whether he could pay for such treatment  in  any
           event.  I did note that the Appellant had visited his mother  in
           Jamaica in 2004, some 15 years ago".

   21. Mr Lindsay pointed out that the Judge had not made a finding  whether
       the factors relied upon did amount to very significant  obstacles  to
       the Appellant's integration in Jamaica.  I accept that is so  but  of
       course it could not avail the Appellant had the Judge done so because
       the Appellant failed to meet the exception for other reasons and,  in
       any event, it would not be enough for him to meet that exception;  he
       has to show something over and above the exception.

   22. Mr Lindsay also submitted that there was  an  error  in  this  regard
       because it was not clear whether and to what  extent  the  Judge  had
       taken into account these matters when reaching his conclusions as  to
       very compelling circumstances.  The Judge's findings as regards  very
       compelling circumstances are at [44] and  [45]  of  the  Decision  as
       follows:

           "44.  In addition to the above  I  found  the  following  to  be
           relevant  to  the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant   could
           demonstrate that there were 'very compelling  circumstances'  in
           his case:

             i. The deportation order had been made over  10  years  ago  in
                2008 and no positive steps had been taken by the Home Office
                to action it; it was the Appellant who had sought to  revoke
                it in order to regularise his immigration status,

            ii. The Appellant had demonstrated that  he  was  rehabilitated,
                although not mitigating his previous offending behaviour  he
                had not committed any further  offences  since  his  release
                from prison in March 2007, a period in excess of  12  years,
                he had only committed the one offence,

           iii. Not only had the Appellant not been convicted of any further
                offences he was now demonstrating positive  good  character;
                as evidenced by the testimony of Ms Plummer and Ms Pryce and
                letters of support, he as  an  admirable  role  model  as  a
                father to his friends and provided them with  practical  and
                emotional support.  He was also  actively  involved  in  his
                son's nursery supporting staff in group activities.

            iv. Although his health conditions, to  some  extent,  had  been
                mentioned above, this was a significant and serious  concern
                to the Appellant and his family, it was imperative  that  he
                received the right kind of treatment, without  it  he  would
                not survive.  At the moment he was receiving this  treatment
                in the UK but there were substantial questions as to whether
                this  treatment  would  be  available   in   Jamaica.    The
                peritoneal dialysis he needed was  not  generally  available
                and although haemodialysis dialysis was available  this  was
                not recommended by  his  consultant  and  the  outcomes  for
                patients were not always positive.   It  was  also  unlikely
                that the Appellant would be able to pay for  this  treatment
                in any event.

           45.   I am satisfied that the circumstances of  his  family  are
           such that the Appellant presented much more than a  'bare  case'
           in respect of Exception 2, NA (Pakistan).  Taking the above into
           account collectively, which I am entitled to do, NA  (Pakistan),
           I am also satisfied that there are very compelling circumstances
           sufficient to outweigh the strong public interest  in  deporting
           those foreign criminals convicted of serious offences attracting
           a sentence of 4 years or more.  In coming to this conclusion,  I
           note the need  for  the  deterrent  effect  of  the  immigration
           policy.  I am conscious that I must be clear why I am  satisfied
           that the high threshold required by section 117C  (6)  has  been
           crossed and it is for  the  cumulative  effect  of  the  reasons
           stated at [37] - [44] above."

   23. As the Judge's reasoning incorporates also paragraphs [37] to [42] of
       the Decision dealing with Exception 2 based on the Appellant's family
       life, before turning to  look  at  the  Judge's  assessment  of  very
       compelling circumstances, I set out those paragraphs also:

           "37.  In respect of exception 2; it  had  been  conceded  by  Mr
           Cordon  that  the  Appellant  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting
           relationship with a qualifying partner  and  with  a  qualifying
           child, his partner and three children were British citizens.  It
           was not accepted that it would be unduly  harsh  if  either  the
           Appellant's partner or children had to leave the  UK  to  reside
           with the Appellant in Jamaica or remain in the UK without him.

           38.   I found that this was  a  tight  knit  family,  where  the
           parents  relied  on  each  other  for  emotional  and  practical
           support,  the  children,  as  expected  given  their  age,  were
           dependent on both parents  for  their  emotional  and  practical
           needs.  The Appellant played a significant role in  their  daily
           care and, to all intents and purposes, was their primary  carer.
           The children had not known any other life than in  the  UK  with
           their immediate family and maternal extended  family.   The  two
           older  children  were  doing  well   at   school   and   nursery
           respectively and were integrating  into  their  local  community
           through dance school.   Other  than  through  their  father  the
           children had no cultural ties with Jamaica, they had no paternal
           extended family residing there and they had  never  visited  the
           country.

           39.   The two eldest children were aware that their  father  was
           ill, indeed the eldest had asked whether he was  going  to  die.
           Their mother, who from her work and  continuing  education,  had
           some knowledge of child welfare described them as being  anxious
           about their father's illness.  She has  serious  concerns  about
           their emotional, behavioural and physical well-being because  of
           feelings of anger, abandonment and worry should their father  be
           deported.

           40.   The Appellant had  been  particularly  supportive  of  his
           partner's  continuing  professional  development   and   I   was
           satisfied that without his support, coupled  with  the  need  to
           become solely responsible for the emotional and  daily  care  of
           her children, that she would not be in a  position  to  commence
           her degree.

           41.   When assessing the best interests of the children,  I  was
           directed by the guidance of Clarke LJ given in EV  (Philippines)
           v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and Lord Carnwath in KO (Nigeria) and
           I was satisfied, for the reasons stated above, that  it  was  in
           the best interests of the children to remain with  both  parents
           and that that should be in the UK.  I was also satisfied that it
           would be unduly harsh for the children to have to leave  the  UK
           and reside in Jamaica with their father or to remain in  the  UK
           without him.  The reality of  the  situation  was  that  if  the
           Appellant was deported, the children would remain in the UK with
           their mother.  Whilst much of what they would  experience  would
           be the normal consequences of the deportation of a parent, there
           were particular features of their family  life  and  the  health
           condition of  their  father  that  would  make  their  situation
           excessively harsh.  The  children  were  particularly  close  to
           their father, he was responsible primarily for their daily care,
           and they were worried, to the extent that they showed  signs  of
           being anxious, about their father's health.   I  found  that  it
           would be unbearable for them and detrimental to their health not
           to have regular face to face contact with their father  so  that
           they could see that he was still alive and that  they  could  be
           reassured personally by him that he was 'doing ok'.

           42.   In respect of the Appellant's partner I also found that it
           would be unduly harsh for her to remain in the  UK  without  her
           partner or for her to  have  to  leave  the  UK  and  reside  in
           Jamaica.  The reality of the situation was that if the Appellant
           was deported, she would remain in  the  UK  and  have  the  sole
           responsibility for the children day to day.  She did have  close
           family  relatives  nearby  but,  because  of  their   own   work
           commitments, they were not in a position to provide the  support
           when she needed it.  Whilst she might  be  able  to  change  her
           working hours so that she could remain in employment, her family
           responsibilities were such that it would be extremely  difficult
           or impossible to look after a family of  three  young  children,
           anxious about their father's health,  and  study  for  a  degree
           including completing the necessary placements.  She had  already
           undertaken considerable study and sacrifice to get herself in  a
           position where she could commence her degree and not to be  able
           to do so I found would be excessively harsh.  In  reaching  this
           conclusion I did take into account that  a  number  of  'single'
           mothers successfully undertake such  courses  of  study,  but  I
           found  the  Appellant's  likely  situation   to   be   extremely
           challenging and unsurmountable.  Also noted that it would not be
           necessarily harsh that the effect of her  partner's  deportation
           would require her to relinquish her work and become  reliant  on
           state benefits, this was the situation for many single  mothers,
           however being in  this  position  would  seriously  curtail  her
           ambitions of becoming a qualified social worker."

   24. If one reads the paragraphs dealing with the Appellant's  family  and
       private life together with those dealing  with  the  very  compelling
       circumstances assessment, it becomes evident that, in  summary  form,
       the factors on which the Judge relied in his analysis as meeting  the
       test were the following:

             a) The closeness and interdependency of the family unit ([38]);

             b) The reliance which the Appellant's partner placed on him not
                simply to provide childcare whilst she worked but  in  order
                that she could pursue her ambition and training as a  social
                worker ([40], [42]);

             c) The Appellant's illnesses and in particular the diagnosis of
                "end stage" renal failure which required a  particular  type
                of dialysis and, in due course, if the  Appellant's  medical
                conditions improved, a kidney  transplant:  the  Appellant's
                medical condition  was  relevant  both  to  his  ability  to
                integrate on return to Jamaica but also to the impact on the
                children who would  worry  for  his  safety  and  well-being
                ([39], [41], [43], [44]);

             d) The Appellant's  lack  of  familiarity  with  and  therefore
                difficulty with integration in Jamaica ([43]);

             e) By contrast, the level of the Appellant's integration in the
                UK ([43]);

             f) The positive developments in the Appellant's  behaviour  and
                community contribution since release in March 2007 ([44]);

             g) The passage of time since the deportation order was made (in
                2008), that the Appellant had  not  been  deported  in  that
                period and had not  committed  any  further  offences  in  a
                period of twelve years ([44]).

   25. It may go a little too far to suggest that the failure to deport is a
       positive factor in the Appellant's favour.   As  Mr  Lindsay  pointed
       out, a person  facing  deportation  is  expected  to  leave  the  UK.
       However, the  passage  of  time  is  relevant  both  as  to  risk  of
       reoffending and rehabilitation.  The Judge did not in any event place
       any great weight on this issue.  The  positive  change  in  behaviour
       relates only to two of the seven reasons given.

   26. The Judge was clearly entitled to place  weight  on  the  Appellant's
       medical conditions in the way he did.  Although  the  Judge  did  not
       find it necessary to consider those conditions under Article  3  ECHR
       (and I express some reservations whether such a claim  could  in  any
       event have succeeded on the evidence as presented), it was clearly  a
       relevant factor both as to what would  happen  to  the  Appellant  on
       return and as to the impact on his family in the UK if they  were  to
       remain here whilst he returned to Jamaica.  In that regard,  although
       the Respondent did not accept that it would be unduly harsh  for  the
       Appellant's family to accompany him, for the reasons the  Judge  gave
       at [38], that was a finding which the Judge was entitled to make.

   27. There was no independent social worker's report about the  impact  on
       the children.  However, the Judge did have a lengthy  statement  from
       the children's mother, the Appellant's partner who, as I have already
       noted, is training to be a social worker and  has  qualifications  in
       child psychology.  As such, and although she has an interest  in  the
       outcome of the proceedings, the Judge was entitled to place weight on
       her  evidence.   It  is  worthy  of  note  that  there  had  been  no
       opportunity in this case  to  observe  the  impact  of  any  previous
       absence of the Appellant from the children's lives  -  his  offending
       and period of imprisonment pre-date the birth of all three children.

   28. Equally, although the impact on the Appellant's partner and  children
       of separation might be described as "commonplace"  (except  for  that
       impact occasioned by the Appellant's medical conditions),  the  Judge
       recognised at [42] of the Decision that this might be  the  case  but
       provided reasons why, in this particular case, he  did  not  consider
       this to be so.

   29. The Judge also acknowledged at [45] of the Decision  the  seriousness
       of the offending.  I have already concluded that the  Judge  did  not
       misunderstand the nature of the offences committed and recognised the
       significance of those offences at [4] of  the  Decision.   The  Judge
       also noted  the  "deterrent  effect  of  immigration  policy"  which,
       although  not  explicitly  referring  to   deterrence   of   criminal
       offending,  is   capable   of   incorporating   that   consideration,
       particularly in light of the Judge's correct self-directions  earlier
       in the Decision as to the public interest.

   30. Ultimately, the Judge's main reason for allowing the  appeal  appears
       at [45] of the Decision where he concludes that this is more  than  a
       "bare case" in terms of impact on family life and that this,  coupled
       with the "very compelling circumstances" which he had  identified  in
       the preceding paragraphs, outweighed the strong public interest.

   31. As Judge Neville observed when refusing permission to appeal,  "[n]ot
       all judges hearing this appeal would have reached the same decision".
        However, that is not the issue.  The question for me is whether  the
       Respondent has demonstrated that the Decision contains legal  errors,
       whether those be ones of material misdirection or  of  a  failure  to
       provide adequate reasons.  Based on  a  combination  of  the  factors
       which I have set out at [24] above and the Judge's reasoning  leading
       to those findings and based on  the  Decision  read  as  a  whole,  I
       conclude that the Respondent has failed to  show  that  the  Decision
       contains errors of law.  For those reasons, I uphold the Decision.

  CONCLUSION

   32. For the above reasons, I conclude that  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Currie promulgated on 8 July 2019 does not contain any
       errors of law.  I therefore uphold the Decision.



DECISION

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Currie promulgated on 8 July  2019
does not contain errors of law.  I therefore uphold that decision  with  the
effect that the appeal of [KR] remains allowed.
Signed           [pic] Dated: 4 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
