
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/05198/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 February 2018                      |On 11 May 2018                     |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE NICKLIN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Mr Barry Adewale Lawal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Babarinde, Legal Representative, Hatten Wyatt
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Lawal is the respondent in this appeal.  Following a hearing  on  30
    November 2017 on 8 January  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andonian
    allowed an appeal by Mr Lawal against a decision to deport him dated 17
    March 2017.

 2. Mr Lawal has a long immigration history.  He is now 49 years  old.   He
    is a citizen of Nigeria.  There are no records of when he first came to
    the UK but he has previously claimed to the Secretary of State that  he
    entered the UK in June  1989.   He  first  came  to  the  attention  of
    immigration control on 11 August 2005 when he  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain.  That application was finally refused on  23  November
    2005 because of problems with fee payment.  On 2 February 2006 Mr Lawal
    submitted an application for fourteen years long  residence  indefinite
    leave to remain.  On 3 February 2006 Mr Lawal was arrested on suspicion
    of forgery.  He pleaded guilty to a charge of  possession  of  a  false
    instrument, a passport, with intent to use.  Then, on 31 March 2006, Mr
    Lawal was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment by the Inner  London
    Crown Court.  There was no appeal against that sentence.

 3. On 28 July 2006 Mr Lawal was served with a notice of intention to  make
    a deportation order on the basis of his criminal conviction.  Mr  Lawal
    appealed that decision.  In the meantime, on  2  August  2006,  he  was
    detained under immigration powers on the conclusion  of  his  sentence.
    On 26 August 2006 Mr Lawal submitted a further application for fourteen
    years' long residency ILR.  On 12 September 2006 Mr Lawal  applied  for
    and on 26 September  2006  was  granted  immigration  bail  subject  to
    reporting restrictions.  On 8 February 2007 Mr Lawal's  appeal  against
    his deportation was refused and he became appeal rights exhausted.   At
    this time Mr Lawal stopped  complying  with  his  bail  condition.   He
    stopped reporting to Becket House reporting centre weekly.

 4. On 28 July 2008 Mr Lawal's application for ILR submitted on  26  August
    2006  was  refused.   On  11  December  2008  Mr  Lawal  submitted   an
    application for an EEA residency card under an alias as a family member
    of an EEA national.  He was asked to submit  further  evidence  on  two
    occasions, but he did not do so, and the application was refused on  23
    March 2010 with no right of appeal.  On 24 August  2009  a  deportation
    order was made.  There is then a gap of about three  years  and  during
    this time Mr Lawal was in breach of his reporting conditions and had on
    that basis absconded.

 5. On 24 September 2012 M A Consultants  acting  on  behalf  of  Mr  Lawal
    sought an update on his  case.   A  response  was  sent  the  same  day
    including a copy of a restriction notice requiring Mr Lawal  to  report
    on 28 August 2012 to Becket  House.   He  did  not  do  so.   Mr  Lawal
    continued to fail to report.  On 2 March  2016  Mr  Lawal  applied  for
    further leave to remain on the  basis  of  his  relationship  with  his
    British  citizen  partner,  his  British  citizen  child  and   claimed
    residence of over twenty years.  On 29 March 2016 Mr Lawal  was  issued
    with restrictions requiring him to report to Croydon  reporting  centre
    on 5 April 2016 and every 28th day thereafter.  Mr Lawal did report  on
    5 April and on 3 May 2016.

 6. On 7 June 2016m Mr Lawal was detained under immigration powers.   On  8
    June, Mr Lawal's application for further leave to  remain  was  refused
    under paragraph 353 with no  right  of  appeal.   Ultimately  Mr  Lawal
    sought judicial review of this refusal.  On 7 July 2016, a stay against
    his removal was granted.   On  29  July  2016,  Mr  Lawal  was  granted
    immigration bail and released on 1 August 2016.  On 15  December  2016,
    in the judicial review proceedings a  consent  order  was  agreed.   By
    that, the Secretary of State withdrew the various decisions in 2016 and
    Mr Lawal  was  given  until  5 January  2017  to  submit  any  further
    representations which the Secretary of State agreed  then  to  consider
    within three months.

 7. The nature of Mr Lawal's Article 8 claim was that his deportation would
    be in breach  of  his  Article  8  rights  because  he  had  a  current
    relationship with a British  citizen,  her  daughter  from  a  previous
    relationship, who is entitled to apply for British citizenship, and his
    child in the United Kingdom.  Mr Lawal claimed that it would be  unduly
    harsh for his partner, stepchild and child to relocate to Nigeria  with
    him because all were or were entitled to  being  British  citizens  and
    were all settled in the UK.  Mr Lawal also  alleged  that  his  partner
    suffered from health conditions and entered the UK as a minor  and  had
    no memory of her life in Nigeria.  Mr Lawal submitted that it would  be
    unduly harsh for his partner to remain in  the  UK  and  care  for  his
    children and that this would be extremely difficult for her as well  as
    working at the same time.   Finally,  Mr  Lawal  claimed  that  he  had
    established a private life in the UK, having lived in the  country  for
    over twenty years.

 8. In reaching her decision  the  Secretary  of  State  applied  paragraph
    399(a) of the Immigration Rules and decided

    that Mr Lawal did have a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
         stepdaughter but that she was not a  UK  citizen,  but  a  Nigerian
         citizen, and she had not lived in the UK for seven years as she had
         entered the UK on 3 February 2012;

    that it would not be unduly harsh  for  the  stepdaughter  to  live  in
         Nigeria, the decision  on  relocation  being  one  for  Mr  Lawal's
         partner;

    it was not unduly harsh for the stepdaughter to remain in the UK if  Mr
         Lawal were to be deported.  The stepdaughter was not dependent upon
         Mr Lawal for either her right or ability to reside in the UK or for
         any of her day-to-day needs;

    Mr Lawal's deportation was proportionate on the basis  of  his  serious
         criminal conviction in the UK;

    it was accepted that Mr Lawal's daughter was a British citizen and that
         he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with her;

    it was not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for the  daughter  to
         live in Nigeria.  She was  a  dual  citizen  of  both  the  UK  and
         Nigeria.  The decision to relocate would lie with Mr Lawal and  his
         partner; and

    it was not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for the  daughter  to
         remain in the UK following Mr Lawal's  deportation.   The  daughter
         was not dependent upon Mr Lawal for her right or ability to  reside
         in the UK or for any of her day-to-day  needs,  and,  finally,  the
         Secretary of State considered that  there  was  adequate  education
         infrastructure in Nigeria for both children.

 9. In considering Mr Lawal's relationship with his partner  the  Secretary
    of State applied paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration Rules.   She  made
    the following findings:

      1) The Secretary of State accepted that  the  partner  was  a  British
         citizen and Mr Lawal had a genuine and subsisting relationship with
         her.   However,  the  Secretary  of  State  determined   that   the
         relationship with his partner was formed when Mr Lawal was  in  the
         UK unlawfully.  Mr Lawal has never been  in  the  UK  lawfully  and
         indeed the Secretary of State contended that his relationship  with
         his partner had been formed when  he  knew  that  the  Home  Office
         intended to deport him.  His partner, the Secretary of State found,
         would also partially have been aware of that fact.

    It was not unduly harsh for the partner to live in Nigeria if she chose
         to do so.  She was born in Nigeria spent a significant part of  her
         formative years in Nigeria.

    It would not be unduly harsh for the partner to stay in the UK even  if
         Mr Lawal were to be deported.  Both she and Mr Lawal entered  in  a
         relationship knowing that he had a precarious immigration status.

10. As to the partner's medical condition, the Secretary of State  accepted
    that she occasionally suffered from high blood pressure but that  there
    was insufficient evidence of any more serious  conditions.   The  blood
    pressure issues, she found, could be treated in Nigeria.

11. The Secretary of State considered the private life exception under 399A
    Immigration Rules, but determined that he failed to qualify as  he  had
    not been lawfully resident in  the  UK  for  most  of  his  life.   The
    Secretary of State also considered that Mr Lawal was not  socially  and
    culturally integrated into the UK  and,  finally  she  considered  that
    there would not be very significant obstacles to Mr Lawal's integration
    into Nigeria.

12. Under the general consideration of Mr  Lawal's  Article  8  claim,  the
    Secretary of State accepted that Mr Lawal had established a family life
    and private life in the UK and accepted that the decision to remove him
    from the UK would interfere with his right  to  a  family  and  private
    life.  Nevertheless, Mr Lawal's removal  was  in  accordance  with  the
    immigration legislation and would be proportionate to  this  aim.   The
    Secretary of State did not consider  that  there  were  any  compelling
    circumstances why Mr Lawal  should  not  be  deported.   Mr  Lawal  was
    informed of his statutory right of appeal under Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 from within the UK.

13. On 22 March 2017 Mr Lawal submitted an appeal against the Secretary  of
    State's decision.  The grounds simply stated: "The decision  to  remove
    the appellant will lead to a breach of Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The
    appellant cannot be separated from his partner and daughter as it  will
    have an adverse impact on their lives."

14. Before turning to the First-tier Tribunal's judgment the starting point
    is the statutory framework.  The judge considered Sections  117B  to  D
    when considering Mr Lawal's Article 8 claim.  Under Section 117D(2)  Mr
    Lawal as someone who has been sentenced  to  at  least  twelve  months'
    imprisonment was  classified  as  a  foreign  criminal.   As  such,  in
    addition to the consideration of the matters  in  Section  117B,  which
    apply to all cases, the judge had to have regard to Section 117C.  This
    provides:

         "(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated into  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh."

15. Section 117D provides, so far as material, that  a  qualifying  partner
    means a partner who is

         "(a) a British citizen, or

         (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the  meaning  of
             the Immigration Act 1971 - see Section 33(2A) of that Act)"

    and that a qualifying child means a person who is under the age  of  18
    and who is

         "(a) a British citizen, or

         (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
             seven years or more."

16. It is also important to note that paragraphs 396  and  397  provide  as
    follows:

         "396.    Where a person is liable to  deportation  the  presumption
             shall be that the public interest requires deportation.  It is
             in the public interest to deport where the Secretary of  State
             must make a deportation order in accordance with Section 32 of
             the UK Borders Act 2007.

         397. A deportation order will not be made if the  person's  removal
             pursuant  to  the  order  would  be  contrary  to   the   UK's
             obligations under the Refugee Convention or the  Human  Rights
             Convention.  Where deportation would not be contrary to  these
             obligations, it will only be in exceptional circumstances that
             the public interest in deportation is outweighed."

17. In relation to the second sentence of paragraph 396 it is right to note
    that in the Rule 24  response  to  the  appellant  Mr  Lawal  made  the
    following points, that his 2009 deportation order was made pursuant  to
    Section 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Immigration Act rather than Sections  32(4)
    and (5) of the UK Borders Act as his conviction was prior to  the  2007
    Act and the Secretary of State had not made any case that he is  liable
    to deportation under 32(5).  The impact of that for the present purpose
    is as follows.  This was not a  case  of  mandatory  deportation  under
    Section 32 of the 2007 Act.  It  was  a  question  of  a  discretionary
    deportation.

18. Nevertheless, the fact is that, as I have recounted in the  immigration
    history, a deportation order has already been made and that  there  has
    been no challenge to the legality of that order,  so  the  position  is
    that the Immigration Judge was required to consider  the  matters  that
    were identified in 396 and 397.   He  was  also  required  to  consider
    specifically paragraph 399 of the Immigration  Rules  and  whether  the
    deportation of Mr Lawal would be unduly harsh for either  the  children
    or Mr Lawal's partner either for them to accompany him to  Nigeria  or
    for them to remain in the UK  without  him.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    noted the statutory provisions and the Immigration Rules  that  I  have
    identified in paragraph 21 of his judgment.

19. Thereafter the First-tier Tribunal Judge summarised the decision of the
    Secretary of State  before  concluding  in  paragraphs  35  and  36  as
    follows:

         "35. However, it is my view that the appellant's  human  rights  in
             this  matter  do  outweigh  the  need   to   maintain   proper
             immigration control.  I do believe that consideration has  not
             been given to the fact that this  offence  that  occurred  had
             been ten years ago and since then the  appellant  has  been  a
             reformed character, looking after his family and living a law-
             abiding life.  During that ten year period of time when he has
             not been involved in any further issues with  the  authorities
             he has concentrated in looking after his  family,  taking  his
             stepdaughter to school and back home, spending time with  her,
             and looking after his son [that is a  mistake  for  daughter].
             He does not have a good immigration history but the  crime  he
             committed was some ten years ago, during  which  time  he  has
             built up substantial family life in the UK.  If he were to  be
             removed from the UK now he would most likely not  be  able  to
             return for many years.  It  was  clear  that  the  appellant's
             partner would find it financially impossible to make  frequent
             trips to Nigeria and take the children with her  so  they  can
             see the appellant.  The stepdaughter is very much attached  to
             the appellant, who treats her as his own daughter.  If he were
             removed that contact  will  fade  away  it  is  reasonable  to
             conclude as contact by electronic means is  not  the  same  as
             physical contact on a daily basis when the family sit together
             for meals and spend  time  together  and  when  the  appellant
             interacts with his family and children.  As regards the 1 year
             old son [again,  that  is  a  mistake  for  daughter]  if  the
             appellant were removed his [daughter] would be a  stranger  to
             him if the appellant is one day able  to  return,  life  would
             have moved on by then as well.  Now is the time for bonding to
             take place.

         36.  The burden of proof is  on  the  respondent  to  satisfy  this
             Tribunal  on  the  civil   balance   of   probabilities   that
             deportation  is  conducive  to  the  public  good;  it  is   a
             rebuttable presumption that deportation is  conducive  to  the
             public good in regard to a foreign criminal in the UK.   I  do
             believe that the respondent has not discharged the  burden  of
             proof incumbent upon her, and that the appellant has  in  this
             instance successfully rebutted the presumption  in  favour  of
             deportation.  It is not proportionate to remove the  appellant
             in the circumstances of this case."

    As such the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.

20. On 10 January 2018 the Secretary of State lodged an appeal against  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision.  Essentially  the  Secretary  of  State
    contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has in paragraphs 35 and 36
    failed to give clear reasons why the appeal was allowed and  failed  to
    give consideration to Section 117A to D as he was required to  do.   It
    is also submitted that the FtTJ got the burden of proof wrong and  that
    his reliance upon ten years since Mr Lawal had been  convicted  of  the
    offence  and  his  rehabilitation  was  misplaced  in  light   of   the
    authorities of the Court of Appeal in Danso [2015] EWCA  Civ  596  [20]
    and Velasquez Taylor [2015] EWCA Civ 845, in which the court made clear
    that the weight that could be  given  in  a  deportation  case  to  any
    rehabilitation of the foreign criminal was limited.

21. The grounds that the Secretary of  State  has  relied  upon  today  are
    three, first, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge

      1) failed to apply either the requirements of paragraphs 398, 399  and
         399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or   the   mandatory   statutory
         considerations of Section 117A to D of the Nationality, Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 as amended,

      2) failed to properly give  weight  to  the  public  interest  in  the
         appellant's deportation,

      3) failed to give clear findings adequately reasoned  as  to  why  the
         claimant's deportation was disproportionate.

    Essentially though those grounds represent a challenge of the  findings
    and the application of the relevant law.

22. In response on behalf of Mr Lawal, Mr Babarinde  has  today  sought  to
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  contending  that
    it is clear from the decision that  the  judge  had  all  the  relevant
    considerations in mind and that he was entitled to reach the conclusion
    that he did.

23.  It  is  important  to  look  at  the  statutory  framework   and   the
    interpretation that has been placed upon it by the courts.  In Richards
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA  Civ  244  the
    Court of Appeal stated that "the strong public  interest  in  deporting
    foreign criminals is now not merely the  policy  of  the  Secretary  of
    State but the judgment  of  Parliament",  a  point  emphasised  in  the
    subsequent case of SS (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] 1 WLR  998.   It  also  recognised  that  the  public
    interest in  deportation  encompassed  the  need  for  deterrence,  the
    promotion of public confidence in the treatment  of  foreign  criminals
    and the need to express society's  condemnation  of  those  who  commit
    serious  offences.   Parliament  has  prescribed  a  detailed  set   of
    considerations for any court or Tribunal to assess.  It is not  for  an
    individual judge to ignore these provisions  and  perform  a  purported
    balancing exercise without regard to them.  Such an approach  is  wrong
    in principle and it  risks  producing  inconsistent  decisions.   I  am
    afraid to say that I have reached a very clear conclusion  that  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andonian has done just that.

24. On the facts of this case the only real issue upon which there could be
    any argument was whether the deportation of Mr Lawal  would  be  unduly
    harsh on his daughter, his stepdaughter not qualifying under  paragraph
    399(a) and his partner not qualifying under paragraph 399(b)(i) because
    the relationship was formed when Mr Lawal was not in the  UK  lawfully.
    An assessment of undue harshness requires a  careful  analysis  of  the
    evidence of the  likely  impact  on  the  child  measured  against  the
    offending and public interest in deporting foreign criminals.  This can
    be a difficult exercise and there are numerous authorities guiding  the
    Tribunal Judges as to how to perform it.  The  key  decisions  are  KMO
    (section 117 - unduly  harsh)  (Nigeria)  [2015]  UKUT  543  (IAC),  MM
    (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450 and AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1012.
    They establish that undue harshness requires a  high  threshold  beyond
    what might be regarded as the typical harshness that would follow  from
    the separation of a child from his or her parent.

25. In MM (Uganda) Lord Justice  Laws  held  that  when  determining  undue
    harshness the court should have regard to  all  of  the  circumstances.
    These included the applicant's immigration and  criminal  history.   At
    paragraph 24 he said this:

         "This steers the Tribunals and the court  towards  a  proportionate
         assessment  of  the  criminal's  deportation  in  any  given  case.
         Accordingly the more pressing the public interest in  his  removal,
         the harder it will be to show that  the  effect  on  his  child  or
         partner will be unduly harsh."

26. That decision was followed in MA (Pakistan)  &  Ors  v  Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA  Civ  705.   In  AJ
    (Zimbabwe) at paragraph 17 the court indicated that it  would  be  rare
    for the best interests of the children to outweigh  the  strong  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals.

         "Something  more  than  a  lengthy  separation  from  a  parent  is
         required, even though such separation is detrimental to the child's
         best  interests.   That  is  commonplace  and  not   a   compelling
         circumstance.   ...   In  many,  if  not  most,  cases  where  this
         exception  is  potentially  engaged  there  will  be   the   normal
         relationship of love and affection between parent and child and  it
         is virtually always in the best interests of  the  child  for  that
         relationship  to  continue.   If  that  were   enough   to   render
         deportation a disproportionate interference with  family  life,  it
         would drain the Rule of any practical significance."

    And then at paragraph 31 the court stated:

         "It was not open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  find  that  the
         separation of the children from the  father  or  stepfather  was  a
         compelling reason to allow the  respondent  to  remain.   Far  from
         being an exceptional circumstance, this is an everyday situation as
         the authorities I have set out demonstrate.   They  show  that  the
         separating parent and child cannot, without more, be a good  reason
         to outweigh the very powerful public interest in  deportation.   No
         doubt the First-tier Tribunal was right to say that these  children
         would unfortunately suffer from the separation but  for  reasons  I
         have already explained, if the concept of exceptional circumstances
         can apply in such a case, it would undermine the application of the
         Immigration Rules."

    At paragraph 46 the Court of Appeal indicated on the facts of that case
    that there would be some emotional damage to  the  children  but  noted
    that this was not unusual whenever a parent is deported and  the  child
    is unable to live with that parent outside the UK.

27. In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662 at 34 the court said:

         "The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,  as
         identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy Prosecutor  of  the  Italian
         Republic [2013] 1 AC 338 at paragraph 145.  Nevertheless, it  is  a
         consequence of criminal conduct that  offenders  may  be  separated
         from their children for many years, contrary to the best  interests
         of those children.  The desirability of children  being  with  both
         parents is a commonplace of family life.  That  is  not  usually  a
         sufficiently compelling circumstance to outweigh  the  high  public
         interest in deporting foreign criminals.  As Lady Justice  Rafferty
         observed in Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  CT
         (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at paragraph 38: 'Neither the British
         nationality  of  the  respondent's  children   nor   their   likely
         separation from their  father  for  a  long  time  are  exceptional
         circumstances  which  outweigh   the   public   interest   in   his
         deportation.'"

28. Finally, in WZ (China) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 795, paragraph 14, Sir Stanley Burnton said this:

         "I bear in mind that he has an  established  family  life  in  this
         country, that his family and children have UK nationality, and that
         his wife would have to give up work to look after the  children  if
         he were removed and they were to remain in this country.   However,
         none  of  these  facts  takes  his  case  out  of   the   ordinary.
         Deportation necessarily results in the break-up of  the  deportee's
         family if they remain in this country after his removal."

29. It is apparent from the authorities  that  I  have  set  out  that  the
    'unduly harsh'  test  in  paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    reflected in Section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, has a very high threshold. Separation  of  parent  and  child
    even where this may result in some emotional damage to the  child  will
    not  ordinarily  meet  that  test.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    reasoning in this case could be summarised as "it would be  better  for
    this family to stay together".  No doubt that is right, but that is not
    the test.

30. In light of those conclusions and the authorities I have identified  it
    is clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  not  carried  out  the
    necessary assessment in this case.  The appeal will be allowed and  the
    matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. Case remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  to  be
reheard by a Judge other than Tribunal Judge Andonian.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  [pic]    Date: 15 March 2018

Mr Justice Nicklin


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Mr Justice Nicklin
