
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05052/2018
                                                               HU/08539/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 January 2020                 |On 15 January 2020                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON




                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD AQIB
                                ATTIYA BASHIR
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are a husband and wife from Pakistan.  The husband is  the
   principal  appellant,  the  wife's  status   being   dependent   on   his
   circumstances.  By a decision sent to the parties on 10 May 2019,  I  set
   aside  the  decision  of  DUTJ  Juss  upholding  a  First-tier   Tribunal
   dismissing the appellants' appeal on human  rights  grounds  against  the
   respondent's decision to refuse them indefinite leave to  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  long  residence,  with  reference  to
   paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

2. The Upper Tribunal is seised only of the  human  rights  element  of  the
   respondent's decision: any challenge to the refusal under  the  Rules  is
   justiciable only in judicial review.

3. When setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I had  regard
   to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Balajigari v The  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  673.   I  directed  the
   parties to file and serve written submissions dealing with the Balajigari
   question, within 14 days from  the  sending  out  of  the  decision,  and
   indicated that I would then consider whether the appeal decision could be
   remade on the basis  of  the  documents  on  the  file  and  the  written
   submissions, or whether a further oral hearing was required.

4.  On  23  May  2019,  just   within   the   14   days,   the   appellants'
   representatives, Aman Solicitors, sent in submissions on Balajigari.  The
   respondent did not respond.  Unfortunately, the file was  then  misplaced
   at Field House and has only  just  come  to  light.   I  now  proceed  to
   consider  remaking  the  decision,  with  reference  to  the  appellant's
   submissions.

Background

5.  The  principal  appellant  ('the  appellant',  save  where  the  context
   otherwise requires) entered the United Kingdom on 22 September 2006 as  a
   student, extending his leave on multiple occasions and  on  23  September
   2016, 10 years and 1 day after  his  original  arrival,  he  applied  for
   indefinite leave to remain.

6. The second appellant joined him here  on  28  May  2014,  with  leave  to
   remain valid until 18 March 2016.  On 16 March 2016, she made a dependant
   spouse  application  which  on  23  September  2016  was  varied  to   an
   application for leave to remain as the spouse of a settled  person.   The
   principal appellant was not a settled person on  that  date,  but  it  is
   accepted that in practice the second appellant's status stands  or  falls
   with that of the principal appellant, her husband.

7. On 5 June 2017, the respondent wrote to  the  appellant  to  ask  him  to
   complete a tax questionnaire, which he returned promptly on 27 June 2017,
   with supporting documents.

Refusal letter

8. On 2 February 2018, the respondent refused the appellants'  applications,
   relying on paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules HC395  (as  amended)
   and on discrepancies between the appellant's tax returns and  the  income
   stated in his applications to the UKVI.  The respondent  considered  that
   the appellant's character was damaged and  that  it  was  undesirable  to
   allow him to remain, having regard to his character and conduct.

9. The respondent gave the appellants no opportunity  to  explain  what  had
   happened before making her decision.  Had she done  so,  the  explanation
   now before me would have been  given.   The  appellants  say  that  their
   applications were completed by an immigration consultant named Mr Ansari,
   who instructed someone else  at  MCSO  Accountants  to  prepare  the  tax
   returns. Mr Ansari is now in Dubai and unreachable.

10. The appellants subsequently instructed different  tax  specialists,  CBS
   Accountants, who have corrected the errors in the husband's  tax  return.
   The husband has paid any necessary tax and there have  been  no  criminal
   proceedings on behalf of HMRC. The appellants  contend,  in  reliance  on
   [42] of Balajigari, that a 'minded to refuse' approach should  have  been
   adopted by the respondent and further, that the section 55 best interests
   of the appellants' son have not been considered, as well as any Article 8
   ECHR circumstances outside the Rules (Balajigari at [39] relied upon).

The Balajigari decision

11. The judgment of the court  in  Balajigari  was  given  by  Lord  Justice
   Underhill, Lord Justice Hickinbottom and Lord Justice  Singh  concurring.
   Underhill LJ in Balajigari identified three issues in what for brevity he
   described as 'earnings discrepancy cases':  first, under domestic  public
   law the scope of application of paragraph 322(5) and the  procedural  and
   evidential requirements for a decision of that kind; second, interference
   with Article 8 ECHR rights; and  third,  whether  judicial  review  is  a
   suitable vehicle for challenging paragraph 322 refusals where  Article  8
   is  engaged.   I  am  concerned  only  with  the  second  question,   the
   proportionality of interfering with the appellants' Article 8 rights.

12.   At [39], Underhill LJ dealt with the second stage of the  respondent's
   analysis, which concerned the exercise of her discretion under  paragraph
   322(5):

           "39.  Mr Biggs submitted  that  at  this  second  stage  of  the
           analysis  the  Secretary  of  State  must  separately   consider
           whether, notwithstanding the conclusion that it was  undesirable
           for the applicant to have leave to remain,  there  were  factors
           outweighing the presumption that leave should for that reason be
           refused. He  submitted  that  it  is  at  this  stage  that  the
           Secretary of State must consider such factors as the welfare  of
           any minor children who may be affected adversely by the decision
           and any human rights issues which arise. That  seems  to  us  in
           principle  correct.   There   will,   though   no   doubt   only
           exceptionally, be cases  where  the  interests  of  children  or
           others, or serious problems about removal to  their  country  of
           origin, mean that it would be wrong to refuse  leave  to  remain
           (though not necessarily indefinite leave to remain) to  migrants
           whose presence is undesirable."

                                                            [Emphasis added]

13. At [91], the Court of Appeal  accepted  that  Article  8(1)  ECHR  would
   normally be engaged in such cases, because of the  length  of  time  that
   appellants had been in the  United  Kingdom,  and  that  where  dishonest
   conduct had been established, 'in the generality of cases such a  finding
   will be sufficient, for the purposes of the  final  Razgar  question,  to
   justify the applicant being refused leave to remain and  in  consequence,
   which is the relevant interference, becoming liable to removal'.

14. There would always be the possibility  of  exceptional  cases  in  which
   Article 8 outweighed the Secretary of State's assessment  of  the  public
   interest. An analogy was drawn with the approach taken by  the  Court  of
   Appeal on TOEIC cheats in  Ahsan  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009.  At [220]-[223] Underhill LJ  summarised
   the Court of Appeal's overall reasoning thus:

           "220. However, in broader terms the effect of our reasoning  can
           be summarised as follows. ...

           223.   ... But we have expressed the view in Part B  above  that
           if the applicant enjoys a private or family life in the UK which
           is protected by article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
           Rights - which is likely to be so in  the  typical  case  -  the
           notice of liability to  removal  which  is  the  consequence  of
           refusal of ILR will constitute an interference with those rights
           which the Secretary of  State  will  have  to  justify.  If  the
           earnings discrepancies relied on were  in  fact  the  result  of
           dishonesty that will normally be sufficient  justification,  but
           his decision on that question will be reviewable as a matter  of
           fact, whether in the context of  a  "human  rights  appeal"  or,
           where  no  such  appeal  is  available,   in   judicial   review
           proceedings: the  circumstances  in  which  an  appeal  will  be
           available are considered in Part C."

15. That is the basis on which  I  approach  the  remaking  of  the  present
   appeal decision.

Appellant's evidence

16. In the present appeal, the principal appellant did indeed give  evidence
   at  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  is  not  suggested  in  the  written
   submission last year that he seeks an oral hearing, or that his  evidence
   would be different now.  The appellant submitted that  he  had  not  been
   convicted of a dishonesty related offence and that the errors in his HMRC
   submissions were the fault of his advisers, but  did  not  represent  any
   dishonesty by the appellant himself.

17. The paragraph 322(5) assessment that he  used  deception  has  not  been
   challenged by judicial review and I am seised only of  the  human  rights
   issue.  There  is  no  updated  witness  statement  from  either  of  the
   appellants, and no evidence about their son, who was 2 years old  at  the
   date of decision and is only 4 now.

18. The evidence about the family's private and family life was  sparse,  as
   was the evidence of their young son's section 55 best interests.  Neither
   appellant was or is a British citizen and neither has had extant leave to
   remain  since  March  2016.   The  principal  appellant  is   financially
   independent and speaks English.  The couple's son (born in 2016) was very
   young, too young to have formed independent links outside  the  immediate
   family.  He is still not of school age.   The  couple  were  said  to  be
   expecting a second child who would be, at best, a year old  now.  Section
   117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended)
   is inapplicable as the parties' child, or children,  are  not  qualifying
   children.

19. There were character references from friends and  work  colleagues.   Mr
   Khaleel Chowdhree, Trustee and Secretary of the Cultural Community Centre
   in Watford said simply that he had known the appellant 'for  many  years'
   and found him 'dependable, reliable, enthusiastic  and  a  well-respected
   member of the community'.   Euro  Garages,  his  employer,  said  he  was
   'honest, hard-working and dedicated' and 'extremely committed to his  job
   role and never fails to impress'.   Neither  of  those  references  takes
   matters much further.

20. There do not appear to be any other character references or evidence  of
   exceptional circumstances, or private life in the United Kingdom  outside
   the core family group formed by these appellants and their son  (and  any
   other child born to them since  the  hearing).   It  is  right  that  the
   appellants and their small  son  have  family  life  together,  but  both
   appellants lived in Pakistan before  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom  as
   adults, and the boy's section 55 best interests are to  remain  with  his
   parents. It is not suggested that he, or his  putative  younger  sibling,
   are anything other than happy,  healthy  small  children.   There  is  no
   reason to suppose that  this  family  would  be  unable  to  re-establish
   themselves in Pakistan as a family, and the evidence  before  me  is  not
   nearly enough to establish exceptional circumstances for which  leave  to
   remain ought to be granted outside the Rules.

21. It follows that these human rights appeals must fail.

Decision

22. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.   I set aside the previous decision.

    I remake the decision by dismissing these appeals.




Signed      Judith AJC Gleeson                     Date:  10 January 2020
            Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
