
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/05254/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                           |On 6 November 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                             Novelette Richards
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal from the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Clarke promulgated on 9 August  2018.   The  appellant  Ms  Novelette
       Richards is a Jamaican citizen born on 1 November 1974.

    2. The appellant was not represented before the First-tier Tribunal  nor
       is she represented today before me.   There  was  an  application  to
       adjourn this case made by her legal advisors, L.A.K.  Legal,  on  the
       basis that her partner would not be able to attend today due  to  his
       illness.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt  rejected   that   application
       primarily because the issue for me to decide today is one of error of
       law, something  not  requiring  the  attendance  of  the  appellant's
       partner.

    3. Ms Richards confirmed that she content to be  unrepresented  and  was
       eloquent in pursuing the written grounds of appeal which were settled
       by her lawyers and advancing her case that I  should  set  aside  the
       decision of Judge Clarke. She recognises that it is  not  for  me  to
       come to a fresh decision based upon the evidence but to  analyse  the
       decision of the judge and consider whether there is any error of  law
       in that decision and to set it aside accordingly.

    4. In short Judge Clark was not convinced on the  evidence  led  by  the
       appellant that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
       between herself and the gentleman I have referred to as her  partner,
       Mr David Packer.   The  grounds  of  appeal  seek  to  challenge  the
       decision on the basis that it was against the weight of the evidence.
       However, the assessment of weight in relation to  the  assessment  of
       evidence is entirely for the First-tier Tribunal.

    5. The ground at paragraph 2 suggests insufficient weight was  given  to
       the fact that the appellant was referred to as next of kin in various
       medical documentation and listed as spouse on one  occasion.  Whether
       that is the case or not cannot be determinative of whether there is a
       genuine and subsisting relationship.

    6. The ground at paragraph 3 deals with the address at [ ~ ] where it is
       said that they lived. The judge says there is no  evidence  that  the
       appellant lived in [ ~ ]. It is now suggested that  documentation  in
       the medical records supports this assertion. I was not taken  to  any
       evidence to support this assertion, but in any event merely living at
       the  same  address  is  not  proof  of  a  genuine   and   subsisting
       relationship.

    7. The ground to paragraph 4 refers  to  discrepancies  in  relation  to
       dates in particular whether the relationship is alleged to have begun
       in 2014 and 2013.  The grounds suggest that the appellant should  not
       be prejudiced by what is said to be an error on the part of the  Home
       Office in noting the wrong date.  I have  been  shown  a  handwritten
       letter  from  Mr  David  Packer,  which  was  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, in which he clearly states that the relationship  commenced
       in late 2013.  That date emanated from the appellant and her partner.
       The  judge's  decision  cannot  be  impugned  because  she   properly
       identified and took account of inconsistencies in the evidence led by
       the appellant.

    8. The ground  at  paragraph  five  makes  reference  to  the  appellant
       spending time in the Derby area in the  past,  before  the  situation
       changed due to Mr Packer's ill health.  Again,  whether  or  not  the
       appellant spent time in Derby is not probative of the existence of  a
       genuine or subsisting relationship. The judge took all  the  evidence
       into account and came to a clear and sustainable conclusion.

    9. The ground at paragraph 6 deals with what is likely to happen  to  Mr
       Packer in the event that the appellant is returned to  Jamaica.  This
       ground, like the others, amounts to no more than a challenge  to  the
       evidential conclusions to which the judge came and to which  she  was
       entitled to come.

   10. Having  given  this  matter  the  fullest  consideration  and  having
       listened with care to everything that Ms Richards has said to me this
       morning, I can find no error of law in the determination made by  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge. The conclusion which  this  judge  reached
       was perfectly open  on  the  evidence.  Whilst  there  is  a  natural
       sympathy for Mr Packer who is in poor and worsening  health,  and  Ms
       Richards may well have cared for him, the existence of a genuine  and
       subsisting  relationship  was  a  factual  issue  for  the  judge  to
       determine on the evidence. Her decision is not amenable to challenge.



Notice of decision

    1)    Appeal dismissed

    2)    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 5 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

