
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05427/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 October 2019                |On 29 October 2019               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                        THIRUSUTHAN GANACHANDRALINGAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr West of counsel, instructed by City Heights
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is what has come to be known as an ETS case, in which the  correct
    approach which is to  adopted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  been
    considered in a number of reported decisions from  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and the Court of Appeal.  For reasons which I will explain, the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to adhere to that guidance in this appeal.  It  is
    for that reason, in summary, that the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    falls  to  be  allowed  and  the  matter  remitted  to  the   FtT   for
    redetermination de novo.

 2. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national who was born on 21 August  1990.
    He entered the UK as a student in 2010.  He received various periods of
    further leave to remain in that capacity.  In 2015, however, there  was
    a refusal of further leave which resulted in  an  appeal  to  the  FtT.
    That appeal was dismissed by the FtT in August 2016 and  the  appellant
    became appeal rights exhausted on 22 September 2017.  He then  made  an
    out of time application for leave to remain on human rights grounds  on
    6 October 2017.  He stated that he was in a relationship with a British
    citizen and that he ought to be granted leave to remain under  Appendix
    FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  because  his  removal   would   be
    disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR.  Further submissions in  support
    of that claim were made by his present representatives  on  31  January
    2018.

 3. On 5 February 2019, the Secretary of State refused the application. She
    concluded that the appellant did not qualify for leave as a spouse  for
    three reasons.  Firstly, she concluded that the appellant  had  used  a
    proxy to take an English language test at Eden College on 3 April 2013.
     The results of  that  test  had  been  submitted  in  support  of  two
    applications for leave to remain which the appellant had made  in  2013
    and the  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant  had  made  false
    representations in a previous application.  He was consequently refused
    on suitability grounds, under paragraph S-LTR 4.2 of Appendix FM.   The
    second ground of refusal was  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    Immigration Status Requirement (for leave to remain under the Five-Year
    Route) because he was on immigration bail: E-LTRP 2.1-2.2.   The  third
    ground of refusal was that the respondent was not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant met the requirement  in  paragraph  EX1(b)  of  Appendix  FM;
    whilst it was accepted that the appellant and his British partner  were
    in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship,  the  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that there were insurmountable obstacles to that relationship
    continuing in Sri Lanka.  The respondent  did  not  consider  that  the
    appellant fell to be granted leave to remain on  Private  Life  grounds
    under the Immigration Rules, or that  there  were  proper  reasons  for
    concluding  that  his  removal  to  Sri  Lanka  would  give   rise   to
    unjustifiably harsh consequences which would breach Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The appellant gave notice of his appeal to the FtT(IAC) and his  appeal
    came before Judge Abebrese, sitting at Taylor House on  10  June  2019.
    Both parties were represented.  The appellant and his  wife  gave  oral
    evidence.  Submissions were made on the  issues  above  and  the  judge
    reserved his decision.

 5. In his decision of 5 July 2019, the judge rejected a submission from Mr
    West (who appeared then as he does now) that the 'Look Up Tool' at p154
    of the respondent's bundle was illegible: he concluded that it was  'in
    small  letter'  but  that  it  was  not  illegible.   He  rejected  the
    appellant's account of events at Eden College on 3 April  2013,  partly
    because he considered the evidence produced by ETS to be  reliable  and
    partly because he noted that a significant proportion  of  the  results
    from that college had been cancelled by ETS.  He  considered  that  the
    appellant had not provided an innocent  explanation  for  the  apparent
    problems with his  speaking  test  and  that  his  appeal  fell  to  be
    dismissed on suitability grounds.  Nor  did  the  judge  find  for  the
    appellant on the issue which arose under  EX1(b)  of  Appendix  FM;  he
    concluded that the family life between the appellant and his wife could
    continue in Sri Lanka.  He did not accept that there  were  exceptional
    circumstances  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  which   rendered   the
    appellant's removal from the UK contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

 6. Permission to appeal was sought and  granted  (by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Landes) on four grounds.  The grounds are prolix  and  discursive
    but may be summarised as follows.  Firstly, the judge had erred in  his
    application of the burden and standard  of  proof  in  respect  of  the
    suitability ground of refusal.   Secondly,  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider  material  matters  in   concluding   that   there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to the continuation  of  family  life  in  Sri
    Lanka.  Thirdly, the judge had failed to address  the  contention  that
    there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's relocation
    to Sri Lanka.  Fourthly, the judge had failed to  address  a  Chikwamba
    [2008] 1 WLR 1420 argument which had been set out  in  the  appellant's
    skeleton.

 7. In granting permission to appeal,  Judge  Landes  noted  amongst  other
    things that it was arguably perverse for the judge  to  have  concluded
    that the ETS Look UP Tool  at  p154  of  the  respondent's  bundle  was
    legible.  She stated that 'the document at  p154  of  the  respondent's
    bundle cannot be read'.  My own examination of  that  document  clearly
    supported Judge Landes' view.  The document which appears  at  p154  of
    the respondent's bundle is almost completely illegible.  I can make out
    the words 'ETS Search', 'ETS SELT Source Data' and 'MDA  Matched  Data'
    (where applicable) but everything else is in such small  type  that  it
    cannot be read.

 8. When the appeal was called on, therefore, I asked Mr Kotas  whether  he
    was able to read the ETS Look Up Tool which was before the  judge.   He
    said that he was able to read it perfectly well.  I asked him  to  read
    it out to me, and he was readily able to do so.  He  was  reading  from
    the Home Office's copy of the bundle, however.  When I  gave  Mr  Kotas
    the copy of the bundle which had been filed with the  FtT,  he  readily
    accepted that it was completely illegible.  It  seems  that  the  small
    typeface was legible when it was originally printed but that  the  copy
    of the bundle which had been transferred electronically to the Tribunal
    had lost clarity, although it is not possible to know whether this  was
    as a result of the scanning of the bundle by the  Home  Office  or  the
    printing of the bundle by the Tribunal.

 9. This produced a rather unsatisfactory and, it is to  be  hoped,  rather
    unusual state of affairs.  Mr Kotas was sensibly able  to  accept  that
    there was no rational basis upon which the judge in the FtT was able to
    conclude that he had a legible copy of the Look Up Tool.   I  asked  Mr
    Kotas where that left the respondent's opposition to  the  appeal.   He
    initially sought to submit that the error on the part of the judge  was
    immaterial, since there was a legible copy  of  the  Look  Up  Tool  in
    existence.  He was subsequently constrained to  accept,  however,  that
    the judge could not rationally have proceeded beyond the first stage of
    the enquiry required by [10] of SM & Qadir [2016] UKUT 229  (IAC)  when
    there was no legible copy of the ETS Look Up Tool.

10. That must be correct.  It is clear from Shehzad & Chowdhury [2016] EWCA
    Civ 615 that a copy  of  the  ETS  Look  Up  Tool,  together  with  the
    respondent's 'generic evidence' is required if she is to discharge  the
    initial evidential burden upon her.   It  is  trite,  as  Mr  Kotas  in
    fairness accepted, that the question of whether  there  is  a  material
    error of law in a first instance decision is to be  determined  on  the
    basis of the evidence which was before the first instance judge:  CA  v
    SSHD [2004] 1165; [2004] Imm AR 640.  That question cannot sensibly  be
    resolved by reference to evidence which was not available at trial.

11. I concluded at the hearing that I was bound to find that the  judge  in
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in his  approach  to  the  ETS
    Look Up Tool.  Contrary to the finding he made, it is accepted  on  all
    sides that he did not have a legible copy of the Look Up Tool.  He  did
    not  have  the  minimum  evidence  required  by  the  jurisprudence  to
    discharge the initial evidential burden on the Secretary of State.   It
    follows that his assessment of whether the  appellant  cheated  in  his
    speaking test at Eden College in 2013 cannot stand.  It  would  not  be
    appropriate, in my judgment, to seek to preserve  any  aspect  of  that
    assessment in the circumstances which I have described.

12. That is particularly so when there is merit in the other aspects of the
    first ground.  As contended  at  [22]-[34]  of  Mr  West's  grounds  of
    appeal, the judge failed to engage  in  any  meaningful  way  with  the
    appellant's  answer  to  the  respondent's  allegation  of  fraud.   He
    asserted and produced evidence  to  show,  for  example,  that  he  was
    proficient in the English language at the time he  was  meant  to  have
    cheated.  The judge failed to engage with  that  evidence  at  all  and
    whilst that evidence was plainly not decisive (for the reasons given at
    [57] of MA (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT  450  (IAC)),  it  was  undoubtedly  a
    relevant consideration.  Whilst the judge was entitled, at [13] of  his
    decision, to find that the appellant had been somewhat vague about  how
    much he had paid to take the test, he was required to engage  with  the
    appellant's contention that he was a man who had no reason to cheat  in
    this test.  His failure to do so  represented  a  further  legal  error
    which vitiated the assessment of the suitability ground of refusal.

13. It follows, as I announced at the hearing, that the  proper  course  is
    for the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside as a whole.
     The parties were agreed  that  the  correct  course,  in  the  unusual
    circumstances I have described, was for the appeal to  be  remitted  to
    the First tier Tribunal.  On remittal, the parties will be  at  liberty
    to adduce evidence which was not before Judge Abebrese or me.  It is to
    be hoped, in the circumstances set out above, that the respondent  will
    ensure that a legible copy of the Look Up Tool is made available to the
    FtT and to the appellant well in advance of that hearing.   I  make  no
    direction in that regard, however, since it is for  the  respondent  to
    decide what evidence she seeks to rely upon.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was erroneous  in  law  and  is  set
aside.  The appeal is remitted to the FtT to be  heard  afresh  by  a  judge
other than Judge Abebrese.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                            Dated 25 October 2019
