
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05528/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 January 2018                  |On 7 March 2018                         |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                           Miss Marina Anne Marcia
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Georget, Counsel, instructed by UK Migration
Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Guyana who was born on 7 June 1969.  She
    appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall,
    whose determination was promulgated on 24 February 2017 dismissing  her
    human rights claim.  The appellant had applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and  the  Secretary  of  State  had  by  a
    decision made on 12 February 2016 refused that application,  hence  her
    appeal to the Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's immigration history is  that  she  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a student and effectively had leave to remain  between  1998
    and 2009.  An application based on long  residency  was  made  but  was
    unsuccessful.  That was made on 4 August 2008.   Subsequently  a  human
    rights application was made on 18 June 2009 and  that  was  refused  in
    December 2009.  There then followed a period of time until this present
    application was made on 5 September 2015.  During that period  of  time
    the appellant had no extant leave.

 3. The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall is, I  think  it
    is accepted on all sides, a very careful piece of  analysis.   It  sets
    out the requirements of the law and it deals in great detail  with  the
    circumstances of this particular case.  Although  the  application  was
    considered under the ten year partner route and the private life  route
    the appellant had stated that her life would be in danger  if  returned
    to Guyana, that she had lost all ties there and that she suffered  from
    depression.  It was considered by the Secretary of State under Appendix
    FM and paragraph  276ADE  and  then  outside  the  Rules  on  what  the
    Secretary  of  State  deemed  to  be  a  consideration  of  exceptional
    circumstances.  That application failed and the  matter  progressed  on
    the basis of a consideration of the appellant  having  entered  into  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a British  partner  with  whom
    she was and  is  living  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  is  currently
    employed.  He is a British citizen and has never lived  in  Guyana.   I
    think it would be fair to say  that  he  is  a  man  of  irreproachable
    conduct.  That does not mean that the couple might not be able to  live
    in Guyana but that was not the issue which the Tribunal considered.

 4. It was accepted that the appellant had lived in Guyana for the majority
    of her life and the substantial issue was whether or not the  appellant
    should be required to leave the United Kingdom and make an  application
    for entry clearance on the basis of the relationship that she had  with
    her British partner.  Suffice it to say as to his circumstances, he has
    a substantial pension, owns property and has a considerable  amount  of
    savings.  It is not realistically thought that  he  would  relocate  to
    Guyana but  rather  that  she  would  travel  to  Guyana  in  order  to
    regularise her position.  That was  the  basis  upon  which  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Randall considered the application.

 5. The determination is, in my judgment, a model of consideration  of  the
    various factors, by which I mean all the material  factual  matters  to
    which the judge was required to pay consideration.   The  determination
    covers some nineteen pages of closely typed  script  and,  although  it
    consists only of 49  numbered  paragraphs,  there  are  in  fact  large
    sections where the paragraphs are subdivided into subparagraphs so that
    the consideration of the claim is not confined to a mere 49  paragraphs
    but is much more wide-ranging.  It deals  with  the  issues  which  are
    raised in the  claim,  sets  out  the  material  factors,  recites  the
    evidence and deals with the various issues.  No challenge  is  made  to
    the material considerations which are set out in the determination.

 6. However, what is said is that although the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did not have the benefit of later case-law, he applied the case of Chen
    and in doing so inadvertently erred because that decision was overtaken
    by the subsequent decision in R (on the application of Agyarko)  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.  Accordingly
    it is said that the legal  landscape  substantially  changed  with  the
    judgment, in particular, the judgment  of  Lord  Reed  insofar  as  the
    correct approach is concerned in such human rights cases.

 7. The issue before me is whether, inadvertently, the judge approached the
    matter incorrectly by relying principally on the decision in R (on  the
    application of Chen) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -  proportionality)
    [2015] UKUT 189.  It  is  said  that  the  landscape  of  these  claims
    fundamentally changed with the decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  as  a
    result of which the judge erred in  his  application  of  Chen  to  the
    circumstances of this appeal.

 8. The judge considered the  circumstances  that  the  appellant  and  her
    partner were faced with and applied the  provisions  in  Chen.   Having
    done so, the judge determined  that  it  was  not  disproportionate  to
    require the appellant to return to Guyana to apply for entry  clearance
    as an unmarried partner or spouse.  Even though  on  his  own  findings
    such an application may be  likely  to  succeed.   In  coming  to  that
    conclusion, the underlying reasoning, which is set out in the  previous
    eighteen pages, was relied upon.

 9. The grounds of appeal are in essence that as a result of  the  decision
    in Agyarko a different approach has to be adopted.  The  judge  applied
    the wrong provisions because he failed to take into  account  what  the
    Supreme Court said in Agyarko.  The relevant passage relied upon by the
    appellant is paragraph 51 of the judgment of Lord Reed, with  whom  all
    of the other Supreme Court Judges agreed.  He said:

         "Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled  to
         remain in the UK only temporarily,  however,  the  significance  of
         this consideration depends  on  what  the  outcome  of  immigration
         control might otherwise be.  For example,  if  an  applicant  would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal will  generally
         be very considerable.  If, on the other hand, an applicant  -  even
         if residing in the UK unlawfully -  was  otherwise  certain  to  be
         granted leave to enter or at least if an application were made from
         outside the United Kingdom then there might be no  public  interest
         in his or her removal.  The point is illustrated in the decision in
         Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home Department."

    As a result of that passage in the judgment of Lord  Reed  it  is  said
    that the judge inadvertently misdirected himself by placing reliance on
    the earlier decision.

10. If one looks at the judge's application of Chen we turn to the  judge's
    approach set out in paragraphs 44 to  48  of  the  determination.   The
    judge was considering whether it was  disproportionate  to  remove  the
    appellant and require her to make an out  of  country  application  for
    entry clearance and whether that would be a breach  of  her  Article  8
    rights.  In doing so the sponsor  might  or  might  not  accompany  the
    appellant.  The situation in Chen was that it may  be  unreasonable  to
    expect someone to return and apply for entry clearance even where there
    are no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing elsewhere.

11. In paragraph 39 of Chen it was stated:

         "In my judgment, if it is shown by an individual (the burden  being
         upon him or her) that  an  application  for  entry  clearance  from
         abroad would  be  granted  and  that  there  would  be  significant
         interference with family life by temporary removal, the  weight  to
         be accorded to the formal requirement of obtaining entry  clearance
         is reduced.  In  cases  involving  children,  where  removal  would
         interfere with the child's enjoyment of family  life  with  one  or
         other of his parents whilst entry clearance is obtained, it will be
         easier to show that the balance on proportionality falls in  favour
         of the claimant than in cases which do  not  involve  children  but
         where removal interferes  with  family  life  between  parties  who
         knowingly entered into  the  relationship  in  the  knowledge  that
         family life was being established while the immigration  status  of
         one party was precarious.  In other words, in the  former  case  it
         would be easier to show that the  individual's  circumstances  fall
         within the minority envisaged by the House of Lords in Huang or the
         exceptions referred to in judgments of the European Court of  Human
         Rights than in the latter case.  However, it  all  depends  on  the
         facts."

12. The judge pointed out the particular circumstances  of  the  case  with
    which he had to deal, compared with those in Chen.  He concluded:

         "The issue of her short-term safety in  Guyana  was  correctly  not
         vigorously pursued; there was nothing to suggest that she would  be
         particularly at risk.  Against this, there was nothing  to  suggest
         that  the  appellant  and  her  partner  would  not   satisfy   the
         requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  given  my   findings   about   the
         relationship, the sponsor's means and the  appellant's  immigration
         history.  Would there be a significant interference in  the  family
         life enjoyed by this couple if the appellant returned to apply  for
         entry clearance?  The sponsor's health, his  means,  his  contract-
         based work and his family obligations do  not,  even  cumulatively,
         prevent him from accompanying her to Guyana if he wishes, while she
         applies; and there are sufficient means for he  couple  to  support
         themselves there, or for the sponsor to support the  appellant,  if
         she goes alone."

13. After consideration he found that it would not be  disproportionate  to
    require the appellant to return to Guyana to apply for entry  clearance
    as an unmarried partner or spouse even though in those findings such an
    application was likely to succeed.

14. The challenge that is made arises from what is  said  in  the  case  of
    Agyarko.  What is said by Lord  Reed  in  paragraph  51  casts  a  very
    considerably different light on the approach which the Courts  and  the
    Tribunals are required to adopt when it comes to making an  application
    from out of country  in  order  to  regularise  an  otherwise  unlawful
    presence in the United Kingdom.  Particular reliance is placed  on  the
    words

         "if, on the other hand, an applicant - even if residing in  the  UK
         unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted leave to enter, at
         least if an application were made from outside the UK,  then  there
         might be no public interest in his or her removal."

15. In my judgment that passage does not  operate  as  a  wholly  different
    approach to that  which  has  previously  been  adopted  in  the  cases
    Chikwamba and Chen.  It does not say that there is no  public  interest
    in requiring someone to regularise their stay in the United Kingdom  if
    they have entered the  United  Kingdom  lawfully  but  have  thereafter
    remained in the United Kingdom when they have had no leave.  It will be
    a question of balance.  It will be a question of proportionality as  to
    whether or not it is appropriate in any particular case to require that
    individual to regularise his or her stay by making an  application  for
    entry clearance from abroad as she would have had to have done had  she
    returned when her leave expired and then sought to re-enter the  United
    Kingdom as a partner of a British citizen.

16. In the circumstances of this case if there is no substantial difference
    between the law as  was  stated  and  was  applied  for  by  the  judge
    following the decisions in Chen and Chikwamba then the  fact  that  the
    judge inadvertently was unable  to  refer  to  the  guidance  which  is
    provided in Agyarko makes no difference.  It is only, in  my  judgment,
    if the decision of the Supreme Court has  altered  the  application  of
    principles in cases such as these that the judge would have erred.   If
    one considers the determination it is clear  that  he  was  considering
    whether it would be proportionate to require the appellant to leave the
    United Kingdom and apply for  entry  clearance.   The  decision  as  he
    recorded in paragraph 48 was that following Chen  he  decided  that  it
    would not be disproportionate to require the  appellant  to  return  to
    Guyana to apply for entry clearance as an unmarried partner or spouse.

17. It is, in my judgment, a material consideration to say  that  the  case
    was not argued on whether the appellant met all  the  requirements  for
    entry clearance as a partner.  That  was  not  the  approach  that  was
    adopted.  Rather, it was said that those requirements  were  met.   The
    case has been argued before me on the basis that  the  requirements  of
    the Rules would be met and that may well be the case but there  is,  in
    my judgment,  a  difference  between  making  a  prognostication  about
    whether the Rules would  be  met  and  a  consideration  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer that those Rules were met at the material time.

18. The background to this case is that at the  time  the  application  was
    made the appellant did not have entry clearance or leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom and was an overstayer.  In those circumstances it is
    not unreasonable for the appellant  to  be  put  to  the  test  and  to
    establish the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Bearing  in  mind
    the fact that the appellant no longer had leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom, whilst it may be that  in  most  cases  the  requirements  are
    likely to be met we cannot say with any  particular  certainty  whether
    those requirements are met because that was not the  basis  upon  which
    the case was considered or argued.

19. It has been suggested by Mr Georget on the part of the  appellant  that
    the decision that has now been made  in  Agyarko  makes  a  substantial
    difference to the case-law that has  previously  been  applied  and  in
    particular he relies on  the  passage  to  which  I  have  referred  in
    paragraph 51 that where it is certain  that  the  appellant  is  to  be
    granted leave to enter if an application were made from outside the  UK
    there might be no public interest in his or her removal.  That  may  be
    the case but that would be depending upon a consideration  of  all  the
    circumstances taken together.  That includes  a  consideration  of  the
    circumstances in which the appellant came to be in the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully, the period of time that she has been in the United  Kingdom
    unlawfully and the public interest  which  arises  from  ensuring  that
    those  who  are  here  unlawfully  satisfy  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  There may well be cases, even where somebody is  in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully, where there is no public interest in his
    or her removal but that is a matter which is essentially a  matter  for
    the judge to determine and that is not any different from the  position
    which was adopted by the judge in this particular case.

20. If one looks at the consideration  of  proportionality  the  judge  was
    looking at all of the factors which might be said to be  in  favour  of
    the appellant being granted leave to remain  without  formally  meeting
    the requirements of an application for  entry  clearance  made  out  of
    country  but  was  also  considering  her  immigration   history.    He
    considered at some length the position of  her  partner.   His  medical
    health was considered at some length.  He has got  three  children  and
    five grandchildren.  He was anticipating a sixth.  His links  are  well
    and truly within the United Kingdom.  He has very adequate  means.   He
    described his income and he described his health condition.  The  judge
    took into account his past ill health.  It was indeed a factor to which
    he attached some weight.  He is currently in remission and has  regular
    check-ups that occur every four months.  That is something  that  would
    be unaffected were he to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  whilst  his
    partner returned to Guyana to make an application for entry  clearance.
    Accordingly, whilst there are very obvious reasons why he may not  wish
    to settle in Guyana, nevertheless those reasons do not apply  and  what
    one is considering is the appellant regularising her stay by making  an
    out of country application for entry clearance.

21. Mr Georget on behalf of the appellant  sought  to  draw  a  distinction
    between the law as it  stood  and  as  it  was  applied  by  the  judge
    following Chikwamba and Chen and submit that there was  a  considerable
    change since the decision of the  Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko.   In  my
    judgment, that difference is not as he submitted it  to  be.   It  will
    always a matter of whether it is proportionate to require a  person  to
    make an application from out of  country.   That  will  depend  upon  a
    consideration of all of the circumstances.  Of those  circumstances  as
    identified by  the  judge  some  were  in  favour  of  the  application
    succeeding on the basis that the application for  entry  clearance  was
    likely to succeed but the other  considerations  were  the  immigration
    history of the appellant and whether or not she  should  reasonably  be
    required to satisfy an Entry Clearance Officer by returning to make the
    appropriate application.

22. He recited the circumstances in paragraph 47.  The relationship between
    the appellant and her partner had commenced when the appellant's status
    was not just  precarious  but  was  unlawful.   No  evidence  had  been
    provided as to the likely time that an entry clearance  application  in
    Guyana would take place.  Indeed, the appellant had  not  made  any  of
    those enquiries.  There was nothing to suggest that it  would  take  an
    excessively long time, certainly not so long as to render it impossible
    for the appellant to support herself whilst there or for the sponsor to
    be with her.  It is accepted that she had no accommodation there.  That
    is not entirely surprising since she  has  not  lived  there  for  many
    years.  The issue of her short-term safety was not  vigorously  pursued
    and there was nothing to suggest that she would be at risk by returning
    to the country of her origin and regularising her stay by making an out
    of country application.

23. That  would  then  require  the  more  detailed  consideration  of  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and the  basis  upon  which  she  would  be
    entitled to seek entry clearance.  The sponsor's health, his  contract-
    based work and his family obligations were all taken  into  account  by
    the judge but that did not prevent him accompanying her to Guyana if he
    wished to do so but at the same time the couple  had  sufficient  means
    for the appellant to travel to  Guyana  and  to  make  the  appropriate
    application.  In those circumstances I do not consider that the  judge,
    even inadvertently, being of course unaware of the decision of Agyarko,
    would have reached a  different  conclusion.   At  all  stages  in  the
    determination he was considering whether it was proportionate to return
    the appellant and indeed  in  paragraph  48  of  his  determination  he
    expressly makes a finding that it  would  not  be  disproportionate  to
    require the appellant to return to Guyana to apply for entry  clearance
    as an unmarried partner or spouse even though on his findings  such  an
    application was likely to succeed.

24. In those circumstances I do not consider that the judge made  an  error
    of law, even inadvertently, or that the decision  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant in  the  form  of  the  decision  in  Agyarko  makes  such  a
    difference to  the  judge's  reasoning  that  had  he  applied  Agyarko
    properly he would have come to the conclusion that the application  had
    to be allowed on the basis that there was no  public  interest  in  her
    removal.  In my judgment, there was no error of law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error of law and the determination  of
the appellant's appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
