
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05714/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th January 2019                           |On 15th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     VSP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer (instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer}


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, in relation to a Decision and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Davey) promulgated on 23rd July 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a national of India born on 8th July 2010 and  thus  a
    minor. She had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision
    by the Secretary of State, taken on 22nd February 2018, to  refuse  her
    leave to remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds.

 3. The Appellant was born in the UK to Indian parents. She has  a  younger
    sibling. The Appellant could not  succeed  under  Appendix  FM  because
    neither of her parents had leave in the UK. Her parents had come to the
    United Kingdom in 2009 as a working holidaymaker and his dependant  and
    overstayed when their leave expired.

 4. The Secretary of State also considered the application under  paragraph
    276 ADE. The relevant part is paragraph 276 ADE (iv). The Secretary  of
    State accepted that the child had been  in  the  UK  for  a  continuous
    period of seven years but, given that her parents had no leave to be in
    the UK, did not find it unreasonable to expect the Appellant  to  leave
    the UK with them.

 5. The Judge dismissed the appeal finding it proportionate for  the  child
    to return to India in the company of her parents and  not  unreasonable
    to expect her to do so.

 6. The grounds giving rise to the grant of permission to appeal argue that
    the Judge's assessment of "reasonableness"  was  flawed  and  that  the
    decision did not make clear the  powerful  reasons  for  requiring  the
    child, a qualifying child, to  leave  the  UK  as  referred  to  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

 7. In a skeleton argument provided on the day of the hearing before me  Mr
    Singer acknowledged that the Supreme Court had,  since  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision, given judgment in the case of KO (Nigeria)  [2018]
    UKSC 53. However, he argued that, notwithstanding  that  judgment,  the
    Judge's reasoning was still flawed. He argued that the Judge had looked
    at whether the Appellant could live in India rather than whether it was
    in her best interests to do so. He did not assess the reasonableness of
    the child being removed to India with her parents  but  rather  whether
    she could be so removed. He argued that nothing  in  KO  overturns  the
    findings contained in paragraphs 46 and 49 of MA and argued  that,  had
    the Judge properly considered the best interests of the child  in  this
    case he would have found it unreasonable for  her  to  be  expected  to
    leave the UK. He also  argued  that  the  immigration  history  of  the
    parents in this case was nowhere near as bad as that of the parents  in
    KO and that there were no powerful reasons as stipulated by  the  Court
    of Appeal in MA to remove a qualifying child.  Whilst he did  not  seek
    to argue that the immigration history of the parents was immaterial, he
    did argue that the Judge had not properly considered reasonableness and
    had he done so the outcome would have been different.

 8. Mr Bramble argued that the Judge's decision was not flawed as suggested
    and that the Judge had carried out a holistic assessment and considered
    reasonableness as he was required to, giving appropriate weight to  the
    best interests of the child which he took as  his  starting  point.  He
    argued that the way the Judge approached this case was in fact  on  all
    fours with the reasoning in KO.

 9. Paragraphs 46 to 49 of MA read as follows:-

         "46. Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact that
         a child has been herefor seven years must be given significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed, the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10  Year Routes"  in which it
         is expressly stated that once the seven years' residence
         requirement is satisfied, there need to be "strong reasons" for
         refusing leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force
         when the cases now subject to appeal were determined, but in my
         view they merely confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of
         this nature. After such a period of time the child will have put
         down roots and developed social, cultural and educational links in
         the UK such that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child
         is required to leave the UK. That may be less so when the children
         are very young because the focus of their lives will be on their
         families, but the disruption becomes more serious as they get
         older.  Moreover, in these cases there must be a very strong
         expectation that the child's best interests will be to remain in
         the UK with his parents as part of a family unit, and that must
         rank as a primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.


     47. Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test where the
         focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view follow that
         leave must be granted whenever the child's best interests are in
         favour of remaining. I reject Mr Gill's submission that the best
         interests assessment automatically resolves the reasonableness
         question. If Parliament had wanted the child's best interests to
         dictate the outcome of the leave application, it would have said
         so. The concept of "best interests" is after all a well established
         one. Even where the child's best interests are to stay, it may
         still be not unreasonable to require the child to leave. That will
         depend upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the
         links in the UK and in the country where it is proposed he should
         return. What could not be considered, however, would be the conduct
         and immigration history of the parents.


     48. In EV (Phillipines) Lord Justice Christopher Clarke explained how a
         tribunal should apply the proportionality test where wider public
         interest considerations are in play, in circumstances where the
         best interests of the child dictate that he should remain in the UK
         (paras. 34-37):


             "34. In determining whether or not, in  a  case  such  as  the
             present, the need for immigration control outweighs  the  best
             interests of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the
             relative strength of the factors which make it in  their  best
             interests to remain here; and also  to  take  account  of  any
             factors that point the other way.


             35.  A decision as  to  what  is  in  the  best  interests  of
             children will depend on a number of factors such as (a)  their
             age; (b) the length of time that they have been here; (c)  how
             long they  have  been  in  education;  (c)  what  stage  their
             education has reached; (d) to what  extent  they  have  become
             distanced from the country to which it is proposed  that  they
             return; (e) how renewable their connection with it may be; (f)
             to what extent they will have  linguistic,  medical  or  other
             difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g)  the
             extent to which the course proposed will interfere with  their
             family life or their rights (if  they  have  any)  as  British
             citizens.


             36.  In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain? The  longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.


             37.  In the balance on the other side there falls to be  taken
             into account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to
             maintain immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-
             being of the country and the  fact  that,  ex  hypothesi,  the
             applicants have no  entitlement  to  remain.  The  immigration
             history of the parents may also be relevant e.g. if  they  are
             overstayers, or have acted deceitfully."


         49.  Although this was not in fact a seven year case, on the wider
         construction of section 117B(6), the same principles would apply in
         such a case. However, the fact that the child has been in the UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant weight in the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes as a starting
         point that leave should be granted unless there are powerful
         reasons to the contrary."


10. At paragraph 40 of MA Lord Justice Elias said:-

         "It may be said that the wider approach can be justified along the
         following lines. It will generally be in the child's best interests
         to live with his or her parents and siblings as part of a family.
         That is usually a given especially for younger children, absent
         domestic abuse or some other reasons for believing the parents to
         be unsuitable. The approach of the Secretary of State means that
         the stronger the public interest in removing the parents, the more
         reasonable it will be to expect the child to leave. But it seems to
         me that this involves focusing on the position of the family as a
         whole. In cases where the seven year rule has not been satisfied,
         that is plainly what has to be done. As McCloskey J observed in PD
         and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKUT
         108 (IAC) it would be absurd to consider the child's position
         entirely independently of, and in isolation from, the position of
         the parents given that the child's best interests will usually
         require that he or she lives as part of the family unit. But the
         focus on the family does not sit happily with the language of
         section 117B(6). Had Parliament intended to require considerations
         bearing upon the conduct and immigration history of the applicant
         parent to be taken into consideration, I would have expected it to
         say so expressly, not for the matter to have to be inferred from a
         test which in terms focuses on an assessment of what is reasonable
         for the child.  This does not in my view mean that the wider public
         interests have been ignored; it is simply that Parliament has
         determined that where the seven year rule is satisfied and the
         other conditions in the section have been met, those potentially
         conflicting public interests will not suffice to justify refusal of
         leave if, focusing on the position of the child, it is not
         reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. When section
         117A(2)(a) refers to the need for courts and tribunals to take into
         account the considerations identified in section 117B in all cases,
         that would not in my view have been intended to include specific
         circumstances where Parliament must be taken to have had regard to
         those matters."


11. In KO the Supreme  Court  agreed  with  the  views  of  Lewison  LJ  as
    expressed in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at paragraph 58 where
    he said: -

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world. If one parent has no right  to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right remain  to  the
         country of origin?"


12. The Supreme Court went on to say that to the extent that Elias  LJ  may
    have suggested otherwise in MA at paragraph 40  it  would  respectfully
    disagree. It said there is nothing  in  the  section  to  suggest  that
    "reasonableness" is to be considered otherwise than in the  real  world
    in which the children find themselves

13. Mr Singer also referred me to  the  relevant  section  of  the  current
    IDI's, dated 19 December 2018 which follows the  rationale  of  KO  and
    states: -

         "the determination sets  out  that  if  child's  parents  are  both
         expected to leave the UK, the child is normally expected  to  leave
         with  them,  unless  there  is  evidence  that  it  would  not   be
         reasonable. The guidance then goes on to describe situations  where
         it may be reasonable for a qualifying child to leave  the  UK  with
         the parent or primary carer where for example:


          i) the parent or parents, or child, are a citizen of the  country
             and so able to enjoy the full rights of  being  a  citizen  in
             that country


         ii)  there  is  nothing  in  any  country  specific   information,
             including as contained  in  relevant  country  information  to
             suggest that relocation would be unreasonable


        iii) the parent or parents or child have existing  family,  social,
             or cultural ties with the  country  and  if  there  are  wider
             family relationships with friends and community overseas  that
             can provide support:


         iv) removal would not give rise to significant risk to the child's
             health


          v) there are no other specific factors raised by or on behalf  of
             the child."


14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge stated at paragraph 5 that the  facts  in
    this case where that the Appellant was born in the  UK;  had  grown  up
    entirely in the UK, albeit in the midst of a community which  is  based
    around Gujurati and India and that the Appellant had been in  schooling
    and grown up and made friends, bearing in mind her age at  the  present
    time. He said that plainly to uproot her from what she has  grown  used
    to enjoying, including an English education  system,  is  a  matter  of
    concern and certainly will be disturbing and to a degree  one  supposes
    likely to be in measure distressing. The fact was  that  she  would  be
    leaving with her family and there was no suggestion she would  be  left
    behind.

15. The Judge went on to indicate  that  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    family would find itself in India were presented as akin to poverty and
    very diminished from that which she currently enjoyed in the UK but  he
    also bore in mind the fact that the life she enjoys in the UK is  to  a
    degree at public expense, in particular her education.

16. The Judge then concluded that the best interests of the  Appellant  lay
    in her relocating with her family back to  India  and  that  while  the
    quality of life may not be the same that must be  the  case  in  nearly
    every case where someone is in the UK here as  opposed  to  the  Indian
    subcontinent.

17. The Judge went on to say that there was nothing to indicate  that  this
    child, who could speak some Gujarati, would be unable to integrate into
    the schooling system in India. He said  that  while  it  might  take  a
    little time to settle  he  could  see  nothing  about  her  educational
    background or abilities that would suggest she could not  get  used  to
    and benefit from the Indian educational system. He  saw  no  reason  to
    infer that education in India is inferior to that which can be provided
    in the United Kingdom.

18.  It is clear therefore that the first matter that the Judge  considered
    was the best interests of the child and he concluded  that  those  best
    interests lay in going to India with her family.

19. In so doing he assessed her best interests "in the  real  world".   The
    facts in this case were that none of her family had any right to be  in
    the UK and should be expected to leave.

20. Her parents' immigration history was  directly  relevant  to  the  real
    circumstances in which the Appellant found herself  -  a  family  which
    should return to India.

21. The Judge having found under the Immigration  Rules  that  it  was  not
    unreasonable for  the  Appellant  to  go  to  India  with  her  family,
    nevertheless considered Article 8 outwith the Rules.  In  that  context
    and in accordance with  MA  he  did  take  into  account  the  parents'
    immigration history which he found to be poor. He found that they chose
    to remain in the  UK  for  obvious  reasons,  namely  they  prefer  the
    benefits they can achieve of life in the UK to that which they may find
    in their home  country.  Secondly,  the  family  prefer  the  education
    advantages, as they perceive it, to bring their children up in  the  UK
    and thirdly, he found that for understandable reasons  they  sought  to
    play down the extent  of  family  support  and  assistance  they  might
    receive on a return to India.

22. The Judge found the immigration history to be  significantly  poor.  He
    noted that in overstaying the parents had chosen to  remain  when  they
    had no basis to do so and decided deliberately to bring up a family  in
    the UK and to relinquish some ties that they had with Gujarat in India.
    They did not see any  incentive  in  maintaining  those  ties  because,
    plainly, it would prejudice their claim of the difficulties  of  return
    to India.

23. Mr Singer's submission that the immigration history was not  very  poor
    was unattractive.  It is a very serious matter to flout the immigration
    laws of this country; it is an offence.

24. The Judge did not find the father a credible witness as to  the  extent
    to which he had disconnected himself and his wife from India.  He  felt
    that this was  part  of  a  deliberate  presentation  of  the  case  to
    emphasise the adverse effects of removal on the children. He  found  no
    reason why the Appellant's father, who had been able  to  work  in  UK,
    could not work in India as it was plain that he could do a  variety  of
    jobs and was a fit and healthy person. He took into account the factors
    he was required to do under section  117B(6)  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and again found  it  not  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant to leave the UK.

25. I find myself in full agreement with Mr Bramble's submission  that  the
    Judge's assessment of the best interests of the child  is  unassailable
    and indeed his reasoning overall prescient as it  was  wholly  in  line
    with the wisdom of the Supreme Court as subsequently set out in KO.

Decision

26. The Decision and Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  contain
    any material errors of law and the appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

27. The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction  because  of  the
    Appellant's minority status and I agree that it is appropriate to  make
    one also.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]                            Date 4th January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
