

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: hu/05945/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard At                               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 02.10.2018                          |On 09.10.2018                       |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                  Emad [A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Patricia Glass  (counsel instructed by M-R)
For the respondent: Ms A Fijiwala

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Meryll Dean), sitting at Taylor House on 11  April,  to
    an article 8  appeal  by  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  born  1987.  The
    appellant arrived in 2010 on a student visa, valid till 2012,  when  it
    was  renewed  till  2015.  However  on  24  July  2014  his  leave  was
    'curtailed', as he had used a proxy to take his  English-language  test
    when renewing it. The judge found this allegation proved, and there has
    been no appeal against that finding.

 2. At the same time as the appellant's leave was curtailed, he was  served
    with removal directions, which he challenged on judicial review; but on
    21 August 2014 he withdrew that application,  on  which  fresh  removal
    directions were served. On 16  December  he  married  [HB],  a  British
    citizen and, as his  cousin,  also  of  Bangladeshi  origin.  A  second
    application for judicial review was  refused  permission  on  13  April
    2015, and finally on 29  April  he  made  a  private  and  family  life
    application.

 3. On 13 January 2017 the Home Office eventually refused that application,
    both on suitability grounds (the proxy fraud), and on  the  basis  that
    there were no 'insurmountable obstacles' to him and his wife continuing
    their family life in Bangladesh, or 'very significant obstacles' to his
    integrating there himself. Nor were the facts relied on  considered  to
    amount to exceptional circumstances justifying the grant of leave under
    article 8. That decision could not of course take account of the  birth
    of the appellant and his wife's daughter on 2 November 2017.

 4. The judge considered the proportionality of the decision  under  appeal
    at paragraphs 21 - 25. At paragraph 20 she had referred to s.  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  but  she  made  her
    decision on proportionality without explicitly considering any  of  the
    relevant sub-sections. The judge did refer to  the  provisions  of  (2)
    (the appellant's English-language skills) and (3) (his  ability  to  be
    financially independent); but she did  not  take  account  of  Rhuppiah
    [2016] EWCA Civ  803,  which  makes  it  clear  that  satisfying  these
    requirements can be no more than a  neutral  factor  in  the  balancing
    exercise.

 5. The relevant provisions of s. 117B in this case (apart from the general
    statement of the public interest in effective  immigration  control  at
    (1)) are these:

       (4)  Little weight should be given to-
          (a) ....
          (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
          that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
          the United Kingdom unlawfully.)
          ...
       (6) In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -
         a) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
            with a qualifying child; and
         b) it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
            United                                                  Kingdom.




 6. There is no dispute that the appellant's wife is a qualifying  partner,
    and their daughter is a qualifying child, as both are British citizens;
    or that he has a 'genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship'  with
    his daughter. Nor could there be any dispute  that  the  appellant  had
    formed a marital relationship with his wife (though no doubt they  knew
    each other as cousins) at a time when he was here unlawfully, which  he
    had been, as both of them must have known, ever  since  his  leave  was
    curtailed and he was given removal directions on 24 August  2017.  Even
    their unrecognized religious ceremony of marriage  took place  only  in
    October 2014.

 7. What the judge said about the appellant's marriage was  this  (see  her
    paragraph 21):

       Although he was married at a time when he was awaiting the outcome of
       permission to bring a JR, I find that this does not detract from  the
       considerable weight to  be  given  to  the  Appellant's  family  life
       because it is clear from his immigration history that he has not just
       sat back and waited  for  matters  to  take  their  course,  but  has
       actively engaged in seeking legal outcomes to regularise  his  status
       ... The passage of years was not  the  fault  of  the  Appellant  and
       during that time he met and married his wife.

 8. The real position was this: the appellant had, as the  judge  accepted,
    brought about the curtailment of his leave in 2014 by his  proxy  fraud
    in 2012. He had not responded to the removal directions which came with
    it by applying to regularize his position, which he did not do till  he
    made his private and family life application on  29  April  2015,  only
    after he had withdrawn one application for  judicial  review,  and  had
    permission for another refused.

 9. There may  have  been  some  culpable  delay  by  the  Home  Office  in
    considering the private and family life application when they  got  it;
    but the time till then was spent by the appellant in trying  to  resist
    his removal, without having done anything to regularize his  situation.
    It follows that little weight  was  to  be  given  to  the  appellant's
    relationship with his wife, and the judge would not have been justified
    in allowing the appeal on the  basis  of  her  findings  on  the  point
    covered by s. 117B (4).

10. There was of course also the appellant's daughter, and s. 117B (6),  to
    be considered. What the judge said on this subject was at 24:

       I accept that the Appellant did not meet the suitability  requirement
       and as a result a question mark remains. Nevertheless, this has to be
       seen in the context of the best interests of his daughter, which  ...
       I find are clearly in this country. I find that the strength  of  the
       family life which has been created while the  Appellant  awaited  the
       resolution of legal proceedings has to be given considerable  weight.
       When taken in the round I find it would be unreasonable to  tear  the
       Appellant's wife away from her country of citizenship, her family and
       employment, while at the same time taking the  child  away  from  her
       country of citizenship and the opportunities that  this  will  afford
       her as she grows up.

11. On the effect of s. 117B (6), Ms Fijiwala referred to MA  (Pakistan)  &
    others [2016] EWCA Civ 705. Clearly the daughter's best  interests  had
    to be a primary consideration,  and  here  (see  paragraph  53  of  the
    judgment, citing EV (Philippines) & others [2014] EWCA  Civ  874)  "the
    best interests of the child are to be determined by  reference  to  the
    child alone without reference to the immigration history or  status  of
    either parent".

12. As to whether it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's daughter
    to leave this country, the position is different. At  paragraph  45  of
    MA, the Court of Appeal, with some reservations followed  the  approach
    taken to s. 117C (5) in MM (Uganda) & another [2016] EWCA Civ  450,  in
    holding that wider public interest considerations must  be  taken  into
    account when applying the reasonableness criterion in s. 117B (6).

13. While Ms Glass pointed to the judge's noting the appellant's failure to
    meet the suitability requirement, it cannot have  been  justifiable  to
    describe it as doing no more than raise a  question-mark.  This  was  a
    serious point against him, and against the public interest in not  only
    enforcing immigration control, but in deterring fraud used to get round
    it. The mistake involved in the  judge's  reference  to  the  appellant
    "awaiting the result of legal proceedings" has already been pointed out
    at 8 - 9.


14. On the last sentence  of  the  judge's  24,  while  she  says  she  has
    considered the position 'in the round', there were two important things
    of which she did not take account. First, the appellant's wife was from
    Bangladesh herself, and did not come to this country till, at  19,  she
    was already grown up; next, their daughter was less than six months old
    at the date  of  the  hearing,  and,  British  citizen  or  not,  might
    reasonably be thought best off staying with her parents, wherever  they
    went.

15. The judge was  of  course  right  in  saying  that  the  reasonableness
    question had to be considered in the round; but she did not do so,  for
    the reasons I have given. That will have to be done properly,  and  the
    full consideration of the facts involved can best take place at a fresh
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. The judge's finding of proxy  fraud
    has not been challenged, and will stand. The only fresh factor referred
    to by Ms Glass is one of which she accepted I could take no account  in
    my error of law decision; but,  depending  on  timing,  it  may  become
    relevant on the fresh hearing, which  should  take  place  as  soon  as
    possible, to avoid any difficulties the appellant's wife might have  in
    attending. This is the birth of another child,  expected  on  25  March
    2019, according to a copy of an antenatal booking summary produced.

Home Office appeal : first-tier decision set aside, apart  from  suitability
    finding
Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House, not before Judge Dean
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                               Dated 03 October 2018
