
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05863/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 April 2019                              |On 14 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                             miss Bhu Kumari Pun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Arkas
Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge of
      the First-tier Tribunal K R Moore who in a  determination  promulgated
      on 11 January 2019 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision
      of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse to grant her leave  to  enter
      on human rights grounds.

   2.  The appellant, a citizen of Nepal, was born on 4 September 1984.  Her
      father retired from the  Gurkhas  in  1987.   In  September  2009  her
      parents entered Britain with  indefinite  leave  to  enter,  with  her
      brother who was aged under 18.  She has a  second  brother  who  is  a
      British citizen who lives in Germany and her  younger  brother  and  a
      sister are both British living in Britain.    The  appellant  has  two
      sisters who are married and live in Nepal.

   3.  It is of note that the issue  of  "historical  injustice"  was  first
      formulated by the Court of Appeal in the case of Gurung and  Others  v
      SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 18.  That case was followed by the IDI,  Annex  K
      (adult dependent children of former Ghurkhas) of 22 January 2015 which
      dealt with the issue of the human rights of the dependents  of  former
      Gurkhas who were aged over the age of 18.  In effect the provisions of
      Annex K paragraph 9(8) and of IDI Chapter 15 Section 2A 13.2 leads  to
      the presumption that the children of Gurkhas aged between the ages  of
      18 and 30 should be granted entry to Britain on human  rights  grounds
      unless there are strong reasons to the contrary.

4.   The appellant made the application in November 2017.  At that  age  she
    was aged 33.  In refusing the application the  respondent  referred  to
    paragraph 9(4) of Annex K and, although accepting  that  the  appellant
    had  provided  evidence  that  her  sponsor  -her  father  -  had  been
    financially supporting her in Nepal.  The letter of refusal stated:- "I
    am not satisfied that you are wholly financial or emotionally dependent
    on your sponsor; as required under  Annex  K,  paragraph  9(5)  of  IDI
    Chapter 15, Section 2A, 13.2".  In amplification  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer commented that to qualify the appellant  should  normally  have
    lived apart from the sponsor for not more than two years on the date of
    application unless the family unit had been maintained if the appellant
    had been at boarding school, college or university  as  part  of  their
    full-time education but had lived in the family home during holidays.

5.   The letter of refusal stated that the appellant had been  living  apart
    as a direct result of the sponsor migrating to Britain rather than as a
    result of her being away from the  family  unit  as  a  consequence  of
    education or other requirements.  It was considered that there were  no
    exceptional compassionate circumstances  relating  to  the  appellant's
    case and the writer of the letter of refusal referred to  the  judgment
    in Gurung stating that that case indicated that if a Gurkha could  show
    that but for the historic injustice he would have settled in the UK  at
    a time when his dependant and now adult child would have been  able  to
    accompany him as a dependant under the age of 18 there would be  strong
    reasons for holding that it would be proportionate to  admit  an  adult
    child to join his family now.

6.   It was noted that when considering the issue of the public interest  in
    maintaining firm immigration control if it were the case that  but  for
    the historic wrong the appellant would have been settled in the UK long
    that  would  ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the   Article   8
    proportionality assessment in the appellant's favour if  the  Secretary
    of State relied solely on  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  firm
    immigration policy.  However in the refusal the respondent stated that:-
      "I  am  satisfied  the  reasons  for  your   refusal   outweigh   the
    consideration of historical injustice."

7.   The letter of refusal noted that the appellant had grown up  in  Nepal.
    Her parents had chosen to apply for  settlement  visas  while  she  was
    already an adult and did so in the  full  knowledge  that  their  adult
    children did not automatically qualify for settlement.   There  was  no
    bar to the sponsor returning to Nepal either permanently or temporarily
    to be with the appellant and therefore family life could continue as it
    had done in the past without interference.  Even  if  it  was  accepted
    that the refusal might be an interference with the appellant's  private
    life the respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  family  life  had  been
    established with the parents over and above that between an adult child
    and parents stating that it was the  respondent's  obligation  to  take
    into  consideration  how  the  historic  injustice  had  affected   the
    appellant individually.   It  was  not  considered  that  the  historic
    injustice had prevented the appellant from leading a  normal  life  and
    therefore the decision was not disproportionate.

8.   The judge noted that the Presenting Officer stated  that  Article  8(1)
    had  not  been  engaged  referring  to  the  decision  in  Rai  v   ECO
    HU/08538/2015 has no adequate dependence had been demonstrated so as to
    engage Article 8 (1).  He noted the evidence of the appellant's  father
    that although he had not returned to Nepal his  wife  had  visited  the
    appellant on three occasions and that he had always intended to make an
    application for the appellant to join  him  so  that  they  could  live
    together as a family unit.  The sponsor had stated that  the  appellant
    was unemployed and not highly educated having given  up  studies  after
    she failed the tenth grade and  that  she  had  always  been  dependent
    emotionally on him.  It was the appellant's father's evidence that  the
    family separation had caused much stress to both her parents.  They had
    made every attempt to continue to maintain regular  communication.   It
    was emphasised that the first policy for Gurkha veterans had been  made
    in 2004 after the sponsor had retired.  The judge noted  the  reference
    to the decision in Rai made by the appellant's representative and noted
    the terms of the judgment in Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  and
    also noted that family life with the parents did not suddenly cease  to
    have a family life when the child turned 18 years of age.

9.   In paragraphs 18 onwards the judge set out his  findings  of  fact  and
    conclusions. Having first stated that the issue of historical injustice
    was a key issue the judge referred to the judgment in Gurung  where  it
    had been observed that:

         "The historic injustice is only one of the factors  to  be  weighed
         against the need to maintain a fair and  firm  immigration  policy.
         It is not necessarily determinative. If it were, the application of
         every adult child of a UK settled Gurkha who  establishes  that  he
         has a family life with his parent would be bound to succeed."

     The judge noted that if a Gurkha could show that but for  the  historic
    justice he would have settled in Britain at a time when  his  dependant
    would have been able to accompany him as a dependent  child  under  the
    age of 18 that was a strong reason  for  holding  it  proportionate  to
    permit the adult child to join his family now.  He noted  the  guidance
    given in the case of Ghising and Others [2013]  UKUT  00567  (IAC)  and
    that the historic injustice  would  carry  significant  weight  on  the
    appellant's side of the balance but he also referred to the case of Rai
    where it was noted that it could immediately be appreciated  there  had
    been many cases where the appellant in Gurkha cases would  not  succeed
    even if the right to  family life engages Article 1  and  the  evidence
    shows that the child  would have come to the United Kingdom with his or
    her father but  for  the  injustice  that  prevented  the  latter  from
    settling here on  completion  of  his  military  service.   The  judge,
    however, placed weight on the fact that the appellant did not  make  an
    application until November 2017 despite the fact that her  parents  had
    come to Britain in 2010. Moreover, the appellant had two other  sisters
    who lived  in  Nepal  and  were  both  married  and  lived  with  their
    respective  fathers.   The  appellant's  father  had  stated  that  the
    appellant was over 18 when he had come  to  Britain  and  he  had  been
    advised that she would not get a visa and  that  an  application  would
    have to be made after arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the
    sponsor had stated that  he had always intended to make an  application
    in respect of the appellant to join her parents in the  United  Kingdom
    but this had not happened until 2017.  The judge accepted that although
    the appellant's father had not returned  to  Nepal  since  arriving  in
    Britain her mother had done so on three  separate  occasions  over  the
    past eight years.  He took into account that the appellant had grown up
    in Nepal, had attended school there and her two  sisters  continued  to
    live in Nepal albeit with their own families.  He stated  that  it  was
    the parents of the appellant who chose to apply  for  settlement  visas
    when the appellant was already at that time an adult and had presumably
    they had been aware or at  least  should  have  been  aware,  that  the
    appellant would not automatically qualify for settlement.   The  judge,
    having referred to the decision in  Gurung,  stated  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that there was a strong reason for finding that it  would  be
    proportionate to allow the appellant to be  granted  a  visa  to  enter
    Britain.

10.  Referring to the issue  of  family  life  the  judge  stated  that  the
    appellant was  living  independently  from  her  parents  and  had  not
    established a family life for the purposes of Article 8.  He made  that
    finding notwithstanding the fact that he accepted  that  the  appellant
    was reliant on the sponsor for financial assistance and having accepted
    that the sponsor transferred his pension payments to the  appellant  in
    Nepal and that further sums were also sent to the appellant.  The judge
    also accepted that there was  regular  telephone  contact  between  the
    appellant and her parents but said there were no health issues and that
    the appellant was a fit and healthy young  woman  who  was  leading  an
    independent life  of  her  own.  The  dependency  was,  he  considered,
    primarily a financial one.  He considered that even taking into account
    the issue of historic injustice it was not such that the appellant  had
    been prevented in leading a normal and  dependant  life  in  Nepal  and
    therefore  having  undertaken  the  proportionality  assessment   under
    Article 8 he concluded that the decision was proportionate  and  having
    confirmed that he was not satisfied the appellant met the  requirements
    outlined in Annex K of the  IDIs, Chapter 15, Section 2A,  he dismissed
    the appeal.

11.   The grounds of appeal on which  Mr  Balroop  relied  argued  that  the
    judge had erred by only taking into account the factors that  arose  at
    the date of decision - a ground which really has no force as there  has
    been no change in the circumstances in any event. They went on to state
    that the  judge,  having  found  that  the  appellant  was  financially
    dependent, had erred when stating that it was relevant that the parents
    of the appellant had chosen to apply  for  settlement  visas  when  the
    appellant was an adult and that he was not satisfied there was a strong
    reason to find  that  it  would  now  be  proportionate  to  allow  the
    appellant to enter Britain. It was argued that the  fact  that  he  had
    found that the appellant was living independently from her parents  and
    had  not  established  family  life  and  that  he  was  satisfied  any
    dependency was primarily a financial one were not findings on which  he
    should  have  placed  weight   when  concluding   that  the  historical
    injustice had not be such that the  appellant  had  been  prevented  in
    leading a normal life.  The argument put forward was that in  the  case
    of Rai v ECO New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320 the court had addressed  the
    issue of dependency and stated that the factors such as those on  which
    the judge relied such as the willingness of the parents  to  leave  the
    appellant in Nepal and coming to Britain  did  not  confront  the  real
    issue which was whether as a matter of fact the appellant  demonstrated
    that she had a family life with her parents that existed at the time of
    their departure to settle in Britain and  beyond.

12.   The grounds therefore stated that the decision in Rai meant  that  the
    judge had erred in law.  Turning to  the  judgment  in  Gurung  it  was
    stated that the  judge  had  misconstrued  the  dicta  therein  as  the
    appellant's father  had  been  denied  the  opportunity  to  apply  for
    indefinite leave to remain when he first retired and had he  been  able
    to come to Britain then the appellant could have come with him and that
    there was a strong reason to hold it proportionate now that she be able
    to join her family.  The grounds  also  referred  to  the  decision  in
    Ghising [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC) which states that if the respondent could
    point to matters over and above the public interest in maintaining firm
    immigration policy those factors should be factors such as  whether  or
    not family life was engaged should be given appropriate weight: factors
    such as a bad immigration history or criminal behaviour might still  be
    sufficient to outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the  appellant's
    side of the balance.  Mr Balroop took me to the  relevant  passages  of
    the determination which he argued the judge had erred  in  law  by  not
    following the cases of Rai and Gurung. He  asserted  that  the  sponsor
    would have come to Britain in 1987 when  he  retired.   The  judge  had
    found that the appellant was financially dependent and he  argued  that
    the judge should have found that family life was engaged.

13.   In reply, Mrs Kenny argued that the judge  had  found  that  financial
    dependency on the sponsor was not enough and that it was relevant  that
    the appellant had not applied until 2017.  She referred to paragraph 42
    of the judgment in Rai which set out factors to  show  whether  or  not
    family life still existed.  The  judge,  she  said,  had  accepted  the
    reasons why the respondent had considered that that was not  the  case.
    She then referred to the provisions of  Annex  K  and  stated  that  in
    effect the appellant would have failed on three points raised  in  that
    annex which analysed  the  requirements  of  for  entry:  firstly,  the
    appellant was over  30,  secondly,  she  did  not  meet  the  financial
    requirements and, thirdly the family had not been living apart for less
    than two years.  She stated the issue was  a  proportionality  exercise
    and that the factors set out paragraphs  59  and  60  of  Ghising  were
    relevant: these emphasised that  the  weight  to  be  afforded  to  the
    historic wrong in the proportionality balancing exercise did  not  mean
    that being an adult child of a UK settled Gurkha  ex-servicemen  was  a
    trump card because of all  the  factors  which  should  be  taken  into
    account.

14.  In reply, Mr Balroop referred to the headnote in Ghising  which  stated
    that where it is found that Article 8  was  engaged  and  but  for  the
    historic wrong the appellant would have  been  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom that would ordinarily determine the outcome of  the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment where the matters relied on by the Secretary
    of State or Entry Clearance Officer consisted  solely  for  the  public
    interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.   Moreover  of  note
    was the headnote in that case at 5 which stated:-

         "It can therefore be seen that the appellant in  Gurkha  ...  cases
         will not necessarily succeed, even though  (i)  their  family  life
         engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence shows they  would  have
         come to the United Kingdom with their father, but for the injustice
         that prevented the latter  from  settling  here  earlier.   If  the
         respondent can point to matters over and above the public  interest
         in maintaining a firm immigration policy, which argue in favour  of
         removal of the refusal of leave to enter,  these  matters  must  be
         given appropriate weight in the balance in the respondent's favour.
          Thus, a bad immigration  history  and/or  criminal  behaviour  may
         still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the
         appellant's side of the balance."

    Mr Balroop again stated that there  was  no  "bad  immigration  history
    and/or criminal behaviour in this case and therefore the balance should
    lie in favour of the appellant.  He argued  that  the  appellant  never
    worked and relied on her father for financial support.

Discussion

15.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the  determination
    of the judge.  He clearly had in mind relevant case law.   He  properly
    assessed the facts.  He did find that  the  appellant  was  financially
    dependent at the present time on the sponsor.  He  properly  considered
    the issue of the appellant's family life noting  that  an  adult  child
    could still have family life with a parent despite being over  the  age
    of 21. He gave reasons for finding, however, that the mere transfer  of
    funds did not engage family life in this case.  I consider that he made
    no error in doing so notwithstanding the indication  in  Rai  that  the
    transfer of funds was sufficient to show that family life was  engaged.
    But in any event I do not consider that is a material point because the
    judge quite properly went on to consider  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision.  In that regard I consider he was entitled to place weight on
    the fact that the appellant's parents came to Britain in 2009 and eight
    years passed before the appellant made the application to enter.  There
    appears to have been no clear reason given why that was the case.   The
    reality is that the decision to apply was not  made  until  four  years
    after the judgment in Ghising when the issue  of  historical  injustice
    was highlighted.  At that stage the appellant might well have  met  the
    requirements in Annex K which were to come into force two years  later.



16.  The judge did properly consider  all  relevant  factors  including  the
    fact that the appellant is a healthy young woman who  has  siblings  in
    Nepal.  There does not appear to have been any evidence given as to why
    she is not able to form her own household or work in Nepal.  I consider
    that, as  was  stated  in  the  determination  in  Rai,  the  issue  of
    historical injustice is not a trump card.  I consider  that  there  has
    been no unfairness in the way this  appellant  has  been  treated.   No
    decision was made that she should apply for leave to enter until  eight
    years after her parents had come to Britain.  Moreover,  the  appellant
    was aged 33 when the application   was made. I consider that Annex K of
    the IDIs is compliant with the provisions of  the  ECHR  and  that  the
    policy therein follows relevant case law. The cut-off point of  age  30
    is not unreasonable, but accepting that that is not  a  hard  and  fast
    rule  the  reality  is  that  a  further  3  years  passed  before  the
    application as made.

17.    I  consider  therefore  that   the   decision   on   the   issue   of
    proportionality made by the judge was one which was  entirely  open  to
    him and for that reason I find there is no material  error  of  law  in
    this determination and the decision of the judge shall stand.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.
No anonymity direction is made.
Signed: [pic]                       Date: 5 May 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy





