
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/05718/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4th April 2018                          |On 18th April 2018               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                  Mr H.G.G.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmad, Counsel

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made because much of the evidence refers to the
Appellant's partner's minor child.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Jamaica (born 3rd  February  1966)  appeals
    with permission against a decision of a First-tier Tribunal (Judge M  R
    Oliver) in which  it  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal of an application to  remain  on  account  of  his
    family life with his partner (Ms R.S.) and her two-year-old son J. J is
    referred to as the Appellant's stepson.

Background

 2.  The  judge  assessed  the  application  firstly  by  setting  out  the
    Appellant's immigration history.   He  noted  that  the  Appellant  had
    entered the UK in May 2001 and  thereafter  had  overstayed.   In  2005
    following his marriage with  a  person  present  in  the  UK,  he  made
    application for leave to remain  as  a  spouse.  This  application  was
    refused by Notice of Decision dated May 2009.

 3. Following the breakdown of his marriage,  the  Appellant  then  entered
    into a relationship with Ms R.S., a British national.  She records that
    the relationship did not start until 2009.

 4. Further  according  to  Ms  R.S.'s  statutory  declaration  dated  28th
    September 2015, the relationship between her and  the  Appellant  broke
    down in 2012. She began a relationship elsewhere.  This  was  of  short
    duration but as a result of it, her son J  was  born  on  5th  February
    2013. J's father left Ms R.S. before J's birth.

 5. Towards the end of her pregnancy Ms R.S. and  the  Appellant  rekindled
    their relationship and  began  dating  again.   Ms  R.S.  suffers  from
    anxiety and  depression.   She  and  the  Appellant  do  not  presently
    cohabit, but he helps with looking after J and lending some support  to
    her in caring for him.  It is recorded that she finds caring  for  J  a
    challenge.

 6. Suffice to say for the purposes of this decision, the judge gave weight
    to those factors, but  nevertheless  when  weighing  them  against  the
    Appellant's immigration history, he concluded that any interference  by
    the Respondent with the Appellant's Article 8 rights, and those  of  Ms
    R.S. and J, was proportionate. He dismissed the appeal.

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal the FtTJ's decision on  three
    grounds:

       . The FtTJ misdirected himself on the evidence relating to Ms  R.S.'s
         medical problems in that she  suffers  from  severe  mental  health
         problems and had attempted suicide in the past

       . He misdirected himself  as  to  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
         precariousness of the Appellant's stay in the UK

       . He had applied too high a  standard  of  proof  to  the  Article  8
         proportionality assessment

 8. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response  submitting  that  the  grounds
    amount to no more than a disagreement with the weight  that  the  judge
    had placed on the evidence.  No  submission  had  been  made  that  the
    Appellant could in any way meet the Immigration Rules and,  given  that
    he was not cohabiting with Ms R.S., the grounds had not identified  how
    the Appellant would have been able to access EX.1  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Further there was nothing in the assertion that the  judge  had
    incorrectly applied the relevant standard and burden of proof in  [11].







Error of Law Hearing

 9. I heard submissions from Mr Ume-Ezeoke on behalf of the Appellant.   He
    relied on the grounds seeking permission but sought to  emphasise  that
    the judge had failed to give adequate and proper  consideration  to  Ms
    R.S.'s medical problems. Equally the judge had failed  to  give  proper
    weight to the contribution made by the Appellant and reliance placed on
    him by Ms R.S. in caring for J. So far as J was concerned the Appellant
    was a father to him.

10. He submitted that the FtTJ had placed too much  emphasis  on  the  fact
    that the Appellant was in the UK without leave and was therefore  in  a
    precarious position.  He said that if the factors  set  out  above  had
    been properly weighed in the balance then there was a possibility  that
    the appeal would be allowed.  The decision should be set aside and  the
    matter remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

11. Ms Ahmad on behalf of the Respondent referred firstly to the  criticism
    made of the judge in the grounds, saying that the judge had in some way
    minimised the medical problems suffered by Ms  R.S.   She  pointed  out
    that in the main the medical reports were  dated  2014/2015  and  dealt
    with her ongoing problems of depression. There was nothing of a  recent
    nature.  The reports confirmed that in fact Ms R.S. had been  allocated
    a family support worker from  social  services  and  that  her  GP  was
    monitoring her situation.

12. She said that the documentary evidence showed that the  Appellant  only
    helped out to a limited extent, by taking  J  to  the  childminder  and
    having him stay over to sleep on certain nights at his  sister's  house
    where he is living.  She submitted that the judge was correct therefore
    to weigh against those factors, the fact  that  the  Appellant  had  no
    extant leave in the UK and that he  had  remained  here  without  leave
    since 2001.  Ms R.S. was  well  aware  of  the  precariousness  of  the
    Appellant's position when she entered into  a  relationship  with  him.
    The judge had weighed those matters and found  against  the  Appellant.
    The grounds simply amounted to no more than  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's reasoned findings.

Consideration of Error of Law

13. I find firstly that it cannot be said that the FtTJ has failed to  take
    into account material facts.  This challenge is simply  not  made  out.
    The judge sets  out  the  Appellant's  case  extensively  over  several
    paragraphs [7] to [10] referring to both the Appellant's oral  evidence
    and that of Ms R.S.

14. In coming to his findings the  judge  clearly  refers  to  the  medical
    evidence submitted because he outlines this in [9].  He found that  the
    medical evidence was limited with regard to the claimed challenge  that
    Ms R.S. faces in caring for J.  In any event, as he found, J and indeed
    Ms R.S. herself are both entitled to  help  from  the  NHS  and  social
    services.  They receive that help.  The evidence confirms that there is
    a support worker for the child, the child has a nursery  placement  and
    Ms R.S. has ongoing help from her GP.  The judge took  account  of  all
    this.

15. The judge reminded himself  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules [12].  I find it is clear that he is referring to the
    Immigration Rules when he sets out the standard of proof [11].   Having
    found the Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules he  looked  to
    the wider considerations of Article 8.  In doing  so  he  self-directed
    that Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009
    would come into play.  Having noted that the Appellant  relied  heavily
    on the mental condition of Ms R.S. and her interaction with J, the FtTJ
    nevertheless found that the medical evidence was limited.

16. The judge then weighed  those  matters  and  balanced  the  Appellant's
    immigration history against them. The Appellant has remained in the  UK
    without leave for several years and as such the FtTJ  was  entitled  to
    say that the Appellant's leave was precarious to  say  the  least.  The
    judge  found  when  weighing  all  matters  in  the  balance  that  the
    dependence which it was said Ms R.S.  had  on  the  Appellant  did  not
    outweigh the need for immigration control.

17. Having considered the grounds of challenge, submissions  made  and  the
    evidence concerning the decision as  a  whole,  I  find  merit  in  the
    assertion that the grounds are in reality no more than  a  disagreement
    with the findings of the judge and with the weight he attached  to  the
    evidence.  Weight of evidence is a matter for the judge and it has  not
    been shown that  the  conclusions  reached  are  arguably  perverse  or
    irrational, nor outside the range of findings open to the judge.   This
    is clearly a case in which  it  was  found  that  the  public  interest
    outweighs  the  Appellant's  argument.    The   conclusion   that   the
    Respondent's  decision  is  not  a  proportionate  one   is   therefore
    unsustainable.

18. It follows therefore that  no  arguable  error  of  law  is  made  out,
    sufficient to vitiate the FtTJ's decision.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
decision and the decision therefore stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     14 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
