
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05522/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons promulgated  |
|On 22 January 2019                         |On 04 February 2019             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MONA [F]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Ogunnubi T M Legal Services.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The respondent appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Mensah who in a decision promulgated on  4  July  2018
       allowed Ms [F] appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  an
       application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights
       grounds.



Background


      2. The Judge notes Ms [F] is a citizen of Jamaica born on 21  November
         1973 who entered the UK as a  visitor  on  9  March  2001.  Ms  [F]
         overstayed, was joined  by  her  daughter  on  a  similar  Visa  in
         December 2001, choosing to remain with her  daughter  and  latterly
         with her daughter's British partner since. An application for leave
         on the basis of human rights was granted on 14 October 2010 and  Ms
         [F] and her daughter granted 3 years discretionary  leave.  Ms  [F]
         daughter had lived in the United Kingdom for 9 years at  that  time
         and it was accepted it was unreasonable to expect her to leave  the
         United Kingdom. Since that leave expired Ms [F] has failed to  gain
         any further leave. Ms [F] daughter has been recognised  as  a  LGBT
         person and granted leave in her own right. Ms [F] argued  that  she
         had lived with her daughter for 21  years  without  separation  and
         could not have family life if returned to Jamaica  because  of  the
         stigma/danger for LGBT people and the rejection of her daughter  by
         the rest of the family in Jamaica.  Ms  [F]  claims  to  have  been
         shunned by her own family for supporting her  daughter's  sexuality
         and claims she will have to live in isolation in  Jamaica  with  no
         family support.
      3. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [7] in which it  is  found
         Ms [F] cannot succeed under Appendix FM or 276ADE, relying  instead
         on two matters; being  whether  she  can  integrate  into  life  in
         Jamaica and whether she has family life with her adult daughter  in
         the United Kingdom and whether any interruption with such would  be
         disproportionate.
      4. The Judge notes the factual  matrix  is  not  disputed.  The  Judge
         accepts Ms [F] has lived with her daughter throughout her  time  in
         the United Kingdom and that they have a close bond. The Judge finds
         it would be unreasonable to expect her daughter to live in  Jamaica
         if her mother is returned in a situation where she  was  unable  to
         access support on return as a single woman with no  family  support
         who has been ostracised by  her  own  family  making  reintegration
         difficult. The Judge also notes that Ms [F] is  only  44  years  of
         age, has spent the majority of her life in Jamaica,  and  found  it
         had not been made out that  she  had  shown  she  would  face  very
         significant obstacles to integration if returned to Jamaica.
      5. At [16] the Judge finds that given  her  daughter's  sexuality  and
         rejection by the family both in Jamaica in the UK Ms  [F]  and  her
         daughter would have developed an emotional  dependency  beyond  the
         normal emotional ties of adult child and parent depending very much
         upon each other emotionally and that whilst  the  daughter  is  now
         married the Judge finds it appears Ms [F] emotional dependency upon
         her daughter has not diminished leading to a finding that they have
         family life recognised by article 8.
      6. The Judge's core findings are set out at [21 - 22] in the following
         terms:

             "21.     It would not be reasonable to expect the  appellant's
                  daughter to leave her partner or for them both to relocate
                  to Jamaica in  the  circumstances.  The  appellant  speaks
                  English and there appears to be no reason she cannot  work
                  in the UK or Jamaica, other than her  status  prevents  it
                  currently in the UK.  The  appellant's  private  life  was
                  developed at a time when she had a  precarious  status  in
                  the UK and if this was a private life only  I  would  have
                  dismissed the appeal.


             22.  There is a public interest in removing the appellant  and
                  that is the maintenance of  immigration  control  and  the
                  public  purse  as  set  out  above.  However,  given   the
                  circumstances of this case, I am just willing to accept it
                  would be disproportionate for mother and daughter  to  now
                  be forced to live separately and I accept modern means  of
                  communication cannot replace a family life."

      7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the following
         grounds:

             "1.  The FTT concluded that there  would  not  be  significant
                  obstacles to the  appellants  reintegration  into  Jamaica
                  (Para 11 the determination). The FTT has however concluded
                  that the appellant retains a family life with her daughter
                  and that there is an  emotional  dependence  (Para  16  of
                  determination). The respondent submits that  the  FTT  has
                  not  properly  factored  in  why  the  appellant  and  her
                  daughter retain this dependency given the daughter has now
                  married and clearly has established her own family life.


               2. The FTT notes in Para 21 that if this had been a  case  of
                  private life only the appeal would have been dismissed. It
                  is submitted that the FTT has given no  proper  or  proper
                  reasons for concluding that a family  life  still  exists.
                  The fact the appellant has been financially  dependent  on
                  her daughter is essentially due to her not being permitted
                  to work.


               3. The FTT  makes  a  factual  error  at  Para  12  that  the
                  appellant and her daughter have been  living  together  in
                  the UK for 21 years - given the appellant and her daughter
                  arrived in 2001 this cannot be correct,  and  clearly  the
                  FTT has mistakenly factored this into the assessment about
                  family life and proportionality.


               4. It is not clear how the removal  of  the  appellant  would
                  have unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  individual
                  such that  refusal  would  not  be  proportionate.  It  is
                  submitted that there is nothing  disproportionate  to  the
                  appellant returning to Jamaica and  leaving  her  daughter
                  here with her partner.

      8. Permission to appeal was granted by a Designated Judge of the First-
         Tier Tribunal on the basis that the grounds  are  arguable  as  the
         decision appears to contain misapprehensions of fact as  identified
         in the grounds and also to lack rigour.



Error of law


      9. It is important to remember the purpose of article 8 ECHR. It is  a
         provision which is designed to prevent unwarranted interference  in
         family or private life of an individual within the territory  of  a
         Higher Contracting State. Not all  relationships  fall  within  the
         ambit of article 8 which is clearly  designed  to  recognise  close
         relationships between individuals akin to marriage with a degree of
         permanence (whether heterosexual or  same  sex)  or  the  birth  of
         children within or who subsequently form part of such relationships
         or individuals with a parental relationship even if not in any form
         of partnership/relationship. It is therefore not designed to  cover
         each and every relationship and individuals who may have previously
         fallen within the ambit  of  article  8  will  not  necessarily  be
         entitled to such protection if the nature  of  their  relationships
         change. Whether article 8 is engaged in any particular  case  is  a
         question of fact.
     10. Families and/or others can have de facto family life which  is  not
         sufficient to engage article 8. In S v UK [1984] 40 DR  196  Sedley
         LJ made it clear that "Neither  blood  ties  nor  the  concern  and
         affection  that  ordinarily  go  with  them  are,   by   themselves
         altogether, in my judgment enough to constitute family life.   Most
         of us have close relations of whom we are extremely fond  and  whom
         we visit, or who visit us, from time to time; but none of us  would
         say on those grounds alone that we have a family life with them  in
         any sense capable of coming  within  the  meaning  and  purpose  of
         Article 8".
     11. In Berrehab v The Netherlands 1989 11 EHRR 322 the  European  Court
         said that "the concept of family life embraces, even where there is
         no co-habitation, the tie between a parent and  his  or  her  child
         regardless of whether or not the latter is legitimate".
     12. It is not disputed that family life recognised by article 8 existed
         between Ms [F] and her daughter prior to the  daughter  forming  an
         independent life of her  own.  It  is  not  disputed  that  Ms  [F]
         daughter has formed a new relationship with her partner  with  whom
         she is married and with whom she  has  family  life  recognised  by
         article 8. Mr Ogunnubi was asked when this event occurred which  he
         thought it was approximately 3 years ago when they married.  It  is
         not disputed that Ms [F] lives with her daughter and her daughter's
         partner in the same property. The question is  whether  the  family
         life recognised by article 8 has continued between Ms [F]  and  her
         daughter notwithstanding the fundamental change in  her  daughter's
         status and family unit.
     13. In Kugathas v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2003]
         INLR 170 the Court of Appeal  said  that,  in  order  to  establish
         family life, it is necessary to show that there is a real committed
         or effective support or relationship between the family members and
         the normal emotional ties between a mother and an adult  son  would
         not, without more, be enough. In PT (Sri Lanka) v  Entry  Clearance
         Officer, Chennai  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  612  it  was  held  that  some
         tribunals  appeared  to  have  read  Kugathas  as  establishing   a
         rebuttable presumption against any relationship  between  an  adult
         child and his  parents  or  siblings  being  sufficient  to  engage
         Article 8. That was not correct. Kugathas required a fact-sensitive
         approach and should be understood in the light  of  the  subsequent
         case law summarised in Ghising  (family  life  -  adults  -  Gurkha
         policy) [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC) and Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630.  There
         was no legal or factual presumption as to the existence or  absence
         of family life for the purposes of Article  8  nor  was  there  any
         requirement of exceptionality. It all depended on  the  facts.  The
         love and affection between an adult and  his  parents  or  siblings
         would not of itself justify a finding of a family life.  There  had
         to be something more. A young adult  living  with  his  parents  or
         siblings would normally have a family life to  be  respected  under
         Article 8. A child enjoying a family life with his parents did  not
         suddenly cease to have a family life at midnight as  he  turned  18
         years of age. On the other hand, a young adult living independently
         of his parents might well not have a family life for  the  purposes
         of Article 8 (paras 23 - 26).
     14. It is accepted there is a degree of financial dependency by Ms  [F]
         upon her daughter, but this is a dependency  of  necessity  brought
         about as a result of Ms [F] lack of immigration status and the fact
         she has no right to work in the United Kingdom.  In  JB(India)  and
         Others v ECO [2009] EWCA Civ 234 the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that
         financial  dependence  "to  some  extent"  on  a  parent  did   not
         demonstrate the existence  of  strong  family  ties  between  adult
         children and the parent nor did  weekly  telephone  calls  evidence
         anything more than the normal ties of affection  between  a  parent
         and her adult children.
     15. The Judge finds at [12] that  Ms  [F]  has  been  living  with  her
         daughter in the United Kingdom for 21 years and since at least 2013
         she has been totally  dependent  upon  her  daughter  for  all  her
         financial needs. It is not disputed that the calculation of the 21-
         year period is factually incorrect. As noted  in  the  grounds  the
         appellant and her daughter arrived in 2001. It was submitted by  Mr
         Ogunnubi that any error was not  material  as  the  Judge  had  not
         placed great weight upon this fact,  but  such  submission  has  no
         arguable merit for this element is mentioned at [3], [7]  and  [12]
         of the decision under challenge. The Judge makes  a  factual  error
         which  is   clearly   considered   a   material   aspect   of   the
         proportionality assessment  and  assessment  of  the  existence  of
         family life.
     16. The Judge was required to examine and make specific  findings  upon
         the nature of the relationship. The Judge  finds  Ms  [F]  and  her
         daughter have a close relationship [9] and at [16] that  given  her
         daughters sexuality and rejection by the family both in Jamaica  in
         the UK they have  developed  an  emotional  dependency  beyond  the
         normal emotional ties of adult child  and  parents  and  that  they
         clearly depend upon each other emotionally with  Ms  [F]  emotional
         dependence upon her daughter not having diminished. In a case where
         family life is made out, and article 8 (1) satisfied, the Judge was
         required to consider whether the decision is proportionate pursuant
         to article 8(2).
     17. The Secretary of State's view of how human rights matters are to be
         assessed is that it should be through the lens of  the  Immigration
         Rules, although it is accepted they are not a  complete  code.  The
         Judge the Rules at [8] finding  Ms  [F]  was  unable  to  meet  the
         requirements of Appendix FM and could not meet 276 ADE.  The  Judge
         finds she is able to work in Jamaica and  at  [11]  "I  accept  the
         appellant would be returning in circumstances where  she  would  be
         unable to access family support on return. Therefore, the appellant
         will be returning as a single woman with no family support who  has
         been ostracised by her  own  family.  This  would  make  trying  to
         reintegrate difficult. The appellant is however only  44  years  of
         age and spent the majority of her life in Jamaica. I cannot see how
         on the basis of the evidence before me she has shown she would face
         "very  significant  obstacles"  to  reintegration   despite   those
         difficulties.  The  appellant  has  not   shown   she   meets   the
         requirements of 276 ADE.
     18. The submission by Mr  Ogunnubi  that  Ms  [F]  could  satisfy  this
         requirement of the Rules is not a submission that is open to him to
         make on the basis it amounts to no more than disagreement with  the
         Judge's findings that she could not and because there is no  cross-
         appeal against the Judge's rejection of the  merits  of  the  claim
         under the Immigration Rules. Ms [F] has not been granted permission
         to reopen this matter.
     19. The Judge spends some time focusing upon the situation that Ms  [F]
         daughter may face as a result of her grant of leave  and  the  fact
         she is in a same-sex relationship  with  her  wife  in  the  United
         Kingdom. That is not, however, the issue. There  is  no  protection
         claim raised by Ms [F] based upon family or societal  hostility  to
         her acceptance and support for her daughter and, even  if  she  has
         been shunned by her own family in Jamaica, the finding of a lack of
         very  significant  obstacles   to   reintegration,   despite   such
         difficulties, means this is not a determinative issue.
     20. The  Judge  does  not  adequately  reason  at  [16]  how  emotional
         dependency upon her daughter is not  diminished  in  light  of  the
         daughters own independent lifestyle and family unit but,  if  taken
         at  face  value,  there  is  still  the  proportionality   of   any
         interference in such a right to be considered. At  [21]  the  Judge
         finds it would not be reasonable to expect the Ms [F]  daughter  to
         leave her partner or for them both to relocate to  Jamaica  in  the
         circumstances, which is accepted. The Judge finds any private  life
         element would fail as a result of it being formed during  the  time
         Ms [F] presence in the United Kingdom has been precarious which  is
         sustainable finding. At [22] the Judge writes:

             "There is a public interest in removing the appellant that  is
             the maintenance of immigration control of the public purse  as
             set out in part above. However,  given  the  circumstances  of
             this  case  I  am  just  willing  to  accept   it   would   be
             disproportionate for mother and daughter now to be  forced  to
             live separately and I accept  modern  means  of  communication
             cannot replace the family life.

     21. The Judge, arguably, fails to properly  consider  or  analyse  this
         aspect of the case. Modern means of communication are used by  many
         to  maintain  contact  with  relatives  abroad  and   enable   such
         individuals to continue to communicate with each other and  sustain
         relationships. No  findings  were  made  as  to  what  is  actually
         involved in practical terms in the Judge's assertion  that  Ms  [F]
         emotional dependency upon her daughter has not  diminished  or  the
         nature and degree of  the  same.  Even  though  their  face-to-face
         contact and life together would change if Ms [F] was  removed  from
         the United Kingdom, in the sense of  that  family  life  no  longer
         existing, it was not made out on the evidence  that  the  level  of
         communication that  can  be  facilitated  would  not  meet  Ms  [F]
         emotional needs. There is insufficient evidence to  establish  that
         if removal occurred there would be any impact upon  any  member  of
         this family unit sufficient to make the decision disproportionate.
     22. It was submitted by Mr Ogunnubi  that  Ms  Flemings  had  developed
         family life she seeks to rely upon at a time she has  been  in  the
         United Kingdom legally, but this  is  not  so  as  her  immigration
         history recorded at [2] shows.
     23. The basis of this  Judges  finding  on  the  proportionality  issue
         appears to be that as Ms [F] and  her  daughter  continue  to  live
         together and their relationship is not changed, a comment that must
         he read, however, in light of the fact there has been  some  degree
         of change in light of the daughter forming  her  own  family  unit,
         that it will be wrong to change the status quo. There  is  also  no
         consideration by the Judge in the findings that if Ms [F]  daughter
         has provided financial support in the United Kingdom the same could
         be provided if Ms [F] is returned to Jamaica.
     24. Section 117 B of the 2002 Act provides:

             117B Article8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
             all cases:


             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
             the public interest.


             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-


                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-


                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


             (4)  Little weight should be given to-


                  (a)  a private life, or


                  (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.


             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-


                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and


                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.

     25. The fact Ms [F] speaks English is a neutral factor, but it was  not
         made out, even though she has the ability to work, that she will be
         self-sufficient although clearly receives  financial  support  from
         her daughter. The Judge accepts there is an argument for removal by
         reference to the public purse and requirement for valid immigration
         control. The basis on which Ms [F] argued an entitlement to  remain
         is that she had lived  with  her  daughter  for  21  years  without
         separation and cannot have any family life if she  is  returned  to
         Jamaica because of the  stigma/dangers  for  LGBT  people  and  the
         rejection of her daughter by the rest of the family in Jamaica.  Ms
         [F] stated she had been shunned by her own parents  and  family  in
         Jamaica for supporting her daughter's sexuality and so will have to
         live in isolation in Jamaica with no family or other  support.  The
         Judge found  that  there  are  no  very  significant  obstacles  to
         reintegration despite the difficulties, as noted above.
     26. The decision comes down to a finding by the Judge that  the  public
         interest is outweighed by the desire of  the  appellant  to  remain
         with her daughter. As noted in the grounds it is arguable the Judge
         did not consider in  the  assessment  of  the  proportionality  the
         weight to be given to the public interest with the required  degree
         of rigour. It is not made out that the consequences of removal have
         been shown in the decision under  challenge  to  be  sufficient  to
         displace the public interest in Ms [F] removal.
     27. Having indicated at the hearing that the decision of the  Judge  is
         infected by arguable legal error  for  these  reasons,  submissions
         were made as to the remaking of the decision. Having taken the same
         and all other aspects of the  evidence  into  account  I  find  the
         Secretary of State has discharge the burden of proof  upon  him  to
         the required standard to establish that the removal of Ms  [F]  and
         any interference with any protected right she  has  established  is
         proportionate to the public interest.
     28. If it was accepted that family life recognised by article 8  exists
         the appeal still fails as the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is
         proportionate. The grounds establish, however, that the  nature  of
         the relationship by reference to specific findings  of  the  extent
         and degree of the same  is  insufficient  to  support  the  Judge's
         findings that the relationship is beyond the normal emotional  ties
         enjoyed by Ms [F] and her daughter. I make this finding recognising
         that family life recognised by article 8 can exist between  Ms  [F]
         and her daughter even though her daughter is now  married.  I  find
         the Judge fails to adequately reason why  this  is  the  case.   If
         Article 8(1) is not engaged on family life grounds the appeal fails
         too.

Decision

     29. The Judge materially erred in law. I set aside the decision of  the
         original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.  This  appeal  is
         dismissed.

    Anonymity.


     30. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005. Although in the section of  the  decision  headed  Notice  of
         Decision in which the Judge confirms she allows the appeal on human
         rights grounds the Judge writes "I make an anonymity direction"  it
         is clear from the heading of the decision in which the Judge writes
         "anonymity direction is not made" and at [2] where the Judge writes
         "I make no direction for anonymity" that no such order was made.


         I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 23 January 2019

