

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05963/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15 May 2019                      |On 16 May 2019                        |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     A A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare issues. I make clear  that  is  not  granted  to
protect the appellant's  reputation  following  the  finding  that  he  used
deception in an earlier application for leave to remain. However, it  is  in
the interests of the children to continue the  order.  Unless  and  until  a
tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or
any member of his family. This direction applies both to the  appellant  and
to the respondent.

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr P. Richardson, instructed by Goldsmith
Chambers
For the respondent:          Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant entered the UK on 24 October 2002 with  entry  clearance
    as a student which was valid until 24  January  2004.  He  was  granted
    further leave to remain as a student on successive  occasions  although
    the exact dates are not made clear in the respondent's summary  of  his
    immigration history. The appellant says that he was  granted  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant from 22 October 2010 to 22
    October 2012. On 09 May 2013 the appellant was granted Indefinite Leave
    to Remain (ILR) in the UK on the grounds of 10 years' lawful residence.



2.    On 13 October 2015 the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  revoke  ILR
    because it  was  alleged  that  the  appellant  used  deception  in  an
    application made on 22 February 2012 for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student. It was alleged that he submitted a TOEIC certificate
    issued by Educational Testing Services (ETS) which  was  said  to  have
    been obtained by fraud by using a proxy test  taker.  No  copy  of  the
    decision appears to be included in the evidence, but it  is  reasonable
    to infer that it was taken under section 76(2)(a) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA 2002").  The  appellant  did
    not have a right of appeal against the decision.

3.    The appellant says he  made  further  representations  as  to  why  he
    should be able to remain in the UK on 19 October 2015. On  14  December
    2015 he applied for leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.  The
    appellant's wife and four children also live in the UK. The appellant's
    wife was granted Discretionary Leave to Remain (DLR), which I  am  told
    was extended for a further 30 months on 16 March 2018. I am  told  that
    the oldest child has leave in line with his mother. The three  youngest
    children (triplets) were born  in  the  UK  in  2010  and  are  British
    citizens.

4.    The application was refused in decision dated 15  February  2016.  The
    respondent alleged that the appellant used deception in an  application
    for leave to remain made on 22 February  2012.  He  submitted  a  TOEIC
    certificate  issued  by  ETS  which  was  fraudulently  obtained.   ETS
    cancelled the certificate issued for a test purportedly  taken  at  the
    Premier Language Training Centre on 21 March  2012  because  there  was
    evidence to show that it was obtained using a proxy test  taker.  There
    was evidence of widespread fraud at the test centre. The respondent was
    satisfied that the appellant's presence in the UK was not conducive  to
    the public good and that his conduct made it undesirable to  allow  him
    to remain in the UK.  The  application  was  refused  on  'Suitability'
    grounds. The appellant did not meet the private  life  requirements  of
    paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  or  (vi)  of  the  immigration  rules.   The
    respondent noted that the appellant had four children in the  UK,  most
    of whom were British citizens, but concluded that it was  proportionate
    to expect them to remain with their mother in the UK.

5.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated 07 August 2017. The decision was set  aside  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 30 April 2018 and  the  case  was
    remitted for a fresh hearing.

6.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow allowed the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 24 September 2018. The  judge  considered  the  evidence
    relating to the allegation  of  deception.  The  judge  considered  the
    evidence produced by the respondent relating to  the  widespread  fraud
    conducted at Premier Language Training Centre and  weighed  it  against
    the appellant's evidence. He concluded that the  respondent  discharged
    the burden of proof to show that it was likely that the appellant  used
    an English language certificate that was obtained by using a proxy test
    taker. However, in assessing whether the appellant's removal  would  be
    unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  the  judge
    concluded that the strength of the appellant's family life  in  the  UK
    outweighed the public interest in maintaining an  effective  system  of
    immigration control.

7.    In a decision promulgated on 08 January  2019  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Manuell set aside the First-tier Tribunal  decision  relating  to
    the assessment of Article 8 outside the  rules  because  he  considered
    that the judge failed to give adequate weight to  the  public  interest
    considerations. He remade the decision and dismissed the appeal.

8.    On application for permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal  the
    Upper Tribunal set aside the decision  of  the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge under rule 45 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 because the judge failed to make any clear  findings  relating  to
    the best interests of the children or to demonstrate that he had  given
    significant weight to their  interests  in  assessing  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect them to leave  the  UK.  In  doing  so  the  judge
    overlooked binding authorities which could have had a  material  effect
    on the decision.

9.    The appeal now comes before  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  remaking.  The
    findings  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bristow  relating   to
    deception in the earlier  application  remain  undisturbed.  The  Upper
    Tribunal shall proceed to determine whether the appellant's removal  in
    consequence of the decision would be unlawful under section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.

10.   The factual background to  the  case  is  not  in  dispute.  There  is
    agreement that, at the date of  the  hearing,  all  four  children  are
    'qualifying children' for the purpose of section 117B(6)  of  the  NIAA
    2002 and that the appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with the children for the purpose of  section  117B(6)(a).
    The only issue for determination is whether it would be unreasonable to
    expect the children  to  leave  the  UK  for  the  purpose  of  section
    117B(6)(b).

Decision and reasons

Best interests of the children

11.   In assessing the best interests of the children in this case,  I  have
    considered the principles outlined  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]
    UKSC4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) and others  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The best interests of children are a  primary
    consideration although they are not the only consideration.

12.   The respondent must have regard to the need to safeguard  the  welfare
    of children who are "in the United Kingdom". I take  into  account  the
    statutory guidance "UKBA Every  Child  Matters:  Change  for  Children"
    (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties  owed  to
    children under section 55. In the guidance, the respondent acknowledges
    the importance of international human rights instruments including  the
    UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes  on
    to confirm: "The UK Border Agency must fulfil the requirements of these
    instruments in relation to children whilst exercising its functions  as
    expressed in UK domestic legislation and policies." The UNCRC sets  out
    rights including a child's right to survival and development, the right
    to know and be cared for by his or her parents, the  right  not  to  be
    separated from parents and the  enjoyment  of  the  highest  attainable
    standards of living, health and education without  discrimination.  The
    UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility of both parents for the
    upbringing and development of a child.

13.   The appellant's oldest child  was  born  in  Pakistan,  but  has  been
    continuously resident in the UK for more than seven years and has spent
    most of his young life in the UK. Given that he was only a toddler when
    he arrived in the UK it is  likely  that  this  is  the  only  life  he
    remembers. The triplets are now eight years old and were  born  in  the
    UK. I am told that they are British citizens following  an  application
    to register them after their father was granted ILR. Quite rightly, the
    respondent  has  chosen  not  to  take  any  action  to  revoke   their
    citizenship following the revocation of  the  appellant's  ILR  because
    they should not be blamed for the misconduct of their father.

14.   The interests of the children have  already  been  considered  by  the
    respondent and it was deemed appropriate to grant the  mother  and  the
    oldest child DLR and to extend that leave after the appellant's ILR was
    revoked. All four children are likely to be well settled  in  education
    and will have close ties to the UK. Not just  one,  but  three  of  the
    children are British citizens. The intrinsic importance of this  status
    should not be played down. They are entitled  to  the  advantages  that
    this status brings.

15.   It is accepted that the appellant plays a full parental  role  in  the
    upbringing of the children. It is in their interests to be  brought  up
    by both parents. The decision letter does not suggest that it would  be
    proportionate to expect the family to relocate to Pakistan, merely that
    it would be proportionate to expect the children to remain  in  the  UK
    with their mother even though that would mean long term separation from
    their father. I conclude that the best interests of the children  point
    clearly towards the children remaining in the UK with both  parents  in
    light of their  nationality  and  long  standing  connections  to  this
    country.

Article 8(1) - family life

16.   There is no dispute that the appellant has  a  family  life  with  his
    wife and  four  children  in  the  UK.  In  the  decision  letter,  the
    respondent did not suggest that it would be reasonable or proportionate
    to expect the appellant's family to live with him in Pakistan. However,
    no clear concession was made that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect
    the children to leave the UK. The decision  stated  that  it  would  be
    proportionate to expect the children to remain in  the  UK  with  their
    mother albeit that this would mean  long  term  separation  from  their
    father.

17.   Although the exact reasons for the respondent deciding  to  grant  the
    appellant's wife and oldest child DLR in 2014 are unclear, a reasonable
    inference can be drawn from the grant of DLR to  the  appellant's  wife
    that it was not considered reasonable to expect the children  to  leave
    the UK. As such, the consequence of the appellant's removal is that  he
    is likely to be separated from his wife and four children who  are  all
    entitled to remain in the UK.

18.   I find that the removal of the appellant from the  United  Kingdom  in
    consequence of the decision would interfere with his family and private
    life in a sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation of  Article
    8(1) of the European Convention.

Article 8(2) - proportionality

19.   Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 makes it unlawful for a  public
    authority to act in a way that it incompatible with a Convention right.
    The duty is placed on the Secretary of State  as  well  as  courts  and
    tribunals. The requirements of the immigration rules and the  statutory
    provisions are said to reflect the respondent's position on  Article  8
    of the European Convention.  The  complicated  provisions  relating  to
    private and  family  life  and  the  separate  provisions  relating  to
    deportation bear little  resemblance  to  the  approach  taken  by  the
    European Court of Human Rights when  conducting  a  balancing  exercise
    under Article 8. The Strasbourg court conducts a holistic assessment of
    all the relevant circumstances of  a  case  weighing  the  individual's
    circumstances  against  the  public  interest  considerations   without
    separating different aspects of a claim.  I  am  bound  to  assess  the
    appeal with reference to the immigration rules and  relevant  statutory
    provisions, but it must always be remembered that those provisions  are
    intended to give effect to, and are said to  be  compatible  with,  the
    underlying  principles  enshrined  in  Article  8   of   the   European
    Convention: see NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] WLR(D) 662 [38-39].

20.   Part 5A of the  NIAA  2002  applies  where  a  court  or  tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts breaches a person's right to private  or  family  life  and  as  a
    result is unlawful under the Human Rights Act 1998. In considering  the
    'public interest question' a court or tribunal must have regard to  the
    issues outlined in section 117B in non-deportation cases.  The  'public
    interest question' means the question of whether  interference  with  a
    person's right to respect for their private or family life is justified
    under Article 8(2) of the European Convention of Human Rights.

21.   The appellant remained in the UK on a lawful basis until the  decision
    was taken to revoke his ILR. The ETS allegation  involved  two  serious
    matters. Firstly, ETS found that there was evidence to  show  that  the
    appellant was likely to have obtained an English  language  certificate
    by using a proxy test taker. The use of a proxy test taker involved the
    use of fraud to obtain the certificate.  The  individual  fraud  formed
    part of a widespread organised fraud involving thousands of  tests.  It
    is clearly in the public interest to discourage such widespread  fraud.
    Secondly, in relying on a fraudulent  test  certificate  the  appellant
    sought to deceive the respondent when he applied for further  leave  to
    remain as a student. The  fact  that  he  knowingly  sought  to  use  a
    fraudulent document to obtain leave to remain is a  serious  breach  of
    immigration law.

22.   The  allegation  that  the  appellant  obtained  an  English  language
    certificate by fraud,  and  then  sought  to  use  it  to  deceive  the
    respondent  in  an  application  for  further  leave  to  remain,   was
    sufficiently serious to justify refusal of leave to  remain  under  the
    'Suitability' requirements of the immigration rules. The effect of  the
    decision to refuse leave to remain under the 'Suitability' requirements
    is that the appellant does not meet the requirements of the immigration
    rules. At the hearing, Mr Richardson accepted that  the  appellant  did
    not meet the family or private life  requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules in any event. The respondent asserts that the rules strike a fair
    balance between the public interest and individual family  and  private
    life issues. Appropriate weight should be  given  to  the  respondent's
    policy as set out in the rules and relevant statutes.

23.   Although a number of public  interest  considerations  are  listed  in
    section 117B, section  117B(6)  is  the  operative  provision  for  the
    purpose of this appeal. The provision states that the  public  interest
    will not require the person's removal if the person has a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a qualifying child and "it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom."

24.   In KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 the  Supreme  Court  found  that
    the assessment of 'reasonableness' is directed to the position  of  the
    child without reference  to  the  misconduct  of  his  or  her  parents
    although what is reasonable must be  considered  in  the  'real  world'
    context in which the children find themselves.  Mr  Tufan  argued  that
    there was still scope to take into account the misconduct of  a  parent
    and relied on the facts considered in the case of  NS  at  [51]  of  KO
    (Nigeria). However, this part of the decision  did  not  establish  any
    principles of law and only discussed the fact that  the  misconduct  of
    the parent in that case led to  the  real  world  assessment  that  the
    parents of the children in that case would be  required  to  leave  the
    country because of their conduct.

25.   The real world context in which  these  children  find  themselves  is
    that they are not required to leave the UK because three  of  them  are
    British citizens and the respondent has deemed it appropriate to  grant
    DLR to the fourth alongside his mother. Their father remained in the UK
    on a lawful basis until the fraud concerning the  ETS  certificate  was
    discovered. On that basis his ILR was revoked. In the decision  letter,
    the respondent  only  go  so  far  as  to  suggest  that  it  would  be
    proportionate for the children  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  their
    father, but I have found that it is clearly not in their  interests  to
    be separated from their father on a long term basis. The best interests
    of the children  are  a  primary  consideration  which  must  be  given
    significant weight.

26.   Since the last hearing, the Upper Tribunal published the  decision  in
    JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey  [2019]  UKUT  72.  The
    Upper Tribunal rejected the submission that  section  117B(6)  is  only
    engaged if the children would, as a matter  of  fact,  be  expected  to
    leave the UK. It found that the provision requires a court or  tribunal
    to hypothesise that the  child  in  question  would  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and must ask whether it would be reasonable to expect the child
    to do so.

27.   In granting DLR to the appellant's wife and oldest son the  respondent
    appears to have recognised that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    the children to leave  the  UK  even  though  their  father's  ILR  was
    revoked. The real world situation that the children are facing  is  the
    possibility of their father's removal from the UK as a  result  of  his
    own misconduct leaving them in a situation they would  either  have  to
    face long term separation from their father or have to choose  to  give
    up the rights and advantages that they have established in  the  UK  if
    they wanted to maintain the important relationship with their father.

28.   For the  reasons  given  above,  I  conclude  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect three British children to leave the UK and all the
    benefits their citizenship brings to maintain their  family  life  with
    their father. Nor would it be reasonable to expect the oldest child who
    has been continuously resident in the UK for more than seven  years  to
    break the ties that he has now established  in  the  UK.  It  is  quite
    clearly not in the best interests of such young children to  remain  in
    the UK and face long term separation from their father if he is removed
    without them. According to  section  117B(6)  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining an effective system of immigration control does not justify
    the removal of the appellant in such circumstances. I conclude that the
    appellant's removal in consequence of the decision would  amount  to  a
    disproportionate breach of his rights under Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention.

29.   I conclude that removal in consequence of the decision to  refuse  the
    human rights claim is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
    1998


DECISION

The decision is remade and the appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date   16 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
