
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05209/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester.                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Given ex-tempore on                           |On 27th September 2017        |
|15th September 2017                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                               DAO TRONG TUAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mynott a Representative appearing on behalf of
RBC Consultancy
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, born on 23rd November 1972.

2.   He entered the United Kingdom in July 2010.  On 3rd February 2016,  his
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of
    his marriage was refused by the  Secretary  of  State.   The  appellant
    appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd on
    16th December 2016.

3.   At paragraph 21 of the judge's determination, the judge found that  the
    appellant plays a meaningful role in his stepdaughter's life  and  went
    on to find that he has a parental relationship with her, given that  he
    has lived with her since late  December  2013,  and  that  she  has  no
    contact with her father.  He accepted that the appellant had  a  family
    life in the United Kingdom with his wife, child and with his stepchild.



4.    The  judge  accepted  that  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect   the
    appellant's stepchild to leave the United Kingdom as she is  a  British
    citizen.  However, the judge dismissed the appeal,  rather  than  apply
    Section 117B(6).

5.   At the hearing before me today, Mr Bates quite properly  accepted  that
    the judge had materially erred in law  and  invited  me  to  allow  the
    appeal.

6.   The determination of  Judge  Lloyd  is  set  aside,  but  the  findings
    preserved.  I remake the appeal and with the consent of the Home Office
    Presenting Officer this appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
and have decided to make no fee award / to make  a  fee  award  of  any  fee
which has been paid or  may  be  payable  (adjusted  where  full  award  not
justified) for the  following  reason.  The  application  should  have  been
allowed.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge  Chalkley                                     Date:  26
September 2017
