
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05110/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 15 August 2019                    |on 22 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   ZI [W]
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of China,  born  on  10  January  1974.   He
    appealed to the FtT against the SSHD's decision,  made  on  17  January
    2018, to deport him to China.

 3. Judge Lea heard the appeal  on  15  May  2019.   In  her  determination
    promulgated on 20 May 2019, she recorded at [23] that the SSHD accepted
    that it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant's two children to
    go to China.  It is common ground that  she  correctly  identified  the
    decisive issue as "whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to
    remain in the UK with their mother without their father".

 4. At [24] the Judge found that there was a low risk of re-offending,  and
    that the appellant seemed "genuinely chastened".  She noted the opinion
    of a psychologist that it was in the best interests of the children  to
    be with both parents in the UK, and accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    been "very involved ... in childcare" given that his wife was  working.



 5. At [25] the Judge found that "although ... very finely balanced ...  it
    would be unduly harsh on the appellant's two UK children for him to  be
    deported to China and separated from them, with them having very little
    chance of even being able to visit him given the distances involved and
    the financial  situation  of  the  appellant's  wife".   She  therefore
    allowed the appeal.

 6. The SSHD's grounds of appeal cite RA (Iraq)  [2019]  UKUT  123  and  MK
    (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223, and contend  that  the  Judge  did  not
    identify anything meeting the high  standard  required  to  show  undue
    harshness.

 7. In MK the UT (McCloskey J, President, and UT  Judge  Perkins)  said  at
    [46]:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult. Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated threshold.
         'Harsh' in this context, denotes something severe, or bleak. It  is
         the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or  comfortable.  Furthermore,   the
         addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated standard
         still higher."

 8. In KO [2018] UKSC 53 the  Supreme  Court  at  [27]  described  that  as
    authoritative guidance.  The Court went on to reject the view that  the
    exercise involved any consideration of the criminality of  the  parent.
    At  [35],  the  Court  said  that  "unduly  harsh"  meant   more   than
    "undesirable", and that effect was to be given to  "the  much  stronger
    emphasis of the words" approved and applied in MK  and  in  MAB  [2015]
    UKUT 435.

 9. Mr Govan referred to RA [2019] UKUT 123  (Lane  J,  President,  and  UT
    Judges Gill & Coker) for the proposition that rehabilitation  will  not
    ordinarily bear material weight in favour of a foreign criminal.

10. He cited also PF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 1139 at [97 iii]:

         "... the separation of  children  from  a  deported  parent  is  an
         unfortunate but usual consequence  of  a  deportation  order.   The
         degree of upset that is  contemplated  for  the  children  here  is
         unfortunate but clearly not extraordinary; and, in my  view,  comes
         nowhere near meeting the unduly harsh test even on the  exclusively
         child-centred approach required by KO, let alone the more stringent
         "very compelling circumstances" test in section 117C(6) of the 2002
         Act."


11. At [23] the judge said that it was clear from the  social  work  report
    that there was a low risk of  re-offending,  which  she  repeated  when
    weighing up at [24].   Mr Govan pointed out that the  criminal  justice
    social work report at page O6 of the SSHD's FtT bundle says  under  the
    heading of "risk assessment":

         'Likelihood

         Assessed as low risk of reoffending.  No responsibility  taken  for
         the current offence which may indicate a risk of reoffending.'

12. And at page O7:

         'Conclusion

         ...

         The risk assessment is scored as medium.'

13. Mr Govan said that the FtT was "not entirely correct"  about  the  risk
    assessment, but, more significantly, was wrong to think that a low risk
    of re-offending weighed on the appellant's side.

14. The appellant had produced a report  by  Dr  Alia  Ul-Hassan,  clinical
    psychologist,  on  the  impact  on  the  children  of  their   father's
    deportation.  At [24] the judge noted the psychologist's  opinion  that
    it was "in the best  interests  of  the  children  in  terms  of  their
    psychological wellbeing, development and  education  to  be  with  both
    their parents in the UK".  Mr Govan said that the report  showed  there
    would be a significant impact, but no more than is inherent in any such
    case.

15. Mr Govan submitted finally that the FtT did not identify the  threshold
    which the appellant had to meet, or specify  anything  which  met  that
    threshold; and that, applying KO, its decision should be set aside  and
    reversed.

16. Mr Caskie made two "preliminary observations"; (i) the SSHD was  trying
    to have "a second bite at the cherry", could have cited the  cases  now
    relied upon to the FtT, but did not do so; and (ii) the SSHD  has  been
    anxious  for  many  years  to  ensure  that  responsibility  for   non-
    deportation of any "foreign criminal" is passed to someone else.

17.  The  principal  submissions  for  the  appellant  were  based  on  the
    psychological report and on JG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 982.

18. The report shows that the appellant has played a full and  active  role
    in his children's  lives.   The  older  child,  JJ,  is  vulnerable  to
    anxiety, and the risk of mental health problems  would  be  greater  if
    faced with "significant life stressors", of which his father's  removal
    would  be  a  clear  example.   The  younger,  JW,  "does  not  possess
    particularly well developed coping strategies", which, with a  tendency
    towards anxiety, suggests that he is "also prone to developing problems
    with his mental health, particularly if forced to undergo a significant
    and traumatic separation from his father".  "From psychological theory,
    it is well established that loss of secure attachments can be extremely
    detrimental and traumatic to a child".  The report also opines  on  the
    impact of separation from the appellant on the children's  mother,  and
    expresses concern over her "ability to cope with such extreme levels of
    stress", which in turn  may  result  in  her  having  "more  difficulty
    supporting the healthy development of the children".

19. The further points which I noted from the submissions for the appellant
    were these:

      i) As in JG, the SSHD was in reality alleging perversity.

     ii) It was enough that there  was  evidence  capable  of  reaching  the
         necessary threshold.  The UT could interfere only if there had been
         no evidence capable of supporting the decision of the FtT.

    iii) Removal of the appellant would effectively  separate  the  children
         from their father for at least a decade, beyond  the  remainder  of
         their childhood years.

     iv) The family relationships here  were  strong  and  stable,  not  the
         fractured and imperfect ones often seen in such cases.

      v) The submissions in the FtT (where Mr  Caskie  also  appeared)  were
         based on the psychological report.  With a report in such clear and
         strong terms, there had been little more to say.  That remained the
         foundation of the case in the UT.

     vi) There is no duty to quote case law.

    vii) It was not to be assumed that an experienced judge used  the  legal
         term of art "unduly harsh" without knowing what it meant.

   viii) The judge referred to the seriousness of the appellant's offending,
         so it could not be said that she did not recognise the weight to be
         given to the public interest.

     ix) The judge made a slip about the social work report on the  risk  of
         reoffending, but that made no difference.

      x) At [23] the judge alluded to  the  appellants'  refusal  to  accept
         responsibility at the time of sentencing probably being one of  the
         factors resulting in his situation.  It was likely that she had  in
         mind that if he  had  pleaded  guilty,  there  would  have  been  a
         discount in his sentence taking him out of  automatic  deportation.
         She was entitled to have regard to that.

     xi) At [24] the judge did exactly what she was required to do.

    xii) At [25], the  judge  was  right  to  find  the  case  "very  finely
         balanced".  Other judges might have come down on  the  other  side,
         but it was not an error to strike the balance where she did.

   xiii) The decision was not "so far off beam" that it could  be  said  the
         judge must have applied the wrong test.

20. I reserved my decision.

21. Absence of recital of case law is no error.  However, it must be  clear
    that the decisive issue was  posed  and  resolved  in  accordance  with
    authority.

22. The decision under challenge in JG stood partly because it was "replete
    with correct self-directions in law", and because the judge  repeatedly
    mentioned  the  very  high  hurdle  (in  that  case,  "very  compelling
    circumstances").

23. The question here is whether the judge, although not  setting  out  the
    exegesis of the test in the case law, applied it in substance.   It  is
    agreed that she stated the question correctly at [23], but how did  she
    go about answering it?

24. The judge's slip about the level of risk of re-offending is, in itself,
    inconsequential.  The case did not turn on whether that risk  was  low,
    medium or high.  However,  the  judge  took  this  in  the  appellant's
    favour, along with his remorse, although those matters were irrelevant.



25. At [24] the judge said she had "to weigh up the  clear  adverse  effect
    which removal of the appellant will have on his wife and children  with
    the public interest and the impact of illegal drugs having  a  negative
    effect on public protection issues".  She did  not.   All  she  had  to
    decide was whether the effect on  the  children  would  be  not  merely
    harsh, as was to be expected, but unduly harsh, having  regard  to  the
    effect on them, and to nothing else.

26. This case was at the lowest end of the scale of criminality to  trigger
    deportation.  It is highly likely that a guilty plea would have brought
    the appellant below the threshold.  The case is at the  higher  end  of
    the scale of family relationships.  In a  free-ranging  proportionality
    exercise, it might be finely balanced.  The judge thought that she  was
    engaged in such an exercise.

27. The SSHD categorises  this  case  with  PF,  where  the  UT  reached  a
    conclusion which could not properly be made, as the  evidence  did  not
    come close to anything unduly harsh.  Mr Caskie for the  appellant  has
    done his best to categorise it with JG, where there was such  evidence,
    and the FtT might have decided either way.

28. In my view, the decision of the FtT cannot  be  read  as  applying  the
    legal test correctly, and is not analogous to  JG.   Having  posed  the
    question in its barest form at [23], the judge went the wrong way about
    answering it.  She took  account  of  matters  which  would  have  been
    relevant in a free-ranging proportionality exercise but were irrelevant
    in the  tightly  structured  scheme  of  deportation.   She  identified
    consequences which are sad and unfortunate and did not appreciate  that
    there had to be something beyond that,  taking  the  case  out  of  the
    ordinary.

29. This is not a case where the SSHD has  to  establish  perversity.   The
    judge has failed to apply the relevant test in  accordance  with  clear
    authority.

30. The decision of the FtT is set  aside  because  it  adopted  a  legally
    incorrect approach.

31. At [35]  of  RA  the  UT  said  that  exceptions  from  the  rule  that
    rehabilitation is irrelevant could not entirely be  excluded,  although
    departure from the norm would have to be  "fully  reasoned".   It  was,
    rightly, not argued that the decision  of  the  FtT  fell  within  that
    exception, because the matter was not discussed.  In remaking it, there
    is nothing to initiate a search for an exception to the rule;  and  the
    risk is medium, not low.

32. On the evidence before the FtT, the children  would  be  subject  to  a
    degree of upset which is  real  and  damaging,  but  no  more  than  is
    inherent in any deportation  which  severs  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship; which means that it  would  be  harsh,  but  not
    unduly harsh.

33. The appeal, as originally brought to the FtT, is dismissed.

34. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      19 August 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




