
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05339/2016
                                                               HU/05345/2016
                                                               HU/05349/2016
                                                               HU/05352/2016
                                                               HU/05356/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke             |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 2 November 2017                        |On 6 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     Z U
                                     ZZ
                                     (A)
                                     (B)
                                     (C)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Sood, Trent Centre for Human Rights
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

       1. The first appellant is the husband of the second appellant.   They
          have three daughters born in 1999, 2001 and 2003.  I  shall  refer
          to them as A, B and C in this decision.  They are all citizens  of
          Pakistan.


       2. The appellants have appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
          Tribunal  Judge  Swinnerton  dated  24  January  2017,  in   which
          dismissed their human rights appeals were dismissed on  Article  8
          grounds.


Background facts

       3. The first appellant arrived in the UK as  a  student  in  February
          2004.  He remained with  leave  in  various  capacities  until  an
          application  based  upon  Article  8  was  refused  in  2012.   In
          December  2015,  he  was  served  with  an   enforcement   notice.
          Although the papers  include  reference  to  the  first  appellant
          having benefitted from leave extended by statute when he made  the
          2015 application, Mrs Sood clarified that it was accepted that  at
          that time the first  appellant  was  an  overstayer  and  that  it
          follows that at the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  all
          the appellants were overstayers.


       4. The second appellant came to the UK as  the  first  dependent's  a
          dependent in February 2011 and the three children entered  as  his
          dependents on 30 September 2011.  Since this time  the  appellants
          have lived as a close family unit  in  the  UK.   Their  claim  to
          remain based on Article 8, outside of the  Immigration  Rules  was
          refused in a decision dated 17 February 2016, and the  appellants'
          appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.


       5. At a hearing on 12 January 2017 the  appellants  were  represented
          by Counsel.  The first and second  appellants  gave  evidence  and
          reliance was placed upon documentation  relating  inter  alia,  to
          the circumstances of the children.


Decision under appeal

       6. In a comprehensive decision, the First-tier Tribunal accepted  the
          evidence relevant to the children's circumstances, and noted  that
          return to Pakistan would be  "especially  disruptive  to  the  two
          eldest because of the stage their education is currently  at":  at
          the time, A was in the first year of her A levels  and  B  was  in
          the final year of her GCSEs.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
          consider that their removal would be a disproportionate breach  of
          Article 8, when all  the  circumstances  were  considered  in  the
          round.


Issue before Upper Tribunal

       7. Mrs Sood clarified that  there  was  a  single  issue  for  me  to
          determine:  was  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing   tainted   by
          procedural unfairness by reason of the failure to  hear  from  the
          eldest child, A?  Mrs Sood acknowledged that  the  respondent  and
          the First-tier Tribunal  played  no  role  in  causing  procedural
          unfairness, and the blame for the unfairness  is  attributable  to
          the appellants' previous solicitors and Counsel.


       8. The grounds of appeal argue that it was unfair for the  First-tier
          Tribunal to proceed without hearing from the elder child, A.   The
          grounds assert that she attended the Tribunal "for the purpose  of
          giving evidence as  to  their  education  and  social  integration
          within  the  UK  (particularly  important  as  they  have  studied
          through primary/secondary school in this country) and of how  more
          self-willed and independent they  are  within  the  education  and
          social structures here, making their relocation  insuperable"  but
          that "neither the solicitor nor the barrister had acceded  to  the
          appellant's request to call the 17  year  old  at  least  to  give
          evidence, and a complaint against the lawyers is pending".


       9. When granting permission to appeal  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson
          observed that if the assertion that A was  prevented  from  giving
          evidence is  shown  to  be  correct  it  may  indicate  procedural
          unfairness.  The appellants were directed to file evidence of  any
          complaint made to the previous representatives  and  any  response
          to that complaint.

      10. At the hearing before me Mrs Sood  argued  that  the  hearing  was
          infected by procedural unfairness because A was not  permitted  to
          give  evidence  by   Counsel   representing   the   family.    The
          consequence of this, according to Mrs Sood,  is  that  the  First-
          tier Tribunal did not hear  any  evidence  from  the  children  on
          three important issues: their  westernisation,  their  integration
          into the UK and their education.   Mr McVeety submitted  that  the
          evidence  provided  came  nowhere  close   to   establishing   any
          misconduct  or  negligence   on   the   part   of   the   previous
          representatives  and  in  any  event   the   First-tier   Tribunal
          considered all relevant  evidence,  including  evidence  from  the
          first and second appellants regarding the important issues  raised
          by Mrs Sood.

      11. After hearing from both parties, I reserved my decision.


Error of law discussion

      12. Although the parents' witness statements available to  the  First-
          tier Tribunal do not contain any detailed evidence  regarding  the
          children, it is clear from the record of  proceedings  that  Judge
          Swinnerton permitted related questions to be asked in  examination
          in chief.  The  first  appellant  was  asked,  inter  alia:  "what
          differences  would  your  daughters  face  if  they  go  back   to
          Pakistan?"  and  "how  would  their  education  be   affected   in
          Pakistan?".  The  second  appellant  was  asked  "how  would  your
          daughters be affected especially your family and  your  daughters'
          education, if they returned to Pakistan?" and she gave  a  lengthy
          answer.

      13. The First-tier Tribunal also referred  to  an  "extensive  bundle"
          that included testimonials and  correspondence  from  the  schools
          (pg  2).   The  First-tier  Tribunal   was   well-aware   of   the
          appellants' case that the three children were doing well  and  had
          reached a critical stage in their UK  education  such  that  their
          education and social lives would be seriously  disrupted  if  they
          had to return to Pakistan (pg 4).  The  First-tier  Tribunal  also
          conducted a detailed assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
          children, treating these as a  primary  consideration:  they  have
          been in the UK since 2011, they have been doing well in  education
          and A and B were at very important stages in their education  (pgs
          5-6).  This was balanced  against  the  absence  of  any  specific
          information about the difficulties  the  children  would  face  in
          Pakistan (pg 6) and the finding (pgs 7-8) that  the  family  could
          reintegrate into Pakistan by supporting each other  as  a  settled
          stable family unit and with the support  of  friends  and  family.
          The First-tier Tribunal expressly  accepted  that  the  return  to
          Pakistan would be especially disruptive to the older two  children
          because of their stage in education  but  did  not  consider  this
          would be so disruptive  so  as  to  prevent  them  from  going  to
          University  or  fulfilling  their  aspirations.   The   First-tier
          Tribunal took into account that friendships  could  be  maintained
          by modern means of communication.

      14. These are all findings that were entirely open to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal considered section 117B of  the
          Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the  best  interests
          of the  children  and  conducted  a  balancing  exercise  for  the
          purposes of Article 8.  This  is  not  a  case  in  which  section
          117B(6) of the 2002 Act applied  because  the  children  were  not
          'qualifying children', having not been  resident  in  the  UK  for
          seven years, and the First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  take
          this into account.

      15. I am not satisfied that there was any procedural unfairness  as  a
          result of  A  not  giving  oral  evidence  before  the  First-tier
          Tribunal given the particular circumstances of the case.

                 a) There was ample evidence  available  to  the  First-tier
                    Tribunal addressing the wishes  and  feelings  and  best
                    interests of the children.  This was to be found in  the
                    school reports and the oral evidence of their parents.


                 b) This is not a case in which fairness required A to  give
                    evidence, because the evidence that  she  could  provide
                    was given on her behalf by her parents.   I  acknowledge
                    the need to  involve  children  in  the  decision-making
                    process, thus taking reasonable  steps  to  ensure  that
                    relevant and accurate information is assembled to make a
                    properly  informed  decision  about  the  child's   best
                    interests: see Articles 3 and 12 of the  United  Nations
                    Convention on the Rights of the Child.  In this case the
                    parents  are  articulate  and   educated.    The   first
                    appellant is a gas engineer and studied in the  UK  from
                    2004 to 2008.  The second appellant is a teacher.   They
                    were entirely capable  of  communicating  the  views  of
                    their children, and did  so.   There  was  none  of  the
                    possible conflict as identified in ZH (Tanzania) v  SSHD
                    [2011] 2 AC 166 at [34-37].  Each appellant desired  the
                    same outcome.  The wishes and feelings  of  each  family
                    member was well known and entirely consistent  with  the
                    others.  This is not a  case  in  which  there  was  any
                    particular need to hear separately  from  the  children.
                    Their views were well known and understood.    In  other
                    words, the First-tier Tribunal had a sufficiently  clear
                    idea of the children's  circumstances,  views  and  best
                    interests - see MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2017] Imm AR 53 at
                    [52].

                 c) The  three  issues  said  to  have  been  of  particular
                    importance to the children were adequately addressed  by
                    the First-tier Tribunal,  as  were  the  issues  that  A
                    wished to give evidence in support of - see  para  2  of
                    her witness statement dated 18 October  2017.   Detailed
                    findings were made regarding the  children's  education,
                    and it was accepted that the elder two children were  at
                    critical points in their education.   The  parents  were
                    specifically asked how return to Pakistan  would  impact
                    upon their children.   As  their  Counsel  said  in  his
                    response to the appellants' letter of complaint:

                            "I took the appellants through  their  evidence
                            and they had a full opportunity to  explain  to
                            the court what their daughters  were  studying,
                            what their future career aspirations  were  and
                            how removal to Pakistan would adversely  affect
                            their education and  lives  in  general.   They
                            also explained that they  were  estranged  from
                            their family members in Pakistan..."

                    The appellants were therefore provided with an  adequate
                    opportunity to give evidence regarding the impact of the
                    children's westernisation and  inability  to  integrate.
                    Their  answers  focused  upon  the   impact   to   their
                    education.  As the First-tier Tribunal noted (bottom  of
                    page 6) there was  no  specific  information  about  the
                    difficulties the children would  face.   The  First-tier
                    Tribunal  was  well-aware  that  it  was  part  of   the
                    appellants'  case  that  the  family  would  face   real
                    difficulties and hardship in reintegrating  to  Pakistan
                    (middle of pg 4).  The difficulties referred to  in  the
                    grounds of appeal, such as the inability to be  free  to
                    study and work and choose  their  own  life  partner  in
                    Pakistan, are difficulties of less significance,  where,
                    as here the family unit itself  is  supportive  of  such
                    choices and freedoms.  Reference  is  made  to  pressure
                    from the wider family but it is difficult to see why the
                    family could not relocate to a larger and  more  liberal
                    part of a  city  in  Pakistan,  away  from  such  family
                    pressures.  In any event the  evidence  from  the  first
                    appellant was that he could not count on family  members
                    for support (bottom of pg 3) and they were estranged (pg
                    7 and para 5 of Counsel's statement).


                 d) This was not a finely balanced decision for  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal.   Any  additional   evidence   emanating
                    directly from A was most unlikely to  tip  the  balance.
                    The Immigration  Rules  could  not  be  met  by  a  long
                    distance.  The children were not  'qualifying  children'
                    for the purposes of section 117B(6).  There are no  very
                    compelling or compassionate  circumstances.   The  first
                    and second appellant's immigration history was such that
                    there is a strong  public  interest  in  their  removal,
                    albeit of course the children's best interests are to be
                    determined without reference to the  immigration  status
                    of the parents.  As set out in E-A (Art 8-best interests
                    of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 those who have their
                    families with them during a period of study  in  the  UK
                    must do so in the light of the  expectation  of  return.
                    See also EV (Phillipines) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874
                    (not a 'seven year' or s 117B(6) case), per  Lewison  LJ
                    at [60-61].  Even  if  A  gave  evidence  directly,  the
                    result would have been the same.  After all, the child's
                    views must be considered objectively and in the round  -
                    see MK (best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475
                    at [20].


                 e) Given that there were no health concerns or particularly
                    compelling circumstances relating to the  children,  and
                    the parents were  able  to  provide  the  relevant  oral
                    evidence, there was  no  obligation  on  the  First-tier
                    Tribunal to make further enquiries.  The failure  to  do
                    so was not unreasonable and did not result in unfairness
                    - see MA (Pakistan) (supra) at [59].

      16. In addition, I do not accept that  A  was  prevented  from  giving
          oral evidence.  This  appears  to  be  the  belief  of  the  first
          appellant, as set out in a  letter  dated  23  October  2017,  but
          having considered all the evidence in the supplementary bundle,  I
          do not regard this to be well-founded.


              i) A's evidence (as contained in  her  witness  statement)  is
                 that Counsel said: "it is not necessary for your  girls  to
                 give evidence" and they had no alternative  but  to  follow
                 this advice.  The first  and  second  appellants  have  not
                 provided witness statements as to what happened or what was
                 said on the day of the hearing, although their views appear
                 in the letters of complaint in  the  supplementary  bundle.
                 As set out above, Counsel asked A's parents to provide  the
                 evidence  that  A   would   have   given   and   in   these
                 circumstances, A's summary of the advice given  by  Counsel
                 that it was not necessary for her to give evidence, appears
                 logical and reasonable. That approach is broadly consistent
                 with Counsel's summary of what took place in  his  response
                 to the  complaint  -  see  paras  5  and  11  of  Counsel's
                 statement.


             ii) Counsel also states at para 3 that  he  "briefly  explained
                 the court procedure and explained that the  children  would
                 not be called to give evidence as it is  inappropriate  for
                 minors to give evidence at court."  If advice was given  in
                 such stark terms, it was  plainly  incorrect.  It  is  well
                 known that situations arise both in  and  outside  of  this
                 jurisdiction, where it is appropriate for  minors  to  give
                 evidence in courts and Tribunals.  When Counsel's statement
                 is read as a whole and together with A's statement, Counsel
                 must have meant that generally speaking minors do not  give
                 evidence in cases such as  this.   In  any  event  what  is
                 significant  in  this  particular  case  is  that   Counsel
                 considered A's evidence to be unnecessary  as  her  parents
                 could provide all the relevant evidence, and the appellants
                 accepted this advice.


            iii) Cases involving a  very  similar  factual  matrix  are  not
                 uncommon  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    The   clear
                 majority of such cases  proceed  effectively  without  even
                 older children giving  oral  evidence.   Their  wishes  and
                 feelings are often not in dispute and in any event  can  be
                 fully conveyed by their parents and school.

             iv) The first and second appellants have  challenged  and  made
                 complaints about previous legal representatives,  prior  to
                 the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   They  are
                 educated and were capable of explaining their view that  an
                 application should be made for A to  give  evidence.   They
                 did not do so and chose to follow Counsel's advice.

              v) In the email sent to the appellants' former solicitors  and
                 Counsel immediately after the hearing at 3.45pm, the second
                 appellant complained about the way in which  the  case  was
                 prepared and was entirely silent as to what was said  about
                 A  giving  evidence.   In  the  complaint  letter  dated  4
                 February  2017  the  first  appellant  did  not   criticise
                 Counsel's failure to call A but merely stated "Why did they
                 not get my eldest daughter's statement? She was  there  and
                 can speak".

      17. Having considered all the available evidence I  am  not  satisfied
          that the appellants have made out the only ground of  appeal  that
          has been pursued on their behalf.  I do not accept that there  was
          any procedural unfairness as alleged,  for  the  reasons  outlined
          above.  In summary the appellants,  including  A,  have  not  been
          caused any procedural unfairness as a result  of  the  failure  to
          call her before the First-tier Tribunal.  The evidence that  could
          have been provided orally by A, was given by her  parents.   There
          were no particular  features  of  the  case  that  required  A  to
          provide separate evidence in order for the hearing to be fair.



Decision

      18. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
          making of an error of law and I do not set it aside.




Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
6 November 2017
