
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05951/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th December 2016                |On 17th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                             mr Muhammad ansari
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Islam, Counsel instructed by E1 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant applied for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a
    spouse of a person present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  That application was refused  by
    a decision of 24th February 2015.

2.    The  decision  itself  is   somewhat   complicated   considering   the
    application from a number of perspectives.  For example,  it  considers
    the five year partner route under paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(a), (b) and (c)
    of Appendix FM.  It also considered the ten year partner route and  the
    ten year private life route under paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules.

3.   In essence the application was refused because the appellant was not  a
    national of a majority English speaking country and had not  passed  an
    English language test,  nor  did  he  have  an  academic  qualification
    equivalent of a  Bachelors  or  Masters  Degree  which  was  taught  in
    English.

4.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju  on  3rd  June
    2016.  The appellant had undertaken an ACCA and  had  produced  details
    from the National Recognition Information Centre for the United Kingdom
    that such award is equivalent  to  a  Bachelors  Degree.   An  academic
    transcript was also provided.  The narrow point at issue would seem  to
    have been that the transcript did  not  confirm  that  the  course  was
    taught in English, neither was there any confirmation of the award.  On
    that basis the appeal was dismissed.

5.   The appeal against that decision was  lodged  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge had misunderstood or  misapplied  the  Regulations,  particularly
    those set out in E-ECP.4.1. of  Appendix  FM.   The  ACCA  was  clearly
    taught in English, therefore the appellant, it is said,  satisfies  all
    the requirements.  Permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted on 14th November 2006.

6.   Thus it is that the matter comes before me to determine  the  issue  in
    dispute.  It seems to me that the issue in dispute is a narrow one.   I
    note the Secretary of State's response to the grounds of appeal, as set
    out under the letter of 29th November 2016, where it is argued that the
    evidential  requirements  under  paragraph  31  of  Appendix   FM   are
    mandatory.   Such  requires  evidence  of  an  academic   qualification
    (recognised by UKNARIC to be equivalent to the standard of  a  Bachelor
    or Masters Degree in the United Kingdom (and was  taught  in  English))
    which must be either a  certificate  issued  or  an  original  academic
    reference or an original academic transcript.

7.    Whatever  form  of  document  is  used  it  must  confirm   that   the
    qualification was taught in English.

8.   At the hearing  there  has  been  produced  the  information  from  the
    National Recognition Information Centre confirming that  the  ACCA  was
    equivalent to a Bachelors  Degree.   Indeed,  it  is  now  regarded  as
    equivalent to a Masters Degree if further subjects were taken, which in
    this case they have.  Thus a transcript was also produced  showing  the
    subjects and modules that were taken.  Both indicate that the appellant
    has that qualification.

9.   What the documents do not state is  that  the  subject  was  taught  in
    English.  It is argued that that is  a  mandatory  requirement  in  the
    Rules.

10.  At the hearing the ACCA  certificate  was  produced,  together  with  a
    letter from the BPP University dated 18th August  2016  certifying  the
    nature of the study and that the course was taught in English.

11.  This appeal perhaps highlights an absurdity within the  application  of
    the Rules.  It is acknowledged by  all  parties,  particularly  in  the
    light of all the documentation received, that the ACCA  met  the  level
    and standard required and that it was taught in English.  However,  the
    strict  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  require   that   the
    documents. that are expected to establish the fact of the qualification
    must also on their face declare that it is taught in English.

12.  The Home Office Presenting Officer  confirmed  that  though  the  Rules
    require that particular statement, it was unlikely,  in  terms  of  any
    qualification taken in the United Kingdom, that any such  statement  if
    it was taught in English would be affixed either to the certificate  or
    to the transcript.  In other words, a strict application  of  the  Rule
    served to defeat the application by the appellant under those Rules.

13.  Mr Islam, on behalf of the appellant, invited me to consider that  that
    was a ridiculous and unfair situation  in  which  the  appellant  finds
    himself.  It is understandable that if he had obtained a  qualification
    abroad then it would be important for that qualification to be  clearly
    confirmed on its face that it was taught in English.  When  that  issue
    is in no doubt whatsoever for a qualification obtained  in  the  United
    Kingdom, it was an absurd situation making it a  mandatory  requirement
    that the documents speak on their face to that effect.  I was asked  to
    find that the appellant has met all the conditions that were  apparent,
    save for that technicality.

14.  I bear in mind the decision of Mandalia [2015] UKSC 59.  Although  that
    is in relation to a points-based application of the Rules, it seems  to
    me that justice does demand that the Rules be interpreted  consistently
    and fairly.  In this case there  is  no  dispute  whatsoever  that  the
    appellant holds a Bachelors or Masters Degree and that it was taught in
    English.  Simply  to  apply  the  absolute  letter  of  the  Rule   and
    Regulation, without having regard to the proper context in which it  is
    to be applied, seems to me to be both unfair and not something that was
    intended to be the outcome.

15.  In the circumstances, looking at  the  purpose  of  the  Rule  and  the
    justification for the refusal as being ultimately technical rather than
    practical in its nature, I find the judge was in error in applying such
    a  strict  technical  requirement   to   the   application.    In   the
    circumstances, therefore, I shall set aside the decision  held  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I shall proceed to remake it  finding  that
    all relevant evidence that meets the purpose and intention of the  Rule
    has been presented.   In  those  circumstances  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules is allowed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 16 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

