

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                  Appeal Number: HU056602015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal    |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |promulgated                    |
|on 21 June 2017                            |on 21 June 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 JOGA SINGH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: No appearance
For the Respondent: Mrs R Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Parkes ('the Judge') promulgated on 3 November 2016 in  which
        the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of
        his application for leave to remain as a spouse.
     2. On the 2 June 2017, the Birmingham Employment Tribunal  received  a
        letter from the appellant's representatives on behalf of the  Upper
        Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) confirming  the  date  of
        the Initial hearing of this matter and  stating  "The  above  named
        attended my offices today and states that  he  does  not  have  the
        funds for the reconsideration appeal and is  happy  for  the  Upper
        Tribunal to determine his appeal in his absence".
     3.  A  letter  signed  by   the   appellant   is   attached   to   the
        representative's  letter  asking  for   the   attendance   of   the
        representative to be excused  in  light  of  his  instructions  and
        confirming that he is content for the appeal to  be  determined  in
        absence.
     4. Whether a person attends an appeal hearing is a  matter  for  them.
        The Tribunal understands that legal representation can be expensive
        and that not everybody is able to afford  to  pay  a  solicitor  to
        represent them, although it is often the case  that  a  substantial
        number  of  parties  attend  Tribunals  without  representation  to
        present their own cases. No doubt the appellant was advised of  the
        options available to him.  The  Tribunal  accepts  the  request  to
        determine the appeal in the appellant's absence.



Background


     5. The Judge considered the evidence made available in support of  the
        appeal together with the parties'  respective  positions  following
        which findings were made which can be summarised in  the  following
        terms:


   i. The respondent does not dispute  the  length  of  time  the  appellant
      claims to have been in the UK although supporting evidence to show  he
      has is almost "non-existent". The decision  is  not  to  be  taken  as
      finding the appellant has been here as long as he stated but  that  is
      not an issue that needs to be decided in the appeal [7].
  ii. Whenever the appellant arrived in the UK he did so illegally  and  has
      remained here illegally since. The appellant is clearly  an  adaptable
      and resourceful individual and during his time in the UK has  acquired
      the ability to speak English in addition to his other skills which  he
      could use to support himself on return to India [8].
 iii. The appellant maintains he has been disowned by his family. The  Judge
      notes an affidavit from the appellant's father. The Judge surmises  it
      is bizarre that a person who is sufficiently angry with the  appellant
      for his marriage to the sponsor to disown him would  "have  been  kind
      enough to make it available to the appellant for use in  this  appeal"
      [9].
  iv. Swearing an affidavit  in  the  terms  provided  and  then  making  it
      available is contradictory. The Judge accepted the document does exist
      but does not believe it genuinely represents the views of  his  father
      or whoever  actually  produced  the  document,  such  that  the  Judge
      attached no weight to it [10].
   v. If wrong about the affidavit and that it does  genuinely  reflect  the
      appellant has been disowned by his family, the Judge  states  it  does
      not advance his case. The appellant's circumstances on return to India
      would be the same as those when he came to the UK. His claim he  could
      not return  and  support  himself  in  India  has  no  merit.  He  has
      demonstrated abilities and established himself in life in the UK  with
      skills that are entirely transferable [11].
  vi. That the appellant has no convictions does not alter the fact  he  has
      lived in the UK illegally.  Everything he  has  established  has  been
      against that background [12].
 vii. EX.1 arises in this case because the sponsor does not earn  sufficient
      to show she meets the maintenance requirements. The UK is entitled  to
      set requirements for non-nationals to meet to be allowed  to  live  in
      the   UK.   Maintenance   requirements   are   not    in    themselves
      disproportionate [13].
viii. The Sponsor will experience dislocation if she  moved  within  the  UK
      and so the usual problems of relocation would not in themselves amount
      to insurmountable obstacles [14].
  ix. If the couple moved to India the sponsor would have the support of the
      appellant who will be returning to the country and culture in which he
      grew up. The sponsor still speaks Punjabi. Absence of  family  support
      has not inhibited the applicant in the past there is  no  evidence  to
      show, even if it were true, that  it  would  unduly  prevent  his  re-
      establishing himself or supporting the sponsor there [15].
   x. The sponsor has skills that can be applied to  the  jobs  market.  The
      sponsors wish to live in the UK does not show she cannot live in India
      or adapt to doing so [16].
  xi. The test is effectively the  same  under  paragraph  276ADE(vi).   The
      appellant has not shown he has private life of any particular strength
      or durability as he has not shown that with less than 20 years in  the
      UK he cannot return to India [17].
 xii. There are no insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant  and  sponsor
      living together as husband and wife in India. The provisions  of  EX.1
      and EX.2 and paragraph 276ADE are not satisfied. The appeal under  the
      Immigration Rules cannot succeed [18].
xiii. All that the appellant seeks to rely upon has been formed  in  the  UK
      whilst he is here illegally. There is nothing  exceptional  about  the
      circumstances of the case to justify a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
      Rules. Given the inability of the  sponsor  to  meet  the  maintenance
      requirements they would need to be able to point to something  in  the
      circumstances to justify a grant of leave even though the sponsor does
      not earn enough [19].
 xiv. The appellant can leave and reapply. The fact he  does  not  meet  the
      Rules does not improve any argument. There is nothing compelling about
      the case that would justify a finding they could succeed under Article
      8 [20].


     6. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the following grounds:


   i) This was an appeal concerning both an application  and  decision  made
      after 06/04/2015 when all changes in appeal rights  under  S.82(1)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum act  2002  (as  amended)  came
      into force, whereby for  this  Appellant  there  was  only  an  appeal
      against a decision refusing a human rights claim, and his grounds were
      similarly confined by S.84(2) of the said Act;
  ii) The Judge determined the appeal 'old-style' on the basis  that  if  he
      did not succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  his  appeal  "may  be
      considered under Article 8 outside the rules" and that this was  "....
      not a freestanding exercise..." (3);
 iii) The grounds advanced were brief in  the  extreme  asserting  that  the
      Decision was unfair and unreasonable and citing two evidential matters
      relied upon;
  iv) The  Decision  disclosed  an  absence  of  structured  assessment  and
      reasoning of human rights grounds, both private and family  life,  and
      to that end, not helped by the permission grounds, there was shown  an
      arguable material error of law, lack a fair  assessment  and  decision
      making in the appellant's appeal.


     7. The respondent opposes the application  in  the  Rule  24  response
        asserting the Judge directed himself appropriately. It  is  further
        asserted the grounds identified by the judge granting permission do
        not identify any material error as  the  Judge  considered  matters
        outside the Rules adequately.




Error of law


     8. The respondent in the Rule 24 response does not disagree  with  the
        analysis set out in the grant of permission that in  light  of  the
        date of application and date of decision this is a matter  that  is
        to be considered under the  current  regime  which  only  gave  the
        appellant a right of appeal against the decision refusing  a  human
        rights claim, as no protection or other relevant grounds apply. The
        effect of the change of the appeal  regime  is  that  there  is  no
        longer a ground of  appeal  available  to  an  appellant  that  the
        decision is not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.
     9. The original grounds of appeal challenge the human rights decision,
        in accordance with the current regime, of which the Judge was aware
        and in respect of which the Judge  determined  the  merits  of  the
        appeal.
    10. Article 8 jurisprudence has evolved over recent years including  in
        2012 amendments to the Immigration Rules to introduce  Appendix  FM
        and paragraph 276ADE. There has been lengthy debate concerning  the
        relationship between the Rules, which were  said  to  set  out  the
        Secretary States view on how  Article  8  should  be  applied,  and
        Strasbourg  jurisprudence.   In  2014  the   Secretary   of   State
        introduced statutory provisions in the Immigration Act 2014,  which
        have been incorporated into the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
        Act  2002  at  section  117A-D,  giving  statutory  effect  to  the
        Secretary of States view of the relevant factors that  need  to  be
        considered in an Article 8 appeal.
    11. The 'reform' process continued by the amendments to section  82  of
        the 2002 Act which, on the face of it, limited the grounds on which
        a person is able to appeal.
    12. The Senior Courts have again reinforced the need for  a  structured
        approach to be taken when assessing a human rights claim  of  which
        the five questions set out in Razgar are the  accepted  model.  The
        fifth  of  the  Razgar  questions  is   whether   a   decision   is
        proportionate.  Assessing  proportionality  requires  the  decision
        maker to  take  into  account  all  relevant  facts  and  arguments
        presented by both parties to an appeal, to consider what weight can
        be given to  each  element,  and  then  to  determine  which  sides
        argument carries the greater weight. If it is the  appellant's  the
        likely outcome will be a finding the decision is not proportionate.
        If it is the Secretary of State, the likely  finding  is  that  the
        decision is proportionate. The burden  of  proving  a  decision  is
        proportionate falling in the first instance upon the  Secretary  of
        State.
    13. It is accepted at [2] that the Judge stated  the  burden  of  proof
        lies upon the appellant and that in order to succeed the  appellant
        must show the requirements of HC 395 are made out on the balance of
        probabilities. To the extent this suggests the  Judge  was  viewing
        the merits of  the  appeal  through  the  Immigration  Rules  only,
        arguable error may  have  arisen,  although  had  the  matter  been
        considered under the Rules  the  self-direction  by  the  Judge  is
        arguably correct.
    14. In [3] the Judge noted the application was made under  Appendix  FM
        and FM - SE and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. The Judge thereafter
        writes "in the event that the Appellant does not succeed under  the
        Immigration Rules an appeal  may  be  considered  under  Article  8
        outside the Rules. This is not  a  freestanding  exercise  and  the
        Immigration Rules remain relevant to the assessment of  the  public
        interest. Also relevant are the provisions  of  sections  117A  and
        117B of the 2002 Act". This is a clear indication  that  the  Judge
        was aware that the Rules were a relevant factor but that an  appeal
        may also be considered under Article  8  ECHR.  The  self-direction
        that the Immigration Rules remain relevant to the assessment of the
        public interest is arguably  correct  as  the  Rules  set  out  the
        Secretary of States view of how Article 8 should be interpreted and
        applied. The direction in relation to section 117 again informs the
        reader of the Judges awareness  of  the  Article  8  issue  as  the
        statutory  provisions  only  apply   when   a   decision-maker   is
        considering Article 8 ECHR.
    15. The Judge  thereafter  noted  the  issues  and  the  evidence  made
        available before concluding that the appellant had not  established
        that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant  and
        sponsor living together as husband and wife in India,  meaning  the
        provisions of  EX.1  and  EX.2  and  paragraph  276  ADE  were  not
        satisfied. The conclusion the appellant was unable to succeed under
        the Immigration Rules was one properly open to  the  Judge  on  the
        evidence.
    16. Notwithstanding the legal technicalities of whether  an  individual
        has a right of appeal or not, the appellant applied under the Rules
        and had not established he could satisfy the necessary requirements
        to succeed. That is factually correct.
    17. The Judge did not stop there, however, for in [19] the Judge states
        "I  cannot  see  that  there  is  anything  exceptional  about  the
        circumstances of this case that would  justify  a  grant  of  leave
        outside the rules. Given the inability of  the  Sponsor  meets  the
        maintenance requirements the Appellant and Sponsor would need to be
        able to point to something in the circumstances  that  justified  a
        grant even though she does not earn enough". The Judge was  clearly
        considering whether, even though the appellant  could  not  satisfy
        the requirements of the  Rules,  this  was  a  case  in  which  the
        decision could be found not to be proportionate. The conclusion  by
        the Judge that there was  nothing  to  justify  a  grant  of  leave
        outside the Rules is a finding the decision is proportionate.
    18. As stated above, the proportionality exercise requires the decision-
        maker to balance the competing arguments. It would be  an  arguable
        error of law for the Judge to ignore the question  of  whether  the
        appellant was able to satisfy the  requirements  of  the  Rule  for
        those rules set out the Secretary of States argument  for  why,  in
        relation to the issues covered by the Rules, it is a  proportionate
        decision. The Judge was required to consider the provisions of  the
        Rules and the appellant's ability to satisfy the same and then,  as
        stated in [3], to consider the question of Article  8  outside  the
        Rules.
    19. The Judge noted the appellant could return  to  India  to  make  an
        application to re-enter lawfully. The  Judge  also  finds  it  [20]
        "There is nothing remotely compelling about this  case  that  would
        justify a finding that they could succeed under  Article  8".  This
        is, again, a clear statement by the Judge that the appeal was being
        determined by reference to the only available ground of appeal that
        of Article 8 ECHR.
    20. It is also important to note in [21] the conclusion  of  the  Judge
        that "For the reasons given this appeal is  dismissed".  The  Judge
        does not state the appeal is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules
        but rather that it is dismissed for the reasons set out in the body
        of the determination. Those include rejection of the assertion  the
        decision was not proportionate pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.
    21. No arguable legal error is made out in relation to paragraph 2  (i)
        or (ii) of the grant of permission.
    22. Paragraph 2 (iv) asserts the decision discloses the  absence  of  a
        structured assessment in relation to private and family life but  a
        reading of the decision as a  whole  shows  the  Judge  followed  a
        structured approach, fairly assessed the evidence  made  available,
        and has given adequate  reasons  for  the  findings  made,  however
        brief.
    23. The appellant in his grounds of appeal asserted  that  at  [9]  the
        Judge did not place due weight on  the  affidavit  submitted  which
        made it clear the appellant's side of his family  had  severed  all
        links with him meaning he would be destitute if returned to  India.
        The Judge specifically notes in the  first  sentence  of  [9]  "The
        Appellant maintains that he has been disowned by his  family".  The
        Judge notes the affidavits  from  his  father  but  gives  adequate
        reasons for why little weight was  placed  upon  that  evidence  to
        prove the appellant's assertion [9 - 10].
    24. The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for  the  Judge
        and it has not been made out that the weight applied is in any  way
        perverse or irrational. The Judge gives adequate  reasons  for  why
        the weight he gave to the evidence was not as the  appellant  would
        have preferred it to have been.
    25. It is also important to note [11]  in  which  the  Judge  sets  out
        findings in the alternative in case he is wrong about the affidavit
        and that it does genuinely reflect the appellant being disowned  by
        his family. In such circumstances the  Judge  notes  the  appellant
        will be able to re-establish himself and that the appellants  claim
        he could not return and support himself in India was found to  have
        no arguable merit, as the skills the appellant has demonstrated are
        transferable.
    26. The appellant also refers to the finding at [20] that if he was  to
        reapply from India his wife  would  not  be  able  to  satisfy  the
        maintenance requirements of the Rules  which  would  be  a  further
        block to the appellant's chances of ever coming back to the UK.  No
        arguable legal error is made out. The maintenance  requirements  of
        the Rules are lawful and there is  flexibility  within  the  rules,
        depending on a person's individual  circumstances,  that  may  mean
        they do not have to satisfy the minimum income threshold.  In  this
        case, it is stated  that  the  partner's  income  is  approximately
        �12,000 a year but specified evidence was  not  provided  to  prove
        this figure or to show that a greater income could not be earned.
    27. If the appellant cannot  demonstrate  an  ability  to  satisfy  the
        minimum income level, if he  is  required  to  do  the  same,  that
        strengthens  the  argument  by  the  Judge  that  the  decision  is
        proportionate  for  the  minimum  income  level  has  been  set  by
        Parliament to protect the economic welfare of  the  United  Kingdom
        which it is accepted as a legitimate aim pursuant to Article 8  (2)
        ECHR.
    28. Reading the decision as a whole, I find the appellant has failed to
        make out any legal error material to the decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal.

Decision

    29. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    30. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 21 June 2017







