


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal
                                                            Numbers:
                                                            HU/05777/2016


                                                            HU/05783/2016





                                                            HU/05791/2016


                                       HU/05796/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
    Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 28th March 2018
    On 4th April 2018



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                DASILVA WIGOR
                    APARECIDA VENTURA RODRIGUES CARRILHO
                          CARRILHO VENTURA EDUARDO
                             CARRILHO EMANUELLY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:        Ms N Karbari (Counsel, instructed by Western
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:     Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The Appellants applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of
   their private and family life. The applications were refused for the
   reasons given in the Refusal Letters. The appeals were heard by Judge
   Devettie at Taylor House on the 11th of July 2017 and dismissed in the
   decision promulgated on the 11th of July 2017.

2. The Appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
   grounds of the 15th of August 2017. The grounds, at some length, argue
   that the Judge erred in the assessment of the children's best interests
   and the weight to be given the immigration history of the adults under
   section 117B. It is argued that the Judge's findings were contradictory
   and had not considered article 8 properly.

3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Foudy on the 8th of February
   2018. In paragraph 4 of that decision it was stated that the Judge had
   found that the children's best interests demanded that they remain in the
   UK and that their best interests did not require them to remain. The
   grounds were arguable.

4. At the hearing it was argued that the findings were contradictory, that
   the Judge had not applied section 117B(6) and had not considered
   paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules, Eduardo had been in the UK
   for over 7 years. This was relevant because if paragraph 276ADE was met
   then that would increase the weight to be given in the article 8
   assessment. For the Home Office it was argued that the points raised were
   matters of form and not substance and not material. The Judge had had
   regard to all the circumstances and all relevant factors had been
   considered.


5. At the hearing I indicated that I found that the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal contained no error of law and that my decision was
   reserved. The reasons for finding that the First-tier Tribunal decision
   contained no material error of law are set out below.


6. In the course of the decision the Judge set out the adult's immigration
   history, the evidence that was relied on and evidence relating to the
   children themselves. In paragraph 9 it was stated that "It is common
   ground that the Appellant's appeal cannot succeed under the Immigration
   Rules. It therefore falls to be considered outside the Immigration
   Rules." Section 117B was then set out. There is no challenge in the
   grounds to the contents of paragraph 9 of the decision, the inability of
   the Appellants to meet the Immigration Rules is relevant in a number of
   ways.


7. Where the Immigration Rules are not met compelling evidence is required
   to justify a grant of leave outside the rules under article 8 as that
   provision is not freestanding. Section 117B(1) mandates that immigration
   control is in the public interest and so the Immigration Rules form the
   basis for that assessment.


8. As it was common ground that the Immigration Rules were not met, that
   unchallenged finding could only mean that paragraph 276ADE(iv) could not
   be met. That allows for a grant of leave to remain to an applicant who
   "is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the UK for at
   least 7 years ... and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant
   to leave the UK."


9. That provision is in identical terms to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act
   which states that "In the case of a person who is not liable to
   deportation, the public interest does not require the person's removal
   where- (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
   with a qualifying child; and (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the
   child to leave the United Kingdom."


10. The test in relation to a child who has been in the UK for over 7 years
   is the same in the Immigration Rules as in section 117B(6) and there is
   no difference between them. An analysis on one provision will entail the
   same approach as on the other. The concession that the Appellants could
   not meet the Immigration Rules would appear to answer the question that
   the Judge had to address under section 117B(6).


11. The fact that the Judge did not refer to paragraph 276ADE in terms is a
   matter of form only and not relevant to the substance of the decision. In
   observing that it had been accepted the Immigration Rules were not met it
   appeared to have been accepted that it would be reasonable to expect
   Eduardo to leave the UK.


12. In any event the Judge did an assessment of the reasonableness of
   Eduardo leaving the UK. The assessment of the children's best interests
   had to precede any proportionality assessment and that is a stand alone
   exercise. That is found at paragraph 10 of the decision. contrary to the
   observations in the grant of permission the Judge did not find that their
   best interests "demanded" that they remain in the UK simply that their
   best interests are for them to remain. That is not an unusual finding
   where children appear to be settled and doing well in school but that
   does not answer the question that the judge had to decide.


13. In paragraph 11 the Judge went on to address the question of
   reasonableness. In that regard the overall immigration history is clearly
   relevant as indicated in MA (Pakistan)2016] EWCA Civ 705 but there is
   ample other authority for the point including for example EV
   (Philippines) [2014] 874 and Zoumbas [201] UKSC 74. An adverse
   immigration history on the part of the adults is a relevant consideration
   in assessing the reasonableness of children being expected to lave the UK
   to go and live in the country of their nationality.


14. The Judge found in paragraph 14 that the adults entered the UK as
   visitors with the intention of settling here, clearly a finding of an
   intention to evade immigration control. That finding is not challenged
   and nor could it be. In those circumstances the Judge found that it was
   reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK. In doing so the Judge
   acknowledged that there would be a degree of dislocation but that with
   appropriate parental support that could be overcome. The Judge might have
   added that children move between countries with all that that can entail
   on a daily basis and there is nothing inherently in the fact of
   relocation itself that would make a move undesirable in principle.
   Besides the children will be going to the country of their nationality
   which is a country where they can live lawfully, unlike their position in
   the UK.


15. The grounds rely heavily on legal submissions and quotations from
   various authorities but they do not engage with the decision itself or
   point to evidence that required a different decision. There is nothing in
   the grounds that points to any unusual circumstances that could be said
   to be compelling in the family's situation that it is said that the Judge
   had overlooked or had placed insufficient weight on.


16. As was made clear in the ECtHR in Jeunesse [2014] ECHR 1309 states are
   entitled to expect those subject to immigration control to abide by and
   comply with the rules that apply to them and that family life created
   when in a signatory state illegally carries very little weight. In the
   language of the ECtHR exceptional circumstances would be needed to
   justify a grant of leave under article 8, even applying the UK term of
   compelling circumstances, the Appellants had not provided such evidence
   to the First-tier Tribunal to justify a finding in their case. Given the
   conduct of the adults it is hardly surprising that the Judge found
   against them.


17. The grounds do not show that there is any error in the decision of the
   First-tier Tribunal. The Judge made a proper assessment of the children's
   best interests as a stand-alone exercise as was required. The Judge did
   not find that those interests were so strong that the children had to be
   permitted to remain. There then followed an assessment of the
   reasonableness issue which, in the context of the evasion of immigration
   control, was found against the Appellants. That was a finding open to the
   Judge for the reasons given. The grounds are no more than a lengthy
   disagreement with the decision and disclose no error of law raising
   issues of form and not substance.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal, I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 28th March 2018

















