
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05457/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th March 2019                   |On 24th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     OD
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Nyawanza, Genesis Law Associates Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity order was made by First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge  Lodge
    and for the avoidance of  any  doubt,  that  order  continues.   OD  is
    granted anonymity throughout these proceedings.   No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


 2. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe.  She  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 17th December 2000.  The appellant has a son, "DPN" who  was
    born in the UK on 3rd September 2003.  DPN is a national  of  Zimbabwe.
    In May 2008, the appellant was arrested  and  shortly  after,  in  July
    2008, she made a claim for asylum.   That  claim  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on 24th July 2008 and an appeal against  that  decision  was
    dismissed by the  FtT  on  17th  September  2008.   The  appellant  had
    exhausted her rights of appeal on 20th October 2008.   In  April  2009,
    the appellant made further submissions to  the  respondent,  and  by  a
    decision  dated  23rd  February  2010,  the  respondent   refused   the
    application made by the appellant but treated the  further  submissions
    as a fresh claim.  The appellant exercised a right  of  appeal  against
    that decision, and her appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out  in
    a decision promulgated on 20th April 2010.  The appellant  successfully
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal on human rights grounds, and  that  lead
    to a grant of discretionary leave to remain in the UK until 27th  April
    2014.   On 24th April 2014, the appellant applied for further leave  to
    remain on the basis of her continuing relationship with her  son,  DPN.
    That application was refused by the respondent on 11th March 2016.   On
    6th April 2016, the appellant sought to appeal that decision,  but  the
    appeal was determined to be 'out of time' by FtT Judge Farrin  on  29th
    June  2016.  A  further  decision  refusing  to  extend  the  time  for
    appealing, was made by FtT Judge Herlihy on 18th July  2016.   On  13th
    March 2017, the appellant made a further application, on  human  rights
    grounds, for leave to remain on the basis of her continued relationship
    with her son DPN.  That application was refused by the  respondent  for
    the reasons set out in a decision dated 21st March 2017 and  gave  rise
    to the appeal before FtT Judge Lodge.  The appeal was dismissed by  FtT
    Judge Lodge for the reasons set out in a decision  promulgated  on  9th
    April 2018 and it is that decision, that is the subject of  the  appeal
    before me.


 3. The focus of the appellant's application for leave to remain in the  UK
    and at the hearing of her appeal, was her relationship with  DPN.   The
    appellant claimed to have a parental relationship  with  DPN.   At  the
    time of her application to the respondent,  DPN  was  living  with  his
    father and in a letter from the appellant in support  that  application
    the appellant claimed that DPN lives with his father and stepmother and
    that she shares "50% custody of [DPN]". The appellant claimed  that  in
    2010, DPN was granted limited leave to remain in the UK as a  dependent
    of a refugee and subsequently, on  28th  April  2015,  he  was  granted
    settlement. A copy of the residence permit  issued  to  DPN  confirming
    that he has indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  "refugee
    settlement" was provided in support of the application. The application
    was also supported inter alia by a  letter  from  the  appellant's  ex-
    partner, DPN's father, who confirmed that the appellant is DPN's mother
    and that "..[DPN] lives with me and he  goes  to  his  mum  weekends.".
    There was also a letter in support provided by DPN himself, in which he
    describes the arrangements as follows; ".. sometimes I see her  on  the
    weekend and every year she takes me on holiday, she also  buys  clothes
    for me...".  In  the  respondent's  decision  of  21  March  2017,  the
    respondent accepted that DPN is under 18 years of age, and is living in
    the UK as a settled person after being granted ILR as a refugee, as the
    dependent  of  his  stepmother,  the  partner  of  DPN's  father.   The
    respondent concluded that the appellant could not meet the requirements
    for leave to remain as a parent under the immigration rules,  and  that
    there are no exceptional circumstances to justify the grant of leave to
    remain on Article 8 grounds, outside of the immigration rules.


 4. The focus of the appeal before FtT Judge Lodge was, as I say, upon  the
    appellant's relationship with DPN.  Neither the appellant's ex-partner,
    nor others that had provided evidence in  support  of  the  appellant's
    application, attended the hearing of the appeal.  The Judge  noted,  at
    [8], the claim by the appellant that her  ex-partner  was  not  at  the
    hearing as he had a hospital appointment, and that DPN had been  living
    with her since April 2017.   The  Judge  noted  "At  the  time  of  the
    application he was living with  her  ex-partner  and  she  saw  him  at
    weekends. Now she lived with him fulltime and he went to  his  father's
    at weekends. She was not working now and that was why  the  arrangement
    had changed.".  At [10], the Judge noted the appellant's evidence  that
    she had signed DPN up to a GP nearby, but she had no other evidence  to
    support that claim.  The findings and conclusions of the FtT Judge  are
    set out at paragraphs [13] to [27] of the decision.


 5. The Judge first considered the claim by reference to  the  requirements
    of the immigration rules.  The FtT Judge noted that at the time of  the
    appellant's application and the respondent  decision,  DPN  was  living
    with  his  father  and  stepmother.  The  Judge  noted,  at  [16],  the
    appellant's evidence  that  up  until  April  2017  the  appellant  had
    informal access to her son and that he was living with her at weekends,
    and with his father during the week. The Judge  noted  the  appellant's
    claim that since April 2017, DPN has lived with her  during  the  week,
    and sees his father and stepmother, at weekends. The Judge  refers,  at
    [17], to the letters testifying to the continuing relationship  between
    the appellant and her son. For the reasons set out at  paragraph  [18],
    the Judge rejected the explanation that the appellant's ex-partner  was
    unable to attend the hearing because of  a  hospital  appointment.  The
    Judge concluded that he  was  satisfied  "..  in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence to support the appellant's contention that  he  cannot  attend
    the hearing that [the appellant's ex-partner] has simply decided not to
    support the appellant.".  In the circumstances the FtT Judge states  he
    can "attach very little weight to his evidence.".


 6. The Judge noted, at [19], that there was  written  evidence  from  DPN.
    The Judge states that he  draws  "..  No  adverse  inference  from  his
    failure to attend  given  his  age..".  Having  noted  that  the  other
    witnesses who have provided supporting letters  had  not  attended  the
    hearing, at paragraphs [20] and [21], the Judge concludes as follows.


         "20.  The  appellant'  contention  is  that  from  April  2017  the
         appellant (sic) has been living with her during the week. I have no
         reliable documentary evidence that that is the case. I have nothing
         from [DPN's] school or GP or local authority. I  have  no  official
         documentary evidence that [DPN] lives with the  appellant  or  that
         she is playing any role in his life. I have been provided  with  no
         reliable documentary evidence as to  the  role  the  appellant  has
         played or is playing in the school her son attends, and no evidence
         as to her being present at key events in his  life  e.g.  religious
         events, birthdays etc.


         21.  In the circumstances I am  not  satisfied  the  appellant  has
         established she meets E-LTRPR.2.4"


 7. At paragraph [22] of the decision, the Judge concluded that he was  not
    satisfied that the appellant has established that the  requirements  of
    paragraph EX.1.(a) are met. The Judge went on to  conclude  that  there
    will be no very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration
    into her home country.


 8. At paragraph [24] of the decision. the Judge states  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that s55 is applicable because  "..  the  appellant  has  not
    established she has any ongoing contact  with  her  son  [DPN]  in  any
    respect.". The Judge states ".. I cannot therefore find, in the absence
    of reliable  evidence,  that  her  return  to  Zimbabwe  would  have  a
    detrimental impact on [DPN].".


 9. Having considered the Article 8 claim outside the rules, the FtT  Judge
    was satisfied that  having  regard  to  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control, the decision to remove the appellant is lawful and
    proportionate. The appeal was therefore dismissed.


The appeal before me


10. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Parker on 18th May  2018.
    In doing so, FtT Judge Parker noted that in the grounds of appeal,  the
    appellant claims that DPN had attended the hearing of the  appeal,  and
    if that is correct, that may potentially have undermined  the  findings
    of the FtT Judge.  FtT Judge Parker noted that there are  a  number  of
    arguable areas of law in the decision.  The matter comes before  me  to
    determine whether the decision of the FtT  Judge  contains  a  material
    error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


11.  It  was  uncontroversial  that  the  appellant  does  not  have   sole
    responsibility for DPN.   On  behalf  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Nyawanza
    submits that a careful  reading  of  paragraph  [20]  of  the  decision
    discloses that the  Judge  applied  a  higher  standard  of  proof,  in
    requiring the appellant to provide documentary evidence in  support  of
    her claim.  He submits that the evidence before the FtT was  such  that
    the FtT Judge should have found that DPN was living with the appellant.
    DPN had made a statement dated 30th August 2017, that was at  pages  12
    to 13 of the appellant's bundle, and he had attended the hearing of the
    appeal. DPN confirms in his statement that he lives  with  his  mother,
    and that he sees his father every weekend.  In light of the  fact  that
    DPN had attended the hearing of the appeal, and was available  to  give
    evidence, it is unclear why the FtT Judge stated at [19] that he  draws
    no adverse inference from DPN's failure to attend.  The evidence of DPN
    was capable of corroborating the appellant's claim.


12. In reply, Mr Clarke submit that it was for the appellant  to  establish
    her Article 8 claim and the only evidence called at the hearing of  the
    appeal, was the evidence of the appellant. He submits that  the  weight
    to be attached to the evidence of the appellant was a  matter  for  the
    Judge, and that the Judge was clearly aware of  the  witness  statement
    made by  DPN.  He  submits  that  there  was  an  absence  of  evidence
    supporting the assertions being made by the appellant. He submits  that
    it was open to the FtT  Judge  to  find  that  the  appellant  has  not
    established she has any ongoing  contact  with  her  son  DPN,  in  any
    respect. It follows that it was open to the FtT Judge to find that  the
    requirements of the immigration rules  cannot  be  met,  and  that  the
    appellant's return to Zimbabwe would not have a detrimental  impact  on
    DPN, such that it would be contrary to his best interests.


Discussion


13. I accept, as Mr Clarke submits, that it is for an  appellant  to  place
    before the respondent and the Tribunal, all  material  upon  which  the
    appellant relied to suggest that  the  consequences  of  removal  would
    interfere with the Article 8 rights of the family; R. (Kotecha) v  SSHD
    [2011] EWHC 2070 (Admin).


14. The appeal was dismissed  because  there  was  a  paucity  of  evidence
    regarding the arrangements for the care of DPN, and  in  particular,  a
    paucity of evidence to support the claim that since April 2017, DPN has
    been living with the appellant and he has contact with his  father  and
    stepmother, at weekends.  The Judge did not make an adverse credibility
    finding against the appellant, and although  her  claim  that  DPN  has
    lived with her since April 2017 appears to  have  been  unsupported  by
    other evidence, that is not to say it cannot therefore  be  correct  or
    reliable. It is to be noted that the grant of  discretionary  leave  to
    remain made to the appellant  previously,  was  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's relationship with DPN and her involvement in his life.  The
    evidence of DPN, even as set out in the witness  statement  before  the
    FtT, was capable of corroborating the appellant's account.  There is an
    issue between the parties as to whether DPN had attended  the  hearing,
    and although the Judge cannot be  criticised  for  referring  to  DPN's
    "failure to attend given his age", when it is  clear  that  whether  he
    attended or not, he was not called to give evidence,  in  my  judgement
    that evidence was at least capable of supporting the claim made by  the
    appellant and required careful consideration.  It was in  my  judgement
    capable of impacting upon the conclusion as to whether  DPN  now  lives
    with the appellant as she claims.


15. In my judgement, the failure to adequately address the evidence of DPN,
    whether or not he was called is material.  If the FtT  Judge  had  been
    satisfied from the evidence of the appellant and  DPN,  read  together,
    that DPN now lives with  the  appellant,  the  Judge  might  well  have
    concluded that the requirements of the immigration rules are  met,  and
    that the removal of  the  appellant  would  be  contrary  to  his  best
    interests.  I remind myself that where there is a defect or impropriety
    of a procedural nature in the proceedings at first instance,  this  may
    amount to a material error of law requiring the decision of the FtT  to
    be set aside.   The  criterion  to  be  applied  is  fairness  and  not
    reasonableness.


16. Reviewing the decision of FtT Judge Lodge as a whole,  I  have  reached
    the conclusion that in failing to adequately address  the  evidence  of
    DPN, the Judge reached a finding that was, for the reasons given by the
    Judge, irrational, such that there is a material error of  law  in  the
    decision and it must be set aside.


17.  I must then consider whether to remit the case to the FtT, or  to  re-
    make the decision myself.  I am unable  to  resolve  the  issue  as  to
    whether DPN had attended the hearing of the appeal and was available to
    give evidence.  The appellant maintains  that  having  made  a  witness
    statement, he did attend  the  hearing.  Mr  Clarke  submits  that  the
    information recorded by the Presenting Officer is that it was only  the
    appellant that attended the hearing.    There are plainly  concerns  as
    to the living arrangements and the arrangements for the  care  of  DPN,
    and there will plainly be a need for the Tribunal to hear evidence  and
    consider the  consequences  that  flow  from  such  findings  that  the
    Tribunal make.  In my judgment, the appropriate course is to remit  the
    matter to a newly constituted FtT for a fresh hearing.


Notice of Decision


18. The appeal is allowed, and the decision  of  FtT  Judge  Lodge  is  set
    aside.


  19. The matter is remitted to the FtT for hearing afresh, with no findings
      preserved. The parties will be advised of a hearing date in due course






    Signed                                  Date          19th May 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

