
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/05945/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                          |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 27 March 2018                          |  On 13 April 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                sharada limbu
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri instructed by Sam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 2 August 1985.   On
    31 July 2015, she applied for settlement in the United Kingdom with her
    father (the sponsor) who is a former  Gurkha  soldier.   On  20  August
    2015, the Entry  Clearance  Officer  ("ECO")  refused  the  appellant's
    application for entry clearance.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 9 January 2017, Judge Geraint  Jones  QC  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  on  20  September
    2017 the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Plimmer) granted the appellant  permission
    to appeal.

 4. On 9 October 2017, the ECO filed a rule 24 response seeking  to  uphold
    the judge's decision.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The judge had before him a substantial bundle  of  documents  from  the
    appellant running to 101 pages and he heard evidence from  the  sponsor
    (Mr Karna Limbu).  The judge set out a "chronology of events" at para 4
    of his determination and, having considered the evidence at paras 5-16,
    made a number of factual findings at para 17(i)-(viii).

 6. None of the judge's findings were challenged before me.

 7. The appellant's father (the sponsor) enlisted in the Brigade of Gurkhas
    on 18 October 1965.  He was honourably discharged on 29 October 1980.

 8. In 1968, the appellant's father married his first wife.  They have  six
    children, the appellant being the youngest born on 2 August 1985.

 9. In September 1983, the sponsor married his second wife.  She  continues
    to live in Nepal and they have one son who  was  born  on  24  December
    1984.

10. In March 2010, the appellant's father together with his first wife  and
    two sons were granted settlement in the UK under the  2009  Ministerial
    Policy relating to ex-Gurkha servicemen and their family members.  They
    all remain in the UK and have indefinite leave to enter or remain.

11. The appellant remained in Nepal after her father and mother came to the
    UK in March 2010.  It appears that she attended  school  in  Nepal  and
    between 2011 and 2014 undertook  a  degree  in  Humanities  and  Social
    Sciences at the Mahendra Multiple Campus in Dharan under  the  auspices
    of Tribhuvan University.

12. The appellant has, throughout, been financially supported by her father
    in the UK from his army pension.

13. The appellant applied for entry clearance to join her father in the  UK
    on 31  July  2015.   This  was,  therefore,  shortly  before  her  30th
    birthday.

14. At para 17 of his determination, Judge  Jones  QC  made  the  following
    findings of fact:

         "17. On the basis of the totality  of  the  relevant  evidence  and
             those documents to which I have been  referred.   I  make  the
             following findings of fact:

               i) I accept  Mr  Limbu's  evidence  concerning  his  military
                  career, the facts that he sets out  about  his  first  and
                  second marriages and the  details  that  gives  about  the
                  number  of  children  that  he  has  and   their   present
                  respective locations.

              ii) I find that the appellant is a young, healthy adult female
                  who has lived in Nepal in rented accommodation  since  her
                  father chose to relocate to the United Kingdom in 2010.  I
                  find that the appellant has  lived  independently  as  his
                  only to be expected of a young mature adult.  I find  that
                  the appellant has no physical or mental disabilities  that
                  require her to have any particular level of care.  She  is
                  entirely  self-caring  unable  to  live  a  normal   adult
                  independent life.

             iii)  I  find  that  the  appellant's   father   supports   her
                  financially by way of making his  army  pension  available
                  for her use and benefit.  I find that that would continue.
                   If and for so long as  necessary,  whilst  the  appellant
                  continues to reside in Nepal if  she  does  not  have  the
                  means to support herself.

              iv) I find that there is no  good  reason  why  the  appellant
                  should not enter the local employment  market  armed  with
                  such academic qualifications  as  she  has  been  able  to
                  accrue.  I appreciate that it might not be  easy  for  the
                  appellant to obtain employment of the type that she  would
                  prefer to have but, equally, that obtains as much in  this
                  country as it might in any other"

               v) I find that there is no emotional dependence  between  the
                  appellant and her father over  and  above  that  which  is
                  normal between a parent and adult child.   I  specifically
                  reject the evidence of both the appellant and  her  father
                  in so far as it is intended to convey  anything  over  and
                  above emotional ties that are usual between parents and an
                  adult  child.   I  specifically  reject   the   unreasoned
                  assertions that there is emotional "dependence".  If there
                  was "dependence" and certainly dependence  to  the  extent
                  that anybody thought that the appellant's well-being would
                  be harmed if the appropriate  emotional  support  was  not
                  available to her, then it is utterly surprising  that  her
                  father should have chosen  to  relocate  this  country  in
                  2010, leaving his adult daughter in Nepal.   I  also  note
                  that he has made only one visit to her in Nepal,  although
                  I acknowledge that that might be as a result of  financial
                  constraints.  It is common in Nepalese cases  to  find  an
                  assertion that it is culturally the norm for  children  to
                  be reliant upon their  parents  until  they  get  married.
                  That should not be confused with the proposition that  the
                  level of emotional involvement between  parent  and  adult
                  child amounts to emotional dependence.  I reject any  such
                  notion.

              vi) I find that the appellant is not in full  time  education.
                  I accept that she  may  be  re-sitting  some  examinations
                  relating to the degree course that she  undertook  2011  -
                  2014 but the very fact that she is re-sitting examinations
                  either indicates a lack of academic ability or a  lack  of
                  application to her studies was perhaps the  appellant  was
                  pursuing other interests during the years when she  should
                  have been applying herself to successfully completing  her
                  degree  course.   I  accept  that  she  was  in  full-time
                  education 2011 - 2014 as that is supported by the document
                  dated 23 March 2015 at  page  43.   That  document,  which
                  comes from the Mahendra Campus, ends with the paragraph "I
                  know nothing against a moral  character  and  wish  her  a
                  bright future".  That reads as good wishes for the  future
                  to  somebody  who  is  leaving  or  has  just   left   the
                  university.

             vii) I am entirely satisfied that the appellant has been living
                  in her single person independent household in Nepal  since
                  2010.  I find  that  the  father  has  been  living  in  a
                  separate household, as a matter of choice and not  arising
                  from any established necessity.

            viii) I find that there is a very modest degree of  family  life
                  between father and daughter, based upon little  more  than
                  the usual communication between  family  members  and  the
                  fact that the appellant  receives  financial  support,  at
                  least for the time being, from her father.   That  is  the
                  character and extent of that very modest family life"

15. Judge Jones QC then went on to consider  whether  the  appellant  could
    succeed under the relevant policy in respect  of  ex-Gurkha  servicemen
    and their families (Annex K) at paras 18-24.   He  concluded  that  she
    could not meet the requirements of that policy, in  particular  because
    she had formed "an independent family unit" in Nepal since  her  father
    had settled in the UK in 2010.

16. Importantly for the purposes of this appeal, the judge then went on  in
    paras 25-30  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  could  nevertheless
    succeed under Art 8 of the ECHR.  Whilst he accepted that the appellant
    had established, what he described as "very modest  family  life"  with
    her father, he nevertheless concluded that any  interference  would  be
    proportionate.  The judge said this:

         "25.  I turn to article 8 ECHR.  The starting point is  my  finding
             that there is very modest family life  between  the  appellant
             and her father  characterised  by  continued  contact  through
             electronic means and one visit by the appellant's  father.   I
             put the matter in that way because I am in no doubt  that  the
             appellant's father's family home is in the United Kingdom.

         26.  If the United Kingdom refuses to allow the appellant to settle
             in this country there will be no interference with the  nature
             and extent of the very modest family life which I  have  found
             to exist.  It will simply continue or, at least, will be  able
             to continue if the various parties wish it to do so.   Article
             8 is not a choice of country of residence provision and should
             not be treated as such.

         27.  When I look at paragraph 42 in the judgement of the  Court  of
             Appeal in R (Gurung) v Home Secretary [2013] 1 WLR 2546 it has
             to be seen against the factual  findings  in  that  case.   Mr
             Yqsim's position is that once I have made a finding that there
             is any degree of family life between  the  appellant  and  his
             parents then it must follow from the dictum of the  Master  of
             the Rolls at paragraph 42 in the Gurung  judgement  that  this
             appeal must be allowed.  He puts it on the basis that  section
             117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,
             which provides that effective immigration control  is  in  the
             public interest, does not negate  the  opinion  of  the  Upper
             Tribunal that in an historic  wrongs  case,  there  should  be
             something over and  above  the  expedient  of  firm  and  fair
             immigration control  to  weight  the  proportionality  balance
             against an appellant, such as this appellant.  The  dictum  to
             which I have referred is not a proposition of  law,  any  more
             than the dictum of the Upper Tribunal about the weight  to  be
             given to family life in an historic injustice  case  when  the
             proportionality exercise is undertaken  within  article  8(2).
             It is trite law that  the  proportionality  exercise  must  be
             undertaken at  the  date  of  this  appeal  and  not  on  some
             hypothetical basis relating to some earlier date.  That is why
             the nature  and  extent  of  the  actual  family  life  is  an
             important factor to be determined before  the  proportionality
             balancing exercise can be undertaken.

         28.  It would be wholly artificial and in  my  judgement  a  rather
             obvious error of law to proceed on the basis that just because
             the appellant might have been able to settle in  this  country
             many years ago, but for an identified historic  wrong  towards
             her  father,  that  automatically  translates  into  it  being
             disproportionate to deny her settlement now  (and  it  is  now
             that we are concerned  with),  in  circumstances  where  there
             could and would be no prejudice to the nature  and  extent  of
             the family life presently enjoyed between the adult  appellant
             and her father.  I put the matter in that way because there is
             no duty  on  the  United  Kingdom  to  enhance  the  presently
             existing very modest family life between the appellant and her
             father.  The dictum of the Upper Tribunal  suggests  otherwise
             and, to the extent that it does, it is incompatible with well-
             established  jurisprudence   to   the   contrary.    Emotional
             responses to  hard  facts  cannot  be  allowed  to  alter  the
             essential principles applicable in an article 8  appeal  where
             the Razgar approach is to be applied as at the  date  of  this
             appeal.

         29.  The proportionality exercise has to  take  place  against  the
             findings of fact that I have made concerning  the  nature  and
             quality of the family life presently  enjoyed.   There  is  no
             duty under article 8 for the  United  Kingdom  to  enhance  or
             improve the quality of family  life  that  became  established
             after  the  appellant's  father  chose  to  relocate  to  this
             country.  As I have found, that degree of family life will not
             be prejudiced or in any way diminished if  this  appellant  is
             not permitted to settle in the United Kingdom.  Article 8  has
             no compensatory principle within it, and it is not designed to
             be used (and should not be  used)  as  a  vehicle  to  provide
             perceived compensation or recompense to somebody whose  father
             met with an historic wrong.

         30.  Thus on the basis that the very modest degree of  family  life
             that has existed between the appellant and her  father,  which
             has existed for several years since his decision  to  relocate
             to this country, will not be prejudiced or diminished  by  the
             appellant not being able to take up residence in this country,
             I find that denying her settlement will not and cannot  amount
             to a breach of her and/or her father's right to a family life.
              For the reasons which I have given above, even if I was wrong
             in that conclusion, I do not regard the historic wrong done to
             the  appellant's  father  to  be  a  trump  cards  so  far  as
             proportionality is concerned and on the facts of this  case  I
             do not consider it disproportionate for the United Kingdom  to
             deny settlement to an appellant who, as I  have  found  above,
             cannot bring herself within the generous provisions  of  Annex
             K."

The Appellant's Challenge

17. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Jaisri  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law in applying Art 8 of the ECHR.  He submitted that,  having
    found that there was "very modest family life"  between  the  appellant
    and sponsor, the  judge  had  failed  to  give  proper  weight  to  the
    "historic injustice" perpetrated against ex-Gurkha servicemen and their
    family members.  He  submitted  that,  applying  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision in Ghising and Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic  wrong;  weight)
    [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC), in the absence of a bad immigration  history  or
    criminal behaviour, of which there was none in this case, the  historic
    wrong should  be  accorded  significant  weight  and  would  ordinarily
    determine the outcome of the  Art  8  proportionality  assessment.   Mr
    Jaisri submitted that in paras 27-30, the judge had failed to give  the
    'historic wrong' the required weight.  He submitted that was a material
    error of law and  invited  me  to  remake  the  decision  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8.

18. On behalf of the ECO, Mr Richards accepted that there  was  a  material
    error of law in the judge's approach to the weight to be given  to  the
    "historic injustice" perpetrated  against  the  appellant  through  her
    father, an ex-Gurkha serviceman.

19. He also invited me to remake  the  decision  and  made  no  submissions
    seeking to uphold the ECO's decision to refuse entry clearance.





Discussion

20. It was common ground that an "historic injustice" had been  perpetrated
    against the appellant's father and through him the  appellant  herself.
    Had the government's policy properly reflected an opportunity  for  ex-
    Gurkha servicemen to settle in the UK  with  their  dependent  families
    when the appellant's father was discharged in  October  1980  from  the
    Brigade of Gurkhas, I accept that both he and his family (including the
    appellant) would have settled in the UK.  Of course, the  sponsor,  the
    appellant's mother and her two older brothers did settle in the  UK  in
    March 2010 pursuant to the policy that came into effect in 2009.   This
    was, of course, a time when the  appellant  was  still  at  school  and
    shortly after, between 2011 and 2014,  went  to  university.   Although
    Judge Jones QC made no specific finding that the appellant  would  have
    accompanied her father and family to the UK  if  the  policy  had  been
    enforced earlier, that was clearly the evidence of the sponsor set  out
    at para 25 of his witness statement as follows:

         "25. It has always been  my  intention  to  settle  in  the  United
              Kingdom.  However, I was not allowed to apply for  settlement
              until 2009 after  my  daughter  turned  18.   Ex-Gurkhas  who
              retired after 1997 were allowed to apply  for  settlement  as
              early as 2006.   If  I  had  the  opportunity  to  apply  for
              settlement for my daughter before 2009, I would have  applied
              to  settle  before  my  daughter  had  turned  18,  but  this
              opportunity was denied to me.  I was not allowed to apply  to
              settle in the United Kingdom until 2009.  If I had the chance
              to settle earlier, then I would have  taken  the  opportunity
              and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  my  family.   I
              dedicated my life to serving the United  Kingdom.   I  fought
              for the British people, as it was my duty.   I  am  proud  of
              what I did.  We were appreciated by  the  British  government
              for our service but were not allowed to settle in the  United
              Kingdom.  If the Home Office allowed us to settle immediately
              after I retired from the Army, then my daughter Sharada would
              have been able to settle in the United Kingdom sooner."

21. Judge Jones QC did not call  into  question  the  truthfulness  of  the
    appellant's father and it was not suggested before me that I should not
    accept what the appellant's father says in para 25 about  the  family's
    settlement in the UK if the policy had been in force earlier.

22.  There  was,  therefore,  a  "historic  wrong"  perpetrated  upon   the
    appellant's father and through him the appellant herself.  Judge  Jones
    QC accepted that and he was right to do so.  However, in  paras  27-30,
    which I set out above, he gave little or any weight to  this  "historic
    injustice".  At para 27, he appears to call into question what was said
    by the Upper Tribunal in the Ghising and Others case.  There, the Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Peter Lane (as he then was) and UTJ Deborah Taylor)  made
    plan that the "historic injustice" should be given "substantial weight"
    (see [56]).  That followed from  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in
    Gurung and Others v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8.   At  [59],  the  Upper
    Tribunal continued:

         "...[we]  accept [Counsel for the appellant] submission that  where
         Art 8 is held to be engaged and the  fact  that  but  for  historic
         wrong the appellant would have been settled in the UK long  ago  is
         established, this will ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the
         proportionality  assessment;  and  determinate  in  an  appellant's
         favour ... We consider, [it] is the proper interpretation  of  what
         the Court of Appeal was saying when they referred to  the  historic
         injustice as being such  an  important  factor  to  be  taken  into
         account in  the  balancing  exercise.   ...  in  other  words,  the
         historic injustice issue will  carry  significant  weight,  on  the
         appellant's side of the balance, and  is  likely  to  outweigh  the
         matters relied upon by the respondent, where these  consist  solely
         of the public interest just described."

23.  The  reference  to  the  "public  interest  just  described"   is   to
    "maintaining of a firm immigration policy".  The Upper  Tribunal  noted
    at [60] that:

         "... a bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour may  still
         be sufficient to outweigh  the  powerful  factors  bearing  on  the
         appellant's side.  Being an adult child of a UK settled Gurkha  ex-
         serviceman is, therefore, not a 'trump card', in the sense that not
         very application by such a person will inevitably succeed.  But, if
         the respondent is relying only upon the public  interest  described
         by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41 of Gurung, then  the  weight
         to given to the historic injustice  will  not  normally  require  a
         decision in the appellant's favour."

24. In this appeal, although Judge Jones QC did  not  find  any  "emotional
    dependency" between the  appellant  and  her  father  (see  para  17(v)
    above), he did accept that "family life" existed between them albeit of
    a "very modest degree".  There were no countervailing  public  interest
    factors of the kind acknowledged by the Upper Tribunal in  Ghising  and
    Others to outweigh the "historic injustice" which would have  left  the
    appellant settled in the UK sometime after her  father  was  discharged
    from the Brigade of Gurkhas in 1980 if a lawful policy relating to  the
    settlement of ex-Gurkha servicemen  and  their  families  had  been  in
    effect at that time.  The appellant was born in August 1985 and  would,
    therefore, either have been born in the UK or would,  in  my  judgment,
    clearly on the evidence (which is uncontested) have come to the  UK  to
    settle with her father and family.  The judge failed to give proper  or
    any weight to that "historic injustice"  as  required  by  Ghising  and
    Others.  The judge was correct to say that  it  did  not  amount  to  a
    "trump card" but as the Upper Tribunal made  plain  it  must  be  given
    "substantial weight" and,  in  the  absence  of  countervailing  public
    interest  consideration  going  beyond  the  "maintenance  of  a   firm
    immigration policy" such as a bad immigration history  or  criminality,
    it is likely to lead to a decision in an appellant's favour because the
    public interest is of limited weight in those circumstances.

25. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge  materially  erred  in
    law in  his  approach  to  Art  8  and  his  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8.

26. As I have already indicated, Mr Richards, on behalf of the ECO, did not
    seek to make any submissions inviting me  to  dismiss  the  appeal.   I
    remake the decision allowing the appeal under Art 8 for  the  following
    reasons.

27. First, as Judge Jones QC found, there is family life  existing  between
    the appellant and her father, albeit of  a  "very  modest"  nature.   I
    accept that she continues to be financially dependent upon  her  father
    although, since he came  to  the  UK  in  2010,  she  has  been  living
    independently of her father, at school, university and subsequently.

28. Secondly, I accept that the ECO's decision interferes with  her  family
    life to the extent that it prevents her living  with  her  father  and,
    indeed, separating her from her family in the UK.

29. Thirdly, I accept that there has been a  "historic  wrong"  perpetrated
    against the appellant's father and through him the  appellant  herself.
    I accept that she would either have been born in the UK or  would  have
    settled with him in the UK as a child following his discharge from  the
    Brigade of Gurkhas in 1980 if a lawful policy of settlement had been in
    place.  That historic  wrong  is  entitled  to  be  given  "substantial
    weight"  and  have  a  significant  impact  upon  the   proportionality
    balancing exercise.  There is nothing in the evidence, and it  was  not
    suggested before me to be otherwise,  of  bad  immigration  history  or
    criminal behaviour.  The only  relevant  public  interest  is  that  of
    "maintaining  a  firm  immigration  policy"  under  s.117B(1)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Whilst I recognise  that
    the appellant is now 32  years  of  age.   She  is  an  adult  and  has
    completed, or nearly completed, her education.  Nevertheless, there  is
    nothing in the evidence, in my  judgment,  to  outweigh  the  "historic
    wrong" perpetrated against  her  through  her  father.   As  the  Upper
    Tribunal noted  in  Ghising  and  Others,  in  such  circumstances  the
    "historic  injustice"  would  be   "an   important   factor"   carrying
    "significant weight" such that it was "likely to outweigh"  the  public
    interest in a firm immigration policy.

30. In my judgment, the historic wrong does outweigh the public interest in
    this case such that the appellant's continued exclusion from the UK  to
    settle with her father and family is a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

31. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    I set that decision aside.

32. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under  Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

This was a case where, in my judgment, the appellant's  appeal  should  have
been allowed and it is appropriate to make a fee  award  for  the  full  fee
paid or payable.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               11 April 2018
