
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU056702015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 April 2017                     |On 2 May 2017                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DUPTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               MR BISHAN THAPA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Keelin McCarthy, Counsel instructed by Everest
Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge IF Taylor sitting at Stoke on 1  July  2016)
    dismissing his appeal on the papers against the decision  of  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer to refuse him entry clearance as the adult  dependant
    relative of his father, a former Gurkha.  The First-tier  Tribunal  had
    not made an anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not  consider  that  the
    appellant  requires  anonymity  for  these  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 20 February 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "The decision reached by the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  a  very
         brief one and did not give sufficient reasons  for  dismissing  the
         appeal.  In addition, the  Judge  did  not  make  any  findings  in
         relation to the letters from the office of the Village  Development
         Committee, which stated  that  the  appellant  was  unemployed  and
         dependent upon his father and mother.  As  a  consequence,  I  find
         that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  make  arguable  errors  of
         law."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Nepal, whose date of birth  is  26  June
    1985.  On 25 May 2011, the appellant's father  was  issued  with  entry
    clearance for the purpose of  settlement  as  a  Gurkha  veteran.   His
    mother was granted indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom in line
    with his father.  Both of them took up residence in the United  Kingdom
    on 17 August 2011.  The appellant was living in the same  household  as
    his parents at the time when they  applied  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He did not make a settlement application himself  as  he  was
    not eligible under the discretionary policy which was announced  on  21
    May 2009. This policy enabled members of the  Brigade  of  Gurkhas  who
    were  discharged  before  1  July  1997  to  obtain  settlement  on   a
    discretionary basis as a result  of  their  service.  The  policy  also
    covered spouses and children under  the  age  of  18  at  the  date  of
    application. It expressly excluded children aged over 18 at the date of
    application.

 4. The policy was adjusted at the beginning of January 2015 to allow adult
    children  of  former  Gurkhas  to  be  granted  settlement  in  certain
    circumstances. The new policy applied to applications made on or  after
    5 January 2015. The appellant made an application for settlement  after
    5 January 2015.  On 7 August 2015 an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (post-
    reference NEDE/3800125) gave his reasons for refusing  the  appellant's
    application.   He  accepted  that  the  appellant  met  the  qualifying
    criteria  for  consideration  under  the  Home  Secretary's  policy  as
    outlined in Annex K. His sponsor was present and  settled  in  the  UK.
    His sponsor had been granted settlement under  the  2009  discretionary
    arrangements.  The  appellant  was  outside  the  UK  at  the  time  of
    application, and he had been under the age of 18 at  the  time  of  his
    sponsor's discharge.  It was accepted that the sponsor would have  made
    an application to settle before 2009, had the  option  to  do  so  been
    available to the sponsor on his discharge from  the  Gurkhas  before  1
    July 1997.

 5. However, in order to qualify for entry clearance under the  policy,  an
    applicant must not normally have lived apart from the sponsor for  more
    than two years at the date of application or at any time,  unless  this
    was by reason of education or something similar (such that  the  family
    unit was maintained, albeit the applicant lived away) - for example, he
    had spent time at a boarding school, college or university as  part  of
    his full-time education during term time, but he  had  resided  in  the
    family home during the holidays.

 6. His mother and father had migrated to the United Kingdom on  17  August
    2011.  So, both his parents had been present and settled here for  over
    three years and ten months at the time of his current application.  So,
    he had been living apart from his sponsor for more than  two  years  on
    the date of application.  This was as a direct result  of  his  parents
    migrating to the UK, rather than as the result of him being  away  from
    the family unit as a consequence of educational or other  requirements.
    While the policy previously in force had  prevented  him  from  gaining
    entry to the UK, neither parent had decided to remain in Nepal with him
    in a family unit.

 7. He has stated that he was unemployed and that he  was  emotionally  and
    financially dependent upon his parents.  However, he was  30  years  of
    age at the date of application.  His parents had migrated to the United
    Kingdom by choice, over three years and ten months before the  date  of
    his application.  There was no evidence of any care arrangements having
    been put in place by his sponsor  before  he  migrated  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  His parents were content to leave without him, without making
    any obvious care arrangements for him.  So his parents had treated  him
    as an adult, who was able to care for himself.

 8. He was in good health, having completed his higher secondary studies in
    2010, and having spent the majority of his life in Nepal.   There  were
    no obvious factors preventing him from working in Nepal.  There was  no
    evidence of his living conditions being anything but  adequate.   There
    was no obvious reason why his father was unable to continue  supporting
    him financially, if he was to remain in Nepal.  No care arrangements or
    requirements in Nepal had been declared.   He  had  not  mentioned  any
    personal incapacity, and he had not declared any medical conditions  or
    disability.   So,  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the   appellant   was
    financially and emotionally dependent upon his UK sponsor, as  required
    under Annex K, paragraph 15.

 9. The Entry Clearance Officer went on to consider Article 8 ECHR and  the
    cases of Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and Ghising [2013] UKUT 00567  (IAC).
    He said that he was satisfied that the reasons for  refusal  outweighed
    the consideration of historical injustice.  Family life could  continue
    as it may have done in the past.  He had not  established  family  life
    with his parents over and above that which normally exists  between  an
    adult child and his parents.  This was shown by the sponsor's  decision
    to move to the UK without him.  The effect of  the  historic  injustice
    had not been such as to prevent him  from  leading  a  normal  life  in
    Nepal. So, it did not outweigh  the  proportionality  assessment  under
    Article 8.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant asked for his appeal to be decided without a hearing.  In
    his subsequent decision promulgated on 19 July 2016, Judge Taylor  said
    that he had been assisted by  a  slim  bundle  of  documents  from  the
    respondent, but there had been no bundle of documents provided  by  the
    appellant.  He also had possession of the appellant's notice of  appeal
    containing his grounds of appeal dated 2 September 2015.

11. As noted at paragraph [7] of his decision, the appellant's case in  the
    grounds of appeal was that his parents had made visits once a year from
    the UK to Nepal in order to see him, and that therefore the family unit
    had been maintained  by  these  visits  and  also  by  contact  on  the
    telephone.  As a consequence, he had not in fact been  apart  from  his
    parents for more  than  two  years.   He  further  submitted  that  the
    evidence  of  their  visits  to  Nepal  clearly  showed  that  he   was
    emotionally dependent upon his parents.

12. In paragraph [8], the Judge noted that paragraph 15 of the policy  said
    that evidence of financial dependency may include  the  fact  that  the
    applicant has not been supporting him or herself and working,  but  has
    been financially supported "out of necessity" by his sponsor,  who  has
    sent money regularly from the UK.

13. At paragraph [9], the Judge noted the appellant's case in  the  grounds
    of appeal that his parents were supporting him regularly by sending him
    money, as evidenced by recent remittance slips,  and  that  his  father
    would bring him money. He also said that sometimes  he  had  to  borrow
    money from a neighbour, and the money was paid back  when  his  parents
    came to visit him.  He  stated  that  Nepal,  being  an  underdeveloped
    country, had very limited  job  opportunities  available,  and  it  was
    almost  impossible  for  British  Gurkha   families   to   access   job
    opportunities there.

14. The Judge set out his findings at paragraphs [11]-[17].  He found  that
    the appellant had been separated from his parents  for  more  than  two
    years, and there was no argument to suggest that the  family  unit  had
    been maintained, notwithstanding the appellant living away, because the
    separation was not of a result of education or something similar  which
    might include working away for some time.

15. He accepted that regular remittances had been sent to the appellant  by
    his father, and also that when his father  visited  the  appellant,  he
    took some money with him.  But under paragraph 15 of  the  policy,  the
    appellant had to establish that this money was out of  necessity.   The
    evidence from the Office of the Village Development Committee was  that
    the appellant had been taking care of the land  owned  by  his  father,
    "which suggests he receives an income from this land  and/or  is  self-
    sufficient."

16. In any event, the appellant  was  30  years  of  age  at  the  date  of
    application, and there  was  no  obvious  factor  preventing  him  from
    working in Nepal.  There was no evidence  that  his  living  conditions
    were anything other than adequate, and his father could  still  support
    the appellant  financially  if  he  remained  in  Nepal.   He  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant was financially and emotionally  dependent
    upon his sponsor.  Accordingly, he did not meet the requirements of the
    respondent's policy.

17. At paragraph [17], the Judge addressed Article 8 ECHR.   He  said  that
    with regard to Article 8 and the two cases of Gurung  and  Ghising,  he
    was not satisfied that the  appellant  enjoyed  family  life  with  his
    parents in the United Kingdom.  Family life  between  adults  was  only
    established where there are emotional ties  between  the  adults  which
    went beyond the emotional ties to be expected.  In the circumstances of
    this case, he was not satisfied that there  were  any  ties  that  went
    beyond the normal ones to be expected.  Although the appellant was sent
    money, this was not out of necessity.  As the appellant did  not  enjoy
    family life with his parents, any Article 8 argument fell  away.   With
    regard to private life, this was confined to his experiences in  Nepal.



18. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the respondent's policy, and  also
    on human rights grounds.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

19. For the  purposes  of  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant relied on legal representatives based  in  Kathmandu,  Nepal.
    For the purposes of his appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  appellant
    instructed Everest Law Solicitors.  They compiled a bundle of documents
    for the hearing in the Upper Tribunal which  contained  a  considerable
    amount of material which did not appear to have placed before the First-
    tier Tribunal. At my invitation, Ms McCarthy focused on  the  documents
    which had been seen by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

20. Ms McCarthy had prepared an extensive skeleton argument. She  developed
    her error of law challenge by reference to this skeleton  argument  and
    by reference to the documentary material which was  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  She submitted that the Judge had set too  high  a
    standard of proof.  He had not applied the correct test with regard  to
    the existence of family life, or with regard to dependency.  The  Judge
    also failed to consider  all  the  relevant  evidence.   There  was  no
    absolute requirement for there to be emotional dependency in order  for
    family life between adult children and parents to exist.  It  was  also
    not required under Article 8 that the financial dependency should be  a
    dependency of necessity.

21. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Melvin relied on the fact  that
    the documents before the Judge included a land  ownership  registration
    certificate showing that the sponsor was the owner of four  parcels  of
    cultivated land.  So, it would be a reasonable inference, he submitted,
    that the appellant could make a living  from  agriculture.   It  was  a
    matter for the appellant what evidence he chose to provide to the First-
    tier Tribunal by way of appeal, and he could not  sustainably  complain
    about the outcome.  Although brief, the decision  dealt  with  all  the
    salient evidence and issues.

22. In reply, Ms McCarthy submitted that the Judge  had  wrongly  conflated
    the exercise of considering the appellant under  the  policy  with  the
    exercise which was required under Article 8 ECHR.  The  Judge  had  not
    adopted  the  correct  approach  to  resolving  whether  the  appellant
    qualified for entry clearance under Article 8 ECHR.

Discussion

23. As well as the land registration certificate relied on  by  Mr  Melvin,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had before him  the  following  documents
    which are pertinent to the error of law challenge.

24. In a letter dated 22 August 2015, the sponsor said as follows:

         "He is depending on us, though he is compelled to live in Nepal  at
         my own home, looking after his married  brother,  Milan  Thapa  (my
         emphasis)."

25. On 15 April 2015, the Records Office for the British Gurkhas in Pokhara
    issued a certified copy of the  "Kindred  Roll"  held  by  the  Records
    Office in respect of the sponsor's relatives.   The  relatives  on  the
    Kindred Roll comprise the sponsor's wife, three  sons,  two  daughters,
    and the sponsor's parents.  The sponsor's second son  is  Milan  Thapa,
    who was born on 14 October 1982.

26. There is a translation of a recommendation letter issued by the  Office
    of the Village Development Committee.  According  to  the  translation,
    the date of the recommendation letter is 20 August 2015.  However,  one
    version of this document bears  "a  verification  of  a  true  copy  of
    original' stamp, apparently made by a notary public on 2  August  2015.
    The letter states that the parents of Mr Bishan Thapa had gone  to  the
    UK, "letting their youngest son to take care of the land owned  by  his
    father;  as  there  is  not  any  income  source  for  livelihood   and
    nourishment of Mr Bishan Thapa, his father Mr Khadka Bahadur  Thapa  is
    bearing all his financial expenses."

27. In an earlier letter dated 2 February 2015, the Chief District  Officer
    for Syangja District certified that the  appellant  was  unmarried  and
    living in the guardianship of his parents, without doing a job  at  any
    Government or non-Government offices.

28. This letter does not in terms confirm that the appellant is unemployed.
     All it confirms is that he is not doing a job at any Government or non-
    Government office.

29. With regard to the letter from the Office of  the  Village  Development
    Committee, Ms McCarthy submits that the Judge's finding at the  end  of
    paragraph [13] is perverse and/or inadequately reasoned, as the finding
    is directly contradicted by the contents of the letter.   However,  the
    claim made in the letter is a non-sequitur, since the  role  of  taking
    care of land is likely to lead to an income being  generated  and/or  a
    means of subsistence, rather than the opposite. It is also contradicted
    by the surrounding evidence, which is that the land which the appellant
    has been left behind to look after includes cultivated land. So it  was
    open to the Judge to attach no weight to the bare assertion made in the
    letter, having regard to the guidance given in Tanveer Ahmed.

30. Moreover, assuming the role of a caretaker of property  is  a  form  of
    employment, for which the appellant could expect to be  remunerated  by
    his father. The appellant was also, according to his  father,  employed
    in another useful role, which was to look after  his  married  brother,
    Milan Thapa.

31. Although not cited to me, I have had regard to Muse &  Others  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10 on challenges to the adequacy of a
    judge's reasons.  In South Bucks District Council v Porter  (2)  [2004]
    UKHL 33, cited with approval by the Court of Appeal  at  paragraph  33,
    Lord Brown said:

         "The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration."

32. Although the "absence of income or means of subsistence" claim made  in
    the letter from the Office of the Village Development Committee  was  a
    material consideration, the Judge was not bound to  refer  to  it.  His
    reasoning does not give rise to a substantial doubt that he  failed  to
    reach a rational decision on relevant grounds.

33. It was open to the appellant to elect for an oral hearing, at which his
    father would have had the opportunity to give oral evidence in  support
    of his appeal, and thus to be cross-examined on  the  letter  from  the
    Office of the Village Development Committee and on his  own  statement.



34. On the limited evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, it was
    open  to  the  Judge  not  to  be  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was
    financially or emotionally dependent upon his father,  and  I  consider
    that the Judge has given adequate reasons for reaching this conclusion.



35. It follows inexorably from the Judge's  sustainable  findings  of  fact
    that questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test did not fall to  be  answered
    in the appellant's favour, on either family or  private  life  grounds.
    So there was no error in the Judge holding that the appellant could not
    succeed on Article 8 grounds outside  the  scope  of  the  policy.  The
    question of historic  injustice  did  not  arise  in  a  discussion  on
    proportionality, as the appellant had  not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that Article 8 was engaged.  The Judge did not apply too high a
    standard to the question of whether there was family life,  given:  (a)
    the appellant's age, (b) the length of separation from his parents, (c)
    his clear ability to live independently from his  parents  without  the
    supervision of a carer; and (d) the responsibilities with which he  had
    been entrusted.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and so the decision stands. This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 25 April 2017

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
