
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05732/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th September 2017                         |On 12th September 2017        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                         Mr Dulguunmurun Jamsranjav
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel, instructed by Good Advice UK
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant, Mr Dulguunmurun Jamsranjav, against
    the  decision  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Keith   sitting   at
    Harmondsworth.   In  that  decision,  which  was  promulgated  on  10th
    November 2016, Judge Keith dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against
    refusal of his application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on
    private and family life grounds.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and  I
    therefore cannot see that any useful purpose would be served by  making
    one now.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Mongolia who  was  born  on  7th  January
    1995.  The  background  to  his  appeal  is  accurately  summarised  at
    paragraphs 2 to 5 of the judge's decision:

         2.   The Appellant's  father  had  previously  entered  the  United
             Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student.  The Appellant and his sister had
             lived with  their  grandmother  in  Mongolia.   The  Appellant
             subsequently applied for, and was granted, leave to remain  as
             a dependent child  of  his  father.   He  entered  the  United
             Kingdom on 10th June 2008, aged 13 years, with leave to remain
             until 8th May 2015.

         3.   On 28th April 2015 the Appellant applied for indefinite  leave
             to remain as a child of a settled  person,  specifically,  his
             father.  The Respondent refused his application  on  the  same
             date.

         4.   On 7th May 2015 the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  on
             the  basis  of  his  family  and  private  life.    With   his
             application  the  Appellant's  solicitors  referred   to   the
             Appellant's sister having applied to  register  as  a  British
             citizen, as the child of her father, who had indefinite  leave
             to remain.  The Appellant had previously made  an  application
             for settlement on the same basis but this had been refused  as
             both his parents were not settled in the United Kingdom at the
             time of his application.

         5.   The Appellant referred to the fact that the rest of his family
             intended to remain in the United Kingdom  as  his  sister  was
             applying to become  a  British  citizen  and  his  mother  was
             seeking to vary her leave to remain as the spouse of a settled
             person.  It was unjustifiably harsh to expect the Appellant to
             return to Mongolia where he would be at risk  of  destitution.
             He was also in the middle of his university  studies  and  had
             not yet obtained a degree, which would affect his  chances  of
             self-sufficiency in Mongolia.

 4. At the time of the appeal before Judge Keith, the appellant was in  the
    second year of a three-year degree course  in  which  he  was  studying
    civil engineering.   Although  the  appellant's  mother  had  initially
    joined his father in the United Kingdom, she had subsequently  returned
    to Mongolia and it  appeared  that  her  marriage  to  his  father  had
    effectively come to an end.  The Appellant  and  his  sister,  however,
    chose to remain with  their  father  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    Appellant now has little if any contact with his mother.   On  8th  May
    2013, the Appellant's father was granted indefinite leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom and, in June 2014, he  and  the  Appellant's  sister
    applied  to  become  British  citizens.  The  appellant   was   however
    ineligible to make this application due to his age.  At the time of the
    hearing before Judge Keith, he had been living in  the  United  Kingdom
    lawfully for a period of eight years  and  was  residing  in  the  same
    household as his father and his sister.

 5. The grounds of appeal do not  make  any  complaint  about  the  judge's
    primary findings of fact. Rather, they focus upon his analysis  of  the
    law as he applied it those findings.

 6. The first complaint concerns whether the judge was  right  to  consider
    that there  were  no  compelling  circumstances  (falling  outside  the
    contemplation of the Immigration Rules) that merited  consideration  of
    Article 8.

 7. The judge began by correctly  observing  (at  paragraph  36)  that  the
    Immigration Rules limit applications for  leave  to  remain  for  adult
    dependent  relatives  to  those  with  physical  or   other   analogous
    dependencies on their UK Sponsors. He thereafter framed the question as
    to whether it was justifiable to consider the application outside those
    Rules in the following way:

         The factual question in this case was  whether  there  was  such  a
         dependency for which the Immigration Rules could not cater.

    Thus stated, it seems to me that the question was posed  too  narrowly.
    The quality of the appellant's dependency (if any) upon his father  and
    sister was but one factor in deciding  whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances that warranted consideration  outside  the  Rules.  Other
    circumstances - which, through referred to in the passage  setting  out
    the appellant's immigration  background  (above),  were  not  expressly
    considered - included the fact that the Appellant was the only  one  of
    the three who did not qualify for indefinite leave to remain under  the
    Rules. He therefore faced the prospect of having to return to  Mongolia
    alone if he was unable to persuade his father and  sister  to  give  up
    their settled status in the UK and prospects of British citizenship  in
    order to accompany him  to  their  country  of  origin.   That,  in  my
    judgment,  was  a  compelling  circumstance  that  of  itself   merited
    consideration of the appeal outside the Rules. Nevertheless, this error
    does not seem to have been material to the outcome of the appeal, given
    that the judge did in fact consider the appeal outside  the  Rules.   I
    therefore find that the failure to find  compelling  circumstances  was
    not a material error of law. It is thus necessary to  consider  whether
    there was any other error of law in the analysis of the appeal  outside
    the Rules.

 8. The judge considered the existence of family life at paragraphs 36  and
    37.  At paragraph  38,  he  considered  the  issue  of  proportionality
    before, at paragraph 39, returning to the issue of private life.

 9. The judge, quite rightly, did not assume the existence of  family  life
    given that the Appellant  is  now  an  adult.  He  therefore  found  it
    necessary to consider whether there was anything  over  and  above  the
    ordinary emotional ties  that  typically  exist  between  adult  family
    members.  In considering that question, the judge said as follows:

         The Appellant  was  not,  in  reality,  financially  dependent  (as
         distinct from his father providing him with financial support)  and
         there was no reason to think that his relationship with his  sister
         and father was anything beyond the normal relations of a university
         student living at home.

10. The judge expressed a similar sentiment in paragraph 37  when  he  said
    this:

         The Appellant's circumstances in this regard were entirely common -
         he lives at home while studying at university ...

11. It is of course always possible to describe  a  person's  situation  as
    "typical" if it is defined by reference to  his  actual  circumstances.
    It was thus no doubt accurate to describe the appellant's circumstances
    as typical of "a university student living at home". However, this  was
    not a legally correct approach.  The appropriate question  was  whether
    this particular university student was typical  of  the  generality  of
    adults who retain an emotional attachment to  other  adult  members  of
    their family.   By  posing  the  question  that  he  did,  the  judge's
    reasoning was both syllogistic and circular. It thus inevitably led him
    to conclude that family life had not been established. I therefore hold
    it to have been perverse to find  that  the  Appellant  did  not  enjoy
    family life with his father and his sister. The question remains as  to
    whether this error of law was germane to the outcome of the appeal.

12. At paragraph 39, the judge dealt with the issue of private life.  It is
    difficult fully to understand whether or  not  he  was  accepting  that
    private life existed.  This is what he said:

         With regard to his private life, once again, I concluded  that  the
         Appellant's circumstances of his studies and  friendships  did  not
         merit consideration  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   There  was
         nothing  preventing  either  continuing  in  Mongolia,  where   the
         Appellant has lived the majority of  his  life;  where  his  mother
         lives; where he has friends; and where he  is  able  to  speak  and
         study.  In reality, this case centred on the Appellant's desire for
         a better standard of education and career  prospects  -  those  are
         factors which do not engage the Appellant's human rights.

13. Although not entirely clear, it seems to me that the judge was  finding
    that the factors to which he alluded did not constitute a private life.
     If that is what the judge intended to convey, then I  hold  that  this
    was also a perverse conclusion.  Engaging in study, together  with  the
    consequent establishment of relations with tutors and  fellow  students
    alike, clearly does  constitute  private  life.   Again,  the  question
    remains as to whether this error of law was germane to the  outcome  of
    the appeal.

14. The next question that the judge was required to consider  was  whether
    the consequences of the Appellant's removal were sufficiently grave  to
    engage the potential operation of  Article  8.   At  the  beginning  of
    paragraph 38 the judge said this:

         Had I concluded otherwise (i.e. that Article 8 was engaged) I would
         have concluded that while the Appellant did have a family  life  it
         was not interfered with to a sufficient extent to engage Article  8
         - the Appellant could continue to see his family life in the United
         Kingdom for visits or if he applies for a student  visa;  and  that
         any such interference was lawful as being in  accordance  with  the
         Immigration Rules.  I would  also  have  concluded  that  any  such
         interference was proportionate, noting the  need  to  maintain  the
         purpose of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  did  not  prevent  the
         Appellant applying for a student visa, but which  did  prevent  him
         from circumventing those Rules as a means of obtaining settlement.

15. The judge thereby effectively considered stages 2 through to 5  of  the
    classic analysis of Lord Bingham of Cornhill  in  the  case  of  Razgar
    [2005] UKHL 27.   Taking those stages in turn, I am satisfied that  the
    judge erred in holding that Article 8 was not engaged by the  facts  of
    this appeal.  It is trite law that once  private  and  family  life  is
    established, the threshold for engagement of Article 8 in removal cases
    is not an especially high one.  Indeed, it is difficult  to  imagine  a
    greater interference with private and family life than the removal of a
    person from the country where it  has been established. This too, then,
    was an error of  law.  The  cumulative  effect  of  these  errors  will
    nevertheless not be material to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  if  the
    remainder  of  the  judge's  analysis  (which  he  considered  in   the
    alternative) was sound.

16.  The  judge  found  that  the  decision  was  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules and therefore in accordance with the law.   That  was
    not an error of law.  Indeed, as Lord Bingham made clear, the answer to
    the third question will almost always be answered affirmatively.

17. The next question is whether there was a legitimate aim in the removing
    the appellant.  Again, Lord Bingham made it clear  that  this  question
    will usually be answered affirmatively.  The  legitimate  aim  in  this
    context was the maintenance of the economic wellbeing  of  the  country
    through the consistent application of immigration controls.

18. The final question, therefore, is whether the  judge  made  a  material
    error of law in conducting  (in  the  alternative)  his  assessment  of
    proportionality.  If not, then the earlier errors of law  that  I  have
    identified will have been immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.

19. The judge only dealt expressly with the issue of proportionality in the
    final sentence of paragraph 38, quoted above.  That does  not  mean  to
    say, however, that the other factors which he identified at the earlier
    stages of the analysis were not also relevant. In the  final  analysis,
    the question for the judge was whether the Appellant  could  reasonably
    be expected to enjoy private and/or family life in Mongolia.   Relevant
    to this was whether the Appellant's private and family life in  the  UK
    had been  established  at  a  time  when  his  immigration  status  was
    precarious or (as it is sometimes put) whether he  had  any  legitimate
    expectation that he would be allowed to settle.  However  the  question
    is framed, it is clear that the appellant  was  always  aware  that  he
    might not be able to settle in the United Kingdom  and  that  he  might
    thus be required to continue his private and family life  in  Mongolia.
    Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    therefore required the judge to attach  little  weight  to  it.   Thus,
    whilst  the  judge  was  wrong  to  conclude  that   the   element   of
    precariousness prevented the appellant from establishing the  existence
    of private life, he was nevertheless right to hold that  little  weight
    was to be accorded to it in the final  assessment  of  proportionality.
    So far as family life is concerned, whilst the  judge  took  them  into
    account at the  wrong  stage  of  his  analysis,  he  was  nevertheless
    entitled to have regard to the  fact  that  the  appellant's  formative
    years had been spent in Mongolia, that he had relatives  who  continued
    to reside in  Mongolia,  that  he  had  a  facility  in  the  Mongolian
    language, that as national of Mongolia he had a legal right  to  reside
    in that country, and that there was no evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    time, effort and money he had expended upon his studies in  the  United
    Kingdom would be wasted or that he would be  unable  to  continue  with
    those studies in Mongolia. The judge was thus entitled to conclude that
    the  Appellant's  removal  in  consequence  of  the  refusal   of   his
    application  would  strike  a  fair  balance  between  his  rights  and
    interests on the one hand, and the public interest  in  the  consistent
    application of immigration controls on the other.

20. It follows from the above, that whilst I have every sympathy  with  the
    Appellant's predicament, and despite the errors of law  in  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  decision  that  I  have  identified,  this  is  not  an
    appropriate case in  which  to  exercise  my  discretion  to  set  that
    decision aside.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed



Signed                              Date: 11th September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly


