
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU052572015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th July 2017                             |On 20th July 2017             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Mrs srijana thulung subba
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jaisri (instructed by Raiyad, Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    against the Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Sweet.  Following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on  16th  November  2016,  in  a  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 2nd December 2016 Judge Sweet allowed this Human
    Rights appeal.

 2. For the sake of continuity and clarity I shall continue to refer to the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent  although  she  is  in  truth  the
    Appellant before the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant of the Immigration Rules. The application was refused  on
    1st September 2015. The reasons for the refusal were that, based  on  a
    number of inconsistencies in the marriage interview, the  Secretary  of
    State was not satisfied that the marriage was subsisting  or  that  the
    couple intended to live together permanently as husband and wife.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  her
    spouse and from the Appellant's mother-in-law.

 5. The Judge stated at paragraph 21, correctly, that the burden  of  proof
    in meeting the Immigration Rules is on the Appellant on the balance  of
    probabilities. The judge then went on  to  state  that  the  burden  of
    showing that a marriage and relationship were not  genuine  is  on  the
    Secretary of State, particularly if the Secretary of State alleged that
    the marriage is a sham marriage. In that  the  Judge  fell  into  error
    because in this case the Secretary of State had not made an  allegation
    that the marriage was a sham marriage. The Secretary of State  was  not
    satisfied that the requirements of Appendix FM were  met,  namely  that
    the relationship was subsisting or that the  couple  intended  to  live
    permanently together as husband and wife. Those are requirements of the
    Rules and the burden falls squarely on the Appellant to satisfy that.

 6. At paragraph 24 the Judge expressed himself dissatisfied with  much  of
    the evidence. He accepted that there were a number of discrepancies  in
    the evidence given at the marriage interview, for  example  as  to  the
    purchase and exchange of rings. He also  found  that  their  respective
    oral evidence was unsatisfactory in relation to  their  evidence  about
    the spouse's knowledge of the Appellant's difficulties with  her  first
    spouse. The Judge was not  persuaded  by  the  reasons  given  for  the
    spouse's father not attending the wedding, the reasons varying  between
    the fact that he had a flight arranged and/or he could not obtain  time
    off work. The Judge also considered it significant  that  the  marriage
    took place only a  few  days  after  the  Appellant's  leave  had  been
    curtailed. The Judge then took into account  the  Appellant's  mother's
    evidence that the parties were still getting to know each other and had
    not spent enough quality time to get to know each  other  due  to  work
    commitments. The Judge noted that as they only started living  together
    from April 2015 there was no reason why they  had  to  get  married  as
    early as 7 April 2015. The judge  also  commented  that  their  conduct
    together at the hearing did not indicate that they were  in  a  genuine
    relationship.

 7. In the next paragraph the Judge went on to say that the burden of proof
    on showing that this was a sham marriage and the  relationship  is  not
    genuine is on the Secretary of State. In that the Judge was wrong. As I
    have already indicated there was no suggestion that  this  was  a  sham
    marriage and the burden of proof lay squarely on the Appellant.

 8. Mr Jaisri tried to argue that when the Judge went on to say that he was
    prepared to accept on the balance of probabilities that it was  genuine
    relationship  that  rescued  matters.   However,  that   one   sentence
    following on from incorrectly applying the  burden  of  proof  and  the
    preceding paragraph indicating all of the problems  with  the  evidence
    means that I cannot agree that that one sentence saves the decision.

 9. The error of law going to the  heart  of  the  case  it  is  clearly  a
    material error of law meaning that the decision must be  set  aside  in
    its entirety.

10. As the appeal needs to be heard de novo  both  parties  agreed  it  was
    appropriate  to  remit  it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
    rehearing.



 Notice of Decision



    The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the
    extent that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  and
    the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for a
    full rehearing on all issues.




          There was no application for an  anonymity  order  and  I  see  no
reason to make one.




Signed                              Date 20th July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


