
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05530/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 29th March 2019     On 3rd April 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    [A A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Abdul Yusuf, Counsel, instructed by Kingswood
                    Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr. S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national Bangladesh, born in the United Kingdom on
       20 December 2010.On his 7th birthday application was made on his
       behalf for leave to remain on the basis of his family life. He lives
       with his parents, Tahima [B] and Mohamed [A] and his younger sister,
       [ZA]. All are nationals of Bangladesh. His parents leave expired in
       2014 and they claimed they were being maintained by friends as they
       were not permitted to work

    2. His application was refused on 12 February 2018. It was considered
       under the provisions of appendix FM but could not succeed because
       neither parent had the necessary immigration status. In terms of his
       private life the respondent considered paragraph 276 ADE(1)(iii) and
       concluded it would be reasonable for him to leave the United Kingdom
       with his parents. The respondent did not see any exceptional
       circumstances whereby the decision would result in unjustifiably
       harsh consequences for the family. Reference was made to the section
       55 obligation.

    3. The appeal contended that the minor appellant had only known life in
       the United Kingdom and had only basic Bengali.

The First tier Tribunal

    4. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge JL Bristow at
       Birmingham on 17 July 2018. In a decision promulgated on 31 July 2018
       it was dismissed. Both parties were represented and it was agreed the
       requirements of appendix FM were not met. However, it was argued that
       paragraph 276 ADE applied, the relevant issue being whether it would
       be reasonable to expect the appellant to leave.

    5. His parents evidence was to the effect that his parents would not be
       supported by their families in Bangladesh and that they would be in
       parlous circumstances if returned. The judge did not accept the
       background was as described. The judge concluded the appellant was at
       an age when he could adapt to living in a different country. The
       judge then went on to consider freestanding article 8 factors and the
       provisions of section 117 B. The notably, the judge does not refer to
       section 117 B (6).

The Upper Tribunal

    6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis in the absence of any
       criminality on the part of his parents the judge had not identified
       powerful reasons to justify the child being required to leave the
       United Kingdom.

    7. At hearing, the presenting officer accepted that there were errors of
       law in the decision as it did not refer to relevant case law and
       statutory provisions.

    8. The grant of permission referred to the absence of reference to
       MA(Pakistan) on the application of MA) and others [2016] EWA Civ 705.
       The Court of Appeal there indicated that for a child to have resided
       in the United Kingdom for 7 years represented a factor of some weight
       leaning in favour of leave to remain being granted. The report
       referred to the need for strong reasons for refusing leave in such
       cases. After 7 years the child will have put down roots and developed
       social, cultural and educational links and it was likely to be highly
       disruptive if they are required to leave.

    9. The decision contains no reference to section 117 B (6) which was a
       relevant consideration in the family dynamics. Guidance has now been
       given in the decision of KO (Nigeria) and Others (Appellants) v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC
       53. This was published after the impugned decision but nevertheless
       the law must be applied and it is now understood. Furthermore, there
       is no reference to the respondent's published guidance on this issue.

   10. I indicated to the parties that this was a suitable case where the
       decision could be remade without the need for further evidence.
       Bearing in mind the accepted facts and the case law I am driven to
       the conclusion that it would be a disproportionate breach of article
       8 to refuse the appellant and his family members leave to remain.

   11. On the basis of what has been agreed between the parties no further
       written reasons are required. The requirements of subparagraph
       40(3)(a) and (b) of the Upper Tribunal procedural rules are met. I
       therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
       remake it, allowing the appeal.

Decision

   12. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge JL Bristow materially errs
       in law and is set aside. I remake the decision allowing the appeal on
       article 8 grounds.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.
29th March 2019

