
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05367/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2018                   |On 19 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A M G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Bundock, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    To preserve the anonymity direction deemed  necessary  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal, I make an anonymity order  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any
information regarding the proceedings which would be likely to lead  members
of the public to identify the appellant.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heatherington,   promulgated   on
18/05/2018 which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.



Background

3.    The Appellant was born on  23/06/1951  and  is  a  national  of  South
Africa. On  16/03/2017  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for leave to remain in the UK.



The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Heatherington ("the Judge") allowed the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision on article 8 ECHR  grounds.  Grounds  of  appeal  were
lodged and on 2 November 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Frances  gave  permission
to appeal stating

    "It is arguable that the Judge failed to apply the very high  threshold
    applicable in Article 3 cases following D v UK, N v  UK  and  GS(India)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 40. The Judge arguably misdirected herself in assessing
    Article 8. The grounds are arguable. "



The Hearing

5.    For the respondent, Mr Walker adopted the  terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal. He told me that  the  Judge  fails  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
finding that the threshold for engaging article  3  in  a  medical  case  is
approached in this case. He referred me to N 2005 UKHL 31, D v UK (1997)  24
ECHR and GS (India); EO (Ghana); GM (India); PL (Jamaica);  BA  (Ghana)  and
KK (DRC) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 . Relying on GS (India), Mr  Walker  told
me  that  the  appellant's  article  8  claim  cannot  succeed  because  the
appellant's claim cannot succeed on article 3 medical grounds. He  urged  me
to set the decision aside.

6.    (a) For the appellant, Mr Bundock adopted the terms  of  his  rule  24
response. He told me that the grounds of appeal do not identify an error  of
law and  that  the  Judge's  findings  of  fact  are  flawless.  Relying  on
Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] 1 WLR 1360 he told me that the was no error  in
the Judge's decision making and that the Judge gives  adequate  reasons  for
finding that the article 3 threshold is breached.

(b)   Mr Bundock took me through the history of the appellant's  application
and told me that the Judge's article 8 assessment is flawless.  He  told  me
that the Judge took correct guidance in  law  and  that  the  Judge's  fact-
finding process is beyond  criticism.  He  told  me  that  the  respondent's
grounds of appeal focus on medical issues, when the  Judge  has  made  clear
findings that article 8 private life exists. He told  me  that  the  Judge's
article 8 decision is  not  dependent  upon  the  article  3  decision,  but
proceeds  on  different  facts  and  circumstances.  He   said   there   was
considerable force in the article 8 private life findings.

(c)   Mr Bundock urged me to dismiss the appeal and to  allow  the  decision
to stand.



Analysis

7.    In AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64 it  was  decided  that  the
European Court had not ruled that on the medical evidence adduced  it  would
in fact have been a violation of  Article  3  to  remove  Mr  Paposhvili  to
Georgia, rather that Belgium would have violated the  procedural  aspect  of
Article 3 had they  removed  Mr  Paposhvili  without  consideration  of  his
medical condition.  Whilst N was  binding  authority  up  to  Supreme  Court
level, the Court of Appeal said that Paposhvili relaxed the test only  to  a
very modest extent.  The applicant  would  have  to  face  a  real  risk  of
rapidly experiencing intense suffering to the Article 3 standard because  of
their illness and the non-availability there of treatment available to  them
in the removing state or face a real risk of death within a  short  time  in
the receiving state for the same reason. The  boundary  had  simply  shifted
from being defined by imminence of death in the  removing  state  even  with
treatment to the imminence of intense suffering or death  in  the  receiving
state occurring because of the lack of  treatment  previously  available  in
the  removing  state.   On  the  facts  those  appellants  could  not  bring
themselves within that test.

8.    At [27] the Judge makes a  number  of  findings  in  relation  to  the
appellant's health. At [27(iii)] the Judge finds that the appellant  is  not
in the final stages of a terminal illness. The Judge finds at  [27(v)]  that
the appellant is not an imminent risk of dying if the  medication  care  and
treatment that she now receives continues, and [27(vii) &(viii)]  the  Judge
finds that if the appellant returns  to  South  Africa  she  will  not  have
access to the drug crucial to the maintenance of her current  health,  as  a
result she will be exposed to suffering, reduction in life  expectancy,  and
a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in health which will,  eventually,
prove fatal.

9.    Even in the face of those findings, N still binding authority. AM  may
be perceived to  have  softened  the  approach  slightly,  but  the  Judge's
findings do not amount to findings of a real risk of death  within  a  short
time or a real risk of rapidly experiencing intense suffering. In the  final
sentence of [26] the Judge asks the wrong question. The Judge looked  for  a
significant reduction in life expectancy when, in fact (and law), he  should
be looking for evidence of experiencing intense suffering or a real risk  of
death within a short time. That is a material error of law.

10.   The Judge's article 8 assessment commences at [29]. At [30] the  Judge
finds that the appellant is a member of Mr Hyde's household and viewed as  a
grandmother to his children, there  is  a  strong  emotional  tie  in  their
relationship and there is evidence of dependence. The Judge says

    "Family life within the meaning  of  article  8  arises  if  there  are
    sufficiently close factual ties. There are. To establish  family  life,
    it is necessary to show that there is a real,  committed  or  effective
    support or relationship between the family members. There is."

11.   Having made those findings, the Judge goes on to find that  article  8
family life does not exist because a relationship by blood  or  marriage  is
missing. The evidence in this case is that there is financial and  emotional
dependency, but the relationship between Mr Hyde's family and the  appellant
is  not  a  romantic  partnership.  However,  the  financial  and  emotional
dependency forms a significant part of article 8 private life.

12.   The renewed Grounds of appeal directed at article 8 are  misconceived.
It is clear from the decision that there is  much  more  to  the  article  8
private life consideration that the medical  arguments  advanced  under  the
article 3 appeal.

13.   At [32] the Judge correctly applies section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.
The Judge gives little weight to the appellant's private life in  accordance
with the statute. S. 117B does not say that no weight can be  given  to  the
appellant's private life. The Judge goes on to find that  even  when  little
weight is attached to  the  appellant's  private  life  the  extent  of  the
article 8 private life, and the effect of removal  from  the  UK,  is  still
sufficient to outweigh the public interest in immigration control.

14.   In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 254  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
said that

    "Giving weight to a factor one way or another is for the  fact  finding
    Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely give rise to an error
    of law."

15.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

16.   The Judge reached a conclusion that the respondent does not like,  but
she reached that conclusion after taking correct  guidance  in  law  and  by
applying the correct legal test. The Judge  found  that  article  8  private
life  is  engaged.  The  Judge  took  a  balance  sheet  approach   to   her
proportionality assessment. The conclusion she reached is  well  within  the
range of reasonable conclusions available to the Judge.

17.   In R (on the application of Luma Sh Khairdin) v SSHD (NIA  2002:  Part
5A) IJR [2014] UKUT 00566 (IAC) it was held  where  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
considering,  pursuant  to  section  11  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
Enforcement Act 2007, whether there is an error of law in  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal involving Article 8  proportionality,  the  task  of
the Upper Tribunal is confined (at that point) to  deciding  if  the  First-
tier Tribunal's assessment of where to  strike  the  balance  was  unlawful,
according to the error of law principles set out in  R  (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA
Civ 982. In R (Iran) v SSHD (2005) EWCA civ 982 the Court of Appeal  was  of
the firm view that a decision on proportionality  of  an  Immigration  Judge
who has properly directed himself can only be overturned on  reconsideration
on traditional public law grounds.

18.   There is no error of law in relation to the article 8 appeal.



Decision

19.   I set aside the decision in relation  to  the  article  3  appeal  and
substitute my own decision

20.   The appellant's appeal is dismissed on article 3 ECHR grounds

21.   The Judge's decision on the article 8 ECHR appeal (promulgated  on  18
May 2018) stands so that the appellant's appeal  is  allowed  on  article  8
private life ECHR grounds.

Signed      Date 11 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

