

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/05599/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Thursday 2 February 2017                   |On 8th February 2017         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                              MS SOLONGO BIBISH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Usman, Solicitor, Gill Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Chapman promulgated on 6 June 2016 ("the Decision"). By  the  Decision
the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the   Respondent's
decision dated 10 February 2016  refusing  her  leave  to  remain  on  human
rights grounds on the basis of a same-sex relationship.

2.    The facts of the Appellant's case  are  not  in  dispute.   She  is  a
national of Mongolia as is her partner.  The Appellant entered the  UK  with
her partner (on her  case)  in  September  2005  unlawfully  using  a  false
passport.  She made an application for  leave  to  remain  in  May  2012  on
compassionate grounds based on her same-sex relationship. That  was  refused
in July 2013 with no right of appeal.  When a removal decision was  made  in
January 2016 she repeated the claim leading  to  the  Respondent's  decision
under appeal.

3.    The Appellant claims that she and her partner were in  a  relationship
in Mongolia but were cautious about disclosing their  feelings  due  to  the
culture of hate against lesbians in that country.   She  also  claimed  that
she has no ties with her family who have ostracised her on  account  of  the
relationship and she says that she and her partner  would  be  discriminated
against on return.  The Appellant does not claim to  have  been  subject  to
persecution on account of her relationship in the past.  She has not made  a
protection claim.  She was invited to do so by the Respondent's  letter  but
has not done so since.

4.    Rather curiously, the Respondent did not reach any conclusion  whether
the relationship which the Appellant claimed did  or  does  in  fact  exist.
This  appears  to  be  because,  although  Mr  Usman  submitted   that   the
Appellant's partner  was  dependent  on  the  Appellant's  application,  the
section of the claim dated 21 January 2016  relating  to  dependents  states
"N/A".  It may be that the Appellant included her partner  as  dependent  in
the earlier application but, as noted by  the  Respondent  in  her  decision
letter, she did not claim in January 2016 that she had a partner in the  UK.


5.    The Respondent did not dispute though the fact that the  Appellant  is
a lesbian.  She therefore considered the claim on the basis  whether  return
to Mongolia would interfere with her private life.  She concluded, based  on
background  information,  that  whilst  there  is  societal   discrimination
against same-sex partners in Mongolia which can  include  harassment,  abuse
and some violent incidents, nonetheless homosexuality has been  legal  since
1961.  She observed, as I have already noted, that  the  Appellant  did  not
claim asylum and did not report having suffered  any  ill-treatment  in  the
past on account of the same-sex relationship which she and her partner  were
able to conduct in Mongolia.  She therefore  rejected  a  claim  that  there
would be "very significant obstacles"  to  the  Appellant's  integration  in
Mongolia and decided that there were no  very  compassionate  factors  which
required consideration outside the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").

6.    The Appellant asked for her appeal to be  determined  on  the  papers.
In support of her case she produced a witness statement dated 8  April  2016
which I refer to below,  a  number  of  bank  statements  and  a  number  of
photographs (undated) said to be of her and her partner.  Although she  says
in her statement that she continues to reside with her  partner,  there  was
no statement from her partner.

7.    The Judge accepted that the Appellant is a lesbian and  that  she  has
been in a relationship with her partner before coming to the UK and  remains
in that relationship although he did note the paucity of  evidence  in  this
regard ([14] of the Decision). He noted the basis on  which  the  claim  was
made and the difficulties which the Appellant said  would  confront  her  if
forced to return to Mongolia.  He noted the  background  information  relied
upon by the Respondent.  He noted also that the Appellant had  not  made  an
asylum or protection claim.

8.    The Judge  considered  the  Appellant's  case  within  the  Rules  and
outside them at [15] to [33] of the Decision. He concluded that  there  were
not "significant obstacles" to her integration in Mongolia ([18])  and  went
on to conclude at [33]  that  the  decision  to  remove  the  Appellant  was
proportionate.

9.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce in  the
following terms:-

      "The Tribunal found there not to be "very  significant  obstacles"  to
      integration on the basis that the Appellant was able to establish  her
      same-sex relationship whilst in Mongolia [at 18].  This conclusion was
      arguably reached without having regard to the earlier finding that the
      Appellant and her partner had felt compelled to leave Mongolia because
      of the "culture of hate against lesbians"  in  that  country.   It  is
      further arguable that in invoking refugee and Article 3 considerations
      the Tribunal applied the wrong tests.

      Permission is granted on all grounds"

In passing, I infer that the earlier finding to which  Judge  Bruce  intends
to refer is at [6] of the Decision although I note that this  sets  out  the
Appellant's evidence rather than being a  finding.   I  can  find  no  other
finding to that effect.

10.   The appeal comes before me to determine whether there is an  error  of
law in the Decision and if so to either re-make the  decision  or  remit  to
the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

Grounds and submissions

11.   Before turning to consider the substance of the  Appellant's  grounds,
I deal with the Respondent's assertion  that  the  Tribunal  does  not  have
jurisdiction to consider the appeal on the basis on which UTJ Bruce  granted
permission because this was not one of the Appellant's pleaded  grounds.   I
disagree.  Although [5] of the Appellant's grounds is not precisely on  this
point and is certainly not formulated in the same way, it  does  take  issue
more generally with the basis on which the Judge found  that  the  Appellant
could continue her relationship in Mongolia.

12.   In relation to this ground, Mr Usman drew  my  attention  to  what  is
said at [3] to [5] of the Appellant's statement concerning the problems  she
would face in Mongolia.  I refer to that below.  Mr Usman  did  not  dispute
though that the Judge's summary of that  evidence  at  [6]  to  [7]  of  the
Decision is an accurate record of that  evidence.   He  submitted  that  the
Appellant was forced to leave Mongolia because  she  was  "not  comfortable"
with continuing her relationship in  Mongolia.   He  did  though  accept  in
response to a question from me that "not comfortable" could not  be  equated
with  there  being  "very  significant   obstacles"   to   continuing   that
relationship in Mongolia.



13.   Mr Usman accepted that the Appellant had not suffered any  actual  ill
treatment as a result of her relationship whilst in Mongolia.  He  submitted
however that this  was  because  she  and  her  partner  had  conducted  the
relationship discreetly or in secret.  He relied on what  was  said  in  her
evidence about being "very cautious in letting our feelings be known".    He
submitted that the Judge had misunderstood the impact of that evidence.

14.   In light of the pleaded formulation of ground [5], I pressed Mr  Usman
about why the Appellant contended that the Judge had erred in  his  approach
to the  background  evidence.   He  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  not
submitted any background evidence of her own to undermine  the  evidence  on
which the Respondent relied.  He also accepted that the Judge  was  entitled
to have regard to that material when deciding the Appellant's case.

15.   Mr Usman also submitted that the finding at [32] of the  Decision  was
not open to the Judge on the evidence.   This  forms  part  of  the  Judge's
consideration of the Appellant's case outside the Rules and  that  therefore
brings me on to  the  other  parts  of  the  grounds  which  challenge  that
consideration.

16.   Mr Usman referred me to [1] to [3] of the grounds  which  are  general
submissions about the proper analysis of Article 8  ECHR.    The  submission
there made is that, since this is not a criminal deportation case, the  only
legitimate aim in play is the economic well-being of  the  country.   It  is
said that as the Appellant has been self-sufficient since being  in  the  UK
and has not had recourse to public funds and would continue to live in  this
way, this is not  a  case  where  economic  well-being  of  the  country  is
impacted.

17.   Mr Usman argued his case orally under this head however on  the  basis
of what is said at [4] of the grounds  concerning  the  Judge's  comment  at
[16] of the Decision regarding the issue whether the Appellant  entered  the
UK in 2005 or 2009.  Mr Usman submitted that this made a difference when  it
came  to  assessing  the  proportionality  of  the  interference  with   the
Appellant's private life and he  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  erred  by
finding that it was irrelevant.  I pointed out to Mr Usman  that  the  Judge
in fact said that this was not "highly material" not that it was  irrelevant
which Mr Usman accepted.  He  continued  to  submit  that  the  question  of
whether the Appellant had been in the UK for seven  years  or  eleven  years
made a substantial difference in the consideration  outside  the  Rules.  Mr
Usman could not however point to any evidence to show that  the  Appellant's
private life formed in the period between 2005 and  2009  was  qualitatively
any different to that  formed  since.   He  submitted  nonetheless  that  an
additional four years' residence made a difference.

18.   Mr Tarlow relied on the Respondent's rule 24  response  and  continued
to insist that the Appellant had not pleaded the ground on which  permission
was granted.  I have already recorded my disagreement with  that  submission
and Mr Tarlow did not press the point.

19.   Mr Tarlow submitted that the grounds were really nothing more  than  a
disagreement with the findings.  He asked me to note that the Appellant  had
asked for the appeal to be determined on the papers and  that  she  had  not
made a protection claim.  It was for her to make her case and Mr  Usman  had
accepted  that,  when  considering  whether  there  were  "very  significant
obstacles" under the Rules, the Judge was entitled to  have  regard  to  the
background material relied upon by the Respondent.



20.   In relation to the case outside the Rules, Mr Tarlow asked me to  find
that whether the period of residence was  seven  or  eleven  years  made  no
material difference.  He submitted that the Judge's conclusions in  relation
to proportionality were clearly reasoned at [32] and [33] of  the  Decision.
The Judge had found (as he was  entitled  to  do)  that  there  was  nothing
compelling for consideration outside the Rules but had in any event gone  on
to consider the case outside the Rules and the conclusion at [33]  was  open
to him.  Mr Tarlow pointed out that section  117B  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002 ("section 117B") is in  play  in  consideration  of  the
case outside the Rules.   The  Appellant  has  been  in  the  UK  unlawfully
throughout her stay.  He submitted therefore that,  whether  the  length  of
residence is seven or eleven years makes no difference.

21.   At the end of the hearing, I indicated that I reserved my decision  in
relation to whether there is an error of  law  in  the  Decision  and  would
issue my decision in writing which I now turn to do.

Discussion and conclusions

22.   The starting  point  for  my  consideration  is  the  basis  on  which
permission to appeal was granted, particularly in light of the  disagreement
between the parties whether this was actually a basis  of  challenge  raised
by the Appellant.

23.   Judge Bruce referred to [18] of the Decision on which  Mr  Usman  also
focussed his submissions in relation to whether there are  very  significant
obstacles  disclosed  by  the  Appellant's  case  on  this  paragraph.   The
paragraph reads as follows:-

      "With regard to the situation  in  Mongolia,  the  objective  evidence
      shows that, whilst homosexuality is legal there,  there  is  ostracism
      and discrimination.  The evidence falls short  of  showing  that  this
      amounts to persecution, or inhumane or degrading treatment such as  to
      attract international protection or to engage Article 3.  Although the
      Appellant refers to difficulties there, such that they caused  her  to
      prefer the quality of life that could be found elsewhere, her evidence
      shows that,  notwithstanding  those  difficulties,  she  was  able  to
      establish, develop and  maintain  a  relationship  with  her  same-sex
      partner before she left her country of origin.  The Appellant  asserts
      that her family have ostracised her, but there is no detail  or  other
      evidence to satisfy me that this is the case.  For these reasons, I am
      not satisfied that there are significant obstacles  to  the  Appellant
      returning to Mongolia or to her integration there."

24.   I have already noted at [9] above that the  reference  to  an  earlier
finding appears in fact to be a reference to the summary of the  Appellant's
evidence.  Those findings therefore have to be looked at in the  context  of
the evidence before the Judge.  As I have already noted, in this  case,  the
Appellant asked for the appeal to be determined on the papers.   This  meant
that the Judge had to rely on the written evidence before him  and  did  not
receive submissions as  to  how  that  evidence  was  to  be  analysed.  The
evidence could not be tested or expanded upon orally.



25.   Mr Usman relied on what is said at [3]  and  [4]  of  the  Appellant's
statement as being the crux of her  claim  that  she  could  not  return  to
Mongolia  to  continue  her  relationship  there.   I  would  add  to   that
paragraphs [7] to [9] which deal with the problems the  Appellant  says  she
had with her family and her  fears  if  she  returned  to  Mongolia.   Those
paragraphs read as follows:-


      "[3]  We both resided in the same region of Mongolia and met with each
      other in 2002.  We happened to like each  other  and  became  friends.
      Subsequently our friendship developed into a serious relationship.  As
      there is a culture of hate against lesbians in Mongolia we  were  very
      cautious in letting our feelings be known  to  our  respective  family
      members in Mongolia.
      [4]   We continued to enjoy our same-sex relationship with  due  care.
      It was difficult for us to stay apart from  each  other.   As  it  was
      difficult for us to disclose our relationship in Mongolia  we  started
      considering leaving Mongolia and going somewhere else where  we  could
      disclose and enjoy the same-sex relationship with freedom.
      ....
      [7]   I have established my private life with my same-sex  partner  in
      the UK.  I believe that I would be discriminated and socially outcaste
      by my family members and the community  at  large  in  Mongolia  which
      would undermine my physical and moral integrity.  In addition, I would
      not be able to get employment in Mongolia.
      [8]   I have broken my ties with my family as my family members  never
      approved my same-sex relationship.  They blamed me that I had  brought
      shame and disrepute to them and defamed  them  within  the  community.
      They would not accept me if I were sent back to Mongolia.
      [9]   We both draw a lot of comfort from  our  relationship  and  have
      established private life in the UK.  An apprehension of being deprived
      of my same-sex relationship would plunge me into deep anxiety.  I have
      had genuine concerns, which has made me  extremely  upset.   I  cannot
      afford to lose my relationship with my partner."

26.   The Judge dealt with the basis of the Appellant's claim to  remain  at
[6] to [7] of the Decision.  Since Mr Usman did not  challenge  the  summary
of the evidence, I also set that out:
      "[6]  The Appellant states that she and her partner met and  formed  a
      same-sex relationship in Mongolia.  There is a culture of hate against
      lesbians in Mongolia so they  were  cautious  about  disclosing  their
      relationship to family, friends, and others.  They decided to come  to
      live in the United Kingdom so they could enjoy their relationship with
      greater freedom.  They engaged an agent to bring them  to  the  United
      Kingdom. The Appellant entered the country unlawfully  using  a  false
      passport.
      [7]   The Appellant states that she  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
      September 2005, and that she has lived with her  partner  since  then.
      They have met their living costs without  recourse  to  public  funds,
      have established their private lives here, and  have  integrated  into
      the community.  The Appellant states that she has  no  ties  with  her
      family in Mongolia, and  believes  that  she  would  be  discriminated
      against and outcast by them if  she  was  to  return.   Removal  would
      "plunge me into deep anxiety leaving a negative impact on my  physical
      and moral integrity and wellbeing"."

27.   In order to consider what is said at [18] of the Decision, it is  also
necessary to look at the  context  of  the  findings  about  the  background
evidence. Indeed, consideration of this evidence is  required  in  light  of
the pleaded basis of ground [5] which states that:



      "The First-tier Tribunal seems to have not given appropriate weight to
      the  objective  information  regarding   homosexuality   in   Mongolia
      considered by the Respondent which reads "There is  widespread  social
      and institutional discrimination against, and intolerance  of  lesbian
      and bisexual women and transgendered  persons  in  Mongolia  which  is
      manifested in varying forms, from ostracism and harassment to physical
      and sexual violence". If appropriate  [sic]  had  been  given  to  the
      objective  information  the  tribunal  would  have  found   that   the
      interference with the appellant's right to respect for  private/family
      life would be disproportionate and unjustifiable."

28.    Interestingly,  the  extract  there  cited  from  the  rather   wider
consideration of  the  background  evidence  in  the  Respondent's  decision
letter is lifted directly  from  [9]  of  the  Decision.   It  is  difficult
therefore to maintain that the Judge did not have regard  to  that  part  of
the evidence.

29.   The basis on which Judge Bruce  appears  to  have  been  persuaded  to
grant permission is the juxtaposition of  the  Judge's  findings  about  the
background  evidence  as  it  would  be  considered  in  the  context  of  a
protection claim against the finding that there  were  no  very  significant
obstacles to integration in Mongolia.   I am not persuaded  that  the  Judge
has in fact fallen into such error.

30.   Although the Judge does start paragraph [18]  by  looking  at  whether
the background material would be sufficient  in  a  case  such  as  this  to
justify a protection claim, he does so only to  record  that  it  would  not
meet the requisite threshold for establishing a real risk.   Thereafter,  he
goes on to consider that material in the  context  of  the  Appellant's  own
claim and to summarise her evidence as to the difficulties she faced  before
coming to the UK and what she feared on return.  As to the  latter,  it  was
clearly relevant what the background evidence recorded.  However, the  Judge
has not erred in applying the threshold  required  for  a  protection  claim
when considering whether there would be very significant obstacles.   It  is
abundantly clear from the last sentence of that  paragraph  that  the  Judge
was aware that the test under paragraph 276ADE is a different one.   Indeed,
if anything, the reference to "significant  obstacles",  rather  than  "very
significant obstacles" suggests that the Judge may have been  more  generous
to the Appellant than the Rules require.

31.   Before moving on to  the  remainder  of  the  Appellant's  grounds,  I
consider what is said about the  way  in  which  the  Judge  considered  the
Appellant's relationship in Mongolia prior to her arrival in the  UK.   This
arises from Mr Usman's submission  that  the  Judge  has  misunderstood  the
Appellant's evidence about the relationship at [32] of  the  Decision  which
reads as follows:-

      "[32] In essence, I find this to be the case of an  Appellant  seeking
      to exercise her choice of where she lives with her  same-sex  partner,
      and choosing to do so in the United Kingdom because, in her  view,  it
      provides a better quality of life, in particular with  regard  to  her
      sexuality.  In the light of the fact that she had lived with that same
      partner in  Mongolia,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  significant  or
      satisfactory evidence about the adverse consequences to them of  doing
      so there, I find nothing in these circumstances to  be  compelling  or
      exceptional sufficiently to justify allowing the  appeal  outside  the
      Rules under Article 8.  A preference for the quality of  life  in  the
      United Kingdom  does  not  amount  to  an  exceptional  or  compelling
      circumstance."



32.   As I understand Mr Usman's  submission,  the  challenge  is  that  the
Judge's findings ignore the Appellant's evidence that the  relationship  had
to be conducted in secret.  I am however  unable  to  read  the  Appellant's
evidence in that way.  At the very least,  and  bearing  in  mind  that  the
Judge was deprived of the opportunity of exploring that  evidence  with  the
Appellant as she did not want an oral hearing, those findings were  open  to
the Judge on the evidence.  Evidence that  she  and  her  partner  found  it
"difficult to disclose" their relationship  or  had  to  be  "very  cautious
about letting [their] feelings be known" does not amount  to  evidence  from
which  the  Judge  was  bound  to  conclude  that   they   conducted   their
relationship in secret.  Indeed, it is clear from  [8]  of  the  Appellant's
statement that her family did know about the relationship because  they  are
said to have disapproved of it.

33.   That then disposes of the Appellant's challenge  in  relation  to  the
findings about the impact  of  her  relationship  on  the  claim  under  and
outside the Rules.  The other paragraphs of the grounds are a  more  general
challenge to the finding  that  the  Appellant's  claim  fails  outside  the
Rules.  I can deal with this shortly.

34.   The Appellant came to the UK in either  2005  or  2009.   She  did  so
unlawfully.  Contrary to the Appellant's contention, the Judge did not  find
that whether it was the first of those dates or the second was not  relevant
at all.  What he said was that it was not "highly material" to his  findings
because "in either case, she has been here for  several  years,  and  it  is
accepted that she has established a private life here".  I add  that  it  is
also  not  highly  material  because  in  relation  to  either  period,  the
Appellant was in the UK unlawfully.  Mr Usman expressly accepted that  there
was no evidence before the Judge that the Appellant's residence  during  the
period 2005 to 2009 was qualitatively different.  Whilst calculation of  the
period  of  residence  may  become  relevant  when  considering  length   of
residence under the Rules (with which this Appellant cannot comply) that  is
only because those represent the periods of residence  which  the  Secretary
of State accepts outweigh the public interest.   In  relation  to  a  lesser
period, unless there is something qualitatively different, a  period  of  an
additional four years' unlawful residence would not, without more,  outweigh
the public interest.

35.   The remaining grounds challenge the reliance on  the  public  interest
in removing the Appellant and whether that is justified.   Those  completely
ignore however section 117B which the Judge rightly refers  to  at  [26]  of
the Decision as being relevant to the public  interest  when  assessing  the
case outside the Rules.  The Appellant points  to  being  able  to  maintain
herself as a reason why the public interest does not  require  her  removal.
However, as determined in AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  0260  (IAC),  that
factor operates only in the negative if it is  not  present.   It  does  not
increase the weight to be given to the Appellant's private  life  if  it  is
present.  In any event if, as appears from the bank  statements  to  be  the
case, the Appellant is working in the UK, she is doing so unlawfully.

36.   At [27] of the Decision, the Judge placed reliance as he was  required
to do on section 117B(4) and placed little weight on the private  or  family
life of the Appellant.  As he observed, in any case, there was little or  no
evidence about the Appellant's partner and nothing to suggest that  she  had
any status in the UK.  The Judge proceeded nonetheless  on  the  basis  that
the Appellant did have a private and  family  life  in  the  UK  with  which
removal would interfere to a sufficiently serious degree.   He  accepted  as
he was bound to do that  the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration  control  was
engaged.  Although at [32] of the Decision, the Judge found that there  were
no compelling circumstances which required  to  be  considered  outside  the
Rules, he nonetheless went on to  carry  out  a  proportionality  assessment
outside the Rules at [33].  His analysis is impeccably reasoned.

37.   For those reasons, I am satisfied that the Decision does not  disclose
a material error of law and I uphold the Decision.

DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law. I therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  of
Judge Chapman promulgated on 6 June  2016  with  the  consequence  that  the
Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed           [pic] Dated:  7 February 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
