
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05165/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 24 January 2019                    |On: 04 February 2019                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              BHASSANT BOODHOO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Deepchand, of Lambeth Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Boodhoo's
   human rights appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to  revoke  his
   indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr  Boodhoo  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen  of  Mauritius  born  on  1  August  1978.  He
   entered the United Kingdom on 13 March 2003 with  leave  to  enter  as  a
   visitor and was subsequently granted various periods of further leave  to
   remain as a student until 30 April 2014. On 1 May  2013  he  applied  for
   indefinite leave to remain on 10 years long  residence  grounds  and  was
   granted indefinite leave on 15 September  2013.  On  3  August  2016  the
   appellant applied for naturalisation as  a  British  citizen  and,  as  a
   result, enquiries were  made  by  the  respondent  into  his  immigration
   history. The respondent  concluded  from  the  enquiries  made  that  the
   appellant had obtained his leave by deception.

4.  In a decision of 11 January 2017  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to
   revoke  the  appellant's  indefinite  leave  to  remain.  The  respondent
   considered that the appellant had submitted a fraudulently obtained TOEIC
   English language test certificate in his application  for  further  leave
   made on 28 December 2012. According to the Educational  Testing  Service,
   "ETS", there was significant evidence to conclude  that  the  appellant's
   certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy  test  taker.
   ETS cancelled the appellant's test scores from a test taken at South Quay
   College on 22 August 2012. The respondent considered that  the  appellant
   had accrued his leave to  remain  unlawfully  and  would  not  have  been
   granted indefinite leave to remain had his deception been  known  at  the
   time.

5. The appellant submitted a Statement of Additional Grounds  following  the
   respondent's decision, raising Article 8  issues  on  the  basis  of  his
   family and private life. In a letter of 27 February 2017  the  respondent
   considered the appellant's representations but maintained the decision of
   11 January 2017.

6. The appellant appealed against the decision.  His  appeal  was  heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Graves on 25 April 2018 and 15  May  2018.  The
   appeal was adjourned part-heard in order for arrangements to be made  for
   the  audio  clips  of  the  English  language  test,  disclosed  by   the
   respondent, and produced to the judge by the appellant's  representative,
   to be heard by the Tribunal. The appellant gave oral evidence before  the
   judge at the first hearing. At the resumed hearing he played  the  twelve
   separate audio files on his laptop, denying that  any  of  the  different
   voices was his, and asserting that the recordings were too  short  to  be
   from his test.

7. The judge accepted that the evidence from the respondent  was  sufficient
   to discharge the initial, evidential, burden of proof, although by only a
   narrow margin given the deficiencies in the evidence. She did not  accept
   that the respondent had discharged the full legal and factual  burden  of
   proof to establish deception and considered that the  appellant  met  the
   requirements of paragraph 276B of the immigration rules. She  found  that
   the respondent's decision  constituted  a  disproportionate  interference
   with the appellant's Article 8 human rights and she allowed the appeal.

8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge had failed properly to address the question
   of whether the appellant had provided an innocent explanation,  that  the
   judge had wrongly relied upon the appellant's  English  language  ability
   rather than whether he employed deception and that there was a failure to
   give adequate reasons.

9. Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by  Designated  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge  McCarthy  but  was  subsequently  granted  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal on 5 December 2018.

Appeal Hearing

10. Mr Tarlow, in his submissions, relied upon the  grounds  of  appeal  and
   submitted that the respondent's evidence was  enough  to  show  that  the
   appellant had employed deception  and  that  the  judge  had  misdirected
   herself by relying on the appellant's ability in English.

11. Mr Deepchand submitted that the judge's decision was an exceptional  one
   which could  not  be  faulted  and  that  there  had  been  a  meticulous
   consideration of the evidence. The judge had the  benefit  of  the  audio
   tapes which contained various voices and which therefore suggested that a
   proxy test taker had not been used. The judge also noted  the  length  of
   the tapes was inconsistent with the length of the test the appellant  had
   taken, supporting the appellant's position that none related to his test.
   The judge followed the correct  burden  of  proof  and  was  entitled  to
   conclude as she did.

12. Mr Tarlow did not have any response and I indicated to the parties  that
   in my view the judge had made no  errors  of  law  in  her  decision.  My
   reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and Findings

13.  I am entirely in agreement with Mr Deepchand that the judge's  decision
   was a particularly detailed and comprehensive one, including a meticulous
   consideration of the evidence  and  clear  and  cogent  reasons  for  the
   conclusions reached. The judge's approach to the burden and  standard  of
   proof was entirely consistent with that  advocated  in  SM  and  Qadir  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence  -  Burden  of
   Proof) [2016] UKUT 229.

14. The respondent's grounds challenge the decision on the  basis  that  the
   judge erred by giving too much weight to the appellant's English language
   ability instead of focussing on the question of whether he  had  employed
   deception. However that is plainly not the case. This was not  a  matter,
   consistent with [57] of MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 450,
   of the judge focussing on the  appellant's  ability  in  English  without
   considering the range of reasons why persons proficient  in  English  may
   engage in TOEIC fraud. The judge was not precluded from  considering  the
   appellant's proficiency in English at the relevant time in any event, and
   gave careful consideration to the matter at [37]. However she  also  gave
   very detailed reasons, aside from the appellant's proficiency in English,
   for accepting his assertion that the audio tapes relied upon by ETS  were
   not from his test and that he had not used a proxy test-taker. The  judge
   expressed valid concerns  about  the  deficiencies  in  the  respondent's
   evidence, which she detailed at [32] to [35] and [43] to [44]. At [40] to
   [42] the judge assessed the appellant's  own  evidence,  having  had  the
   benefit of hearing from  him  at  length,  on  two  occasions,  and  made
   positive findings about  his  immigration  history,  his  character,  his
   description of the  test  and  his  educational  background.  There  were
   detailed and cogent reasons given by the judge for finding the  appellant
   to be  an  honest  and  credible  witness,  for  accepting  his  innocent
   explanation in response to the respondent's allegation and for concluding
   that the respondent had failed  to  meet  the  legal  burden  of  proving
   deception. The respondent's grounds are essentially little  more  than  a
   disagreement with the judge's decision and go nowhere near  demonstrating
   that her findings and conclusions were unsustainable.

15. For all of these reasons  I  find  no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
   approach  to  the  evidence  or  in  her  reasoning.  Her  findings   and
   conclusions were entirely open to her on the evidence before her.

DECISION

16. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making  of
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  on  a
   point of law, such that the decision has to be set aside. I  do  not  set
   aside the decision. The decision to allow Mr Boodhoo's  appeal  therefore
   stands.



Signed:       [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 24 January
2019
