
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05492/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th September 2018               |On 22 October 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JRR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Joseph instructed by Elite Solicitors Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (JRR), his partner or any of  his
    children.  A failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal, I will for convenience refer to the parties
    as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who  was  born  on  10  September
    1980.  He came to the United Kingdom  in  2002.   He  has  a  long-term
    partner and fianc�e ("P") who is a British citizen.  The appellant  and
    P have two children, C1 aged 11 and C2 aged 7.  The appellant also  has
    another son, C3 who is 14 years of age and lives with the appellant and
    P.  All the children are British  citizens.   The  appellant  also  has
    another son, C4 who lives with his mother.

 4. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on  13  May  2002
    with leave valid until 3 November 2002.

 5. On 25 October 2002, he made an application for leave to remain  on  the
    basis of his relationship with a British citizen.  That application was
    refused  on  29  September  2003  and  the   appellant's   appeal   was
    subsequently dismissed on 7 April 2005  and  thereafter  permission  to
    appeal refused.

 6. On 12 April 2010, the appellant submitted an application for  leave  to
    remain based  upon  his  private  and  family  life.   He  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain until 12 November 2013.

 7. On 15 October 2013, he submitted a further application based  upon  his
    private and family life but this was rejected as invalid on  the  basis
    that no fee had been paid and the incorrect form used.

 8. On 2 December 2013, the appellant made a further application for  leave
    based upon his private and family life which remained outstanding until
    30 March 2017.

 9. On 14 July 2014, the appellant was convicted at the Bristol Crown Court
    of conspiracy to supply controlled drugs in Class B.  On 5 March  2015,
    he was sentenced to four years' imprisonment.

10. On 2 April 2015, the appellant was served with a notice of decision  to
    deport.  On 14 July 2015,  representations  were  made  on  his  behalf
    relying upon Article 8 of the ECHR seeking to bring himself  within  an
    exception to the automatic deportation provisions in the UK Borders Act
    2007.

11. The appellant was released from immigration detention  on  bail  on  29
    April 2016.

12. On 30 March 2017, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claim
    based upon his human rights.  A deportation  order  was  signed  on  24
    March 2017.





The Appeal

13. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  refusal
    of his human rights claim.  Judge J Lebasci allowed  his  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The judge found, on the  basis  of  the  impact
    upon C3, that there were very compelling reasons such that  the  public
    interest  was  outweighed  and  the  appellant's  deportation  was  not
    proportionate.

14. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal
    on 10 August 2017 but, on 22 September 2017, the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ
    Keki?) granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

15. The appeal was initially listed before me  on  27  March  2018.   In  a
    decision dated 11 April 2018, I concluded that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had materially erred in law in allowing the  appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 8 and I set the decision aside.

16. I directed that the appeal be re-listed in the Upper Tribunal in  order
    for the decision  under  Article  8  to  be  re-made.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's primary findings of fact in paras 29 to 42 were to stand.

17. The appeal was  re-listed  for  a  resumed  hearing  before  me  on  18
    September 2018.

18. At that hearing, the Secretary of State was represented by  Mr  Howells
    and the appellant by Mr Joseph.  A  bundle  of  updating  evidence  was
    admitted, without objection from Mr Howells, under rule 15(2A)  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended).

19. Both the appellant and P gave brief oral evidence before  me  in  which
    they adopted their respective witness statements contained in  the  new
    bundle and dated 12 September 2018.

The Issues

20. The appellant relies exclusively upon Article 8 of the ECHR.

21. The central issues, identified by the  parties  in  their  submissions,
    relate to the impact upon the appellant's children, in  particular  his
    son C3 and his daughter C1, but also  his  long-term  partner,  P.   In
    brief, Mr Joseph submitted that the appellant's deportation  would  not
    be in the  public  interest  applying  s.117C(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA  Act  2002").   He  submitted
    that the impact  upon  the  appellant's  children  was  such  that  his
    deportation would be "unduly harsh"  within  Exception  2  set  out  in
    s.117C(5) and because of the severity of that impact, s.117C(6) applied
    because there were "very compelling circumstances, over and above those
    described in [Exception 2]".  The public interest is, as a consequence,
    outweighed by the appellant's circumstances and his  deportation  would
    breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

22. Mr Joseph relied upon the impact upon C3 which had been  considered  by
    the First-tier Judge in paras 29-40 of her determination as part of the
    preserved findings.

23. In addition, and in respect of matters  arising  since  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision, Mr Joseph relied upon  the  impact  upon  C1.   He
    relied, in particular, upon the evidence concerning C1's mental  health
    set out in a number of documents, most recently in  a  letter  dated  3
    September 2018 (at pages 20-30) from Loren Green, a  Specialist  Mental
    Health Practitioner and Social Worker who has  been  working  with  the
    appellant and his family since April 2011.  Mr Joseph relied  upon  the
    recent  history  of  C1  engaging  in  self-harm,  involving  attempted
    strangulation and the taking of overdoses, and the safety plan  put  in
    place for her.  He also relied on the  fact,  which  was  not  disputed
    before me, that on 10 September 2018 C1  was  diagnosed  with  Autistic
    Spectrum Disorder ("ASD").

24. Mr Joseph also placed reliance upon the fact that P was  the  full-time
    carer for her mother who, in January 2018, was diagnosed with  vascular
    dementia (having previously been diagnosed as bipolar).

25. Mr Joseph submitted that taken cumulatively, and having regard  to  the
    seriousness of the appellant's offending, the impact of his deportation
    would not only be "unduly harsh" but would be  of  such  impact  as  to
    amount to "very compelling circumstances" over and above  being  simply
    unduly harsh.

26. Mr Howells submitted that the impact upon C1 and  C3  was  not  "unduly
    harsh".  He relied upon on the appellant's offending  which  was  of  a
    serious crime such that the public interest was very significant.  That
    was a factor that had to be balanced against the family's circumstances
    following MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 617.  He accepted that the
    appellant  had  no  other  convictions  but  the  public  interest  was
    nevertheless  significant  given  the  offence's  seriousness  and  the
    importance of deterring other foreign nationals  from  committing  such
    crimes.  Mr Howells also relied on the appellant's immigration history.
     He had entered the UK as a visitor with leave valid until  3  November
    2002.  Thereafter, the appellant had been in the  UK  unlawfully  apart
    from a period of discretionary leave between 10 November  2012  and  10
    November 2013.

27. Mr Howells submitted that Exception 2 required the impact to be "unduly
    harsh" whilst recognising that the effect of deportation  may  well  be
    "harsh" that was not sufficient.  He relied upon three decisions of the
    Court of Appeal noting that separation by deportation and the necessary
    impact upon a family would not usually be sufficient  to  outweigh  the
    public interest (see LC (China) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1310  at  [24];
    SSHD v CT (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 4 at [18], [19] and  [38];  and  PF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 25 at  [43]).   Mr  Howells  submitted
    that whilst it might be difficult for the appellant's partner to manage
    the household, she had done so whilst he was in prison or detention for
    a period of two and a half years and C3 had not been taken  into  care.
    The evidence showed that C3's behaviour had improved.  The evidence did
    not show that C3 would have to go  into  care  if  the  appellant  were
    deported.

28. As regards C1, Mr Howells accepted there was evidence  that  she  self-
    harmed but that she had not done  this  whilst  the  appellant  was  in
    detention.  This had happened since his release  on  immigration  bail.
    He accepted that she had been diagnosed  with  ASD  but  was  receiving
    support.

29. Mr Howells submitted that, on those facts, the appellant's  deportation
    would not fall within Exception 2 because it had not  been  shown  that
    the impact on C1 and C3 would be "unduly harsh".

30. In any event, Mr Howells submitted that even if Exception 2  were  met,
    that was not  sufficient  because  of  s.117C(6)  requiring  it  to  be
    established that there were "very compelling  circumstances,  over  and
    above" those in Exception 2.  Mr Howells referred me to  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 662 where  it
    was stated that, in order to satisfy that requirement the claim must be
    "especially strong" (see [29]); the circumstances must  be  "especially
    compelling" (see [30]) and it will only be in  "rare"  cases  that  the
    circumstances will be sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high
    public interest (see [33]).  Mr Howells submitted that the threshold in
    s.117C(6) was a "high  one"  as  affirmed  in  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision including in NE-A (Nigeria) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  239.   Mr
    Howells submitted that that threshold was not established.

The Legal Framework

31. It was common ground that Art 8.1 is engaged in  this  appeal.   It  is
    clear that the appellant's deportation will seriously impact  upon  his
    private and family life in the UK with P, but more importantly with his
    children, in particular C1 and C3.  Their Art 8 rights are also engaged
    (see Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39).

32. It was also common ground that the crucial issue under Art 8.2 was that
    of 'proportionality' and the striking of the "fair balance" between the
    individuals'  rights  and  interests  and  the  public  interest   (see
    R(Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at [20] per Lord Bingham).

33. In that regard, Part 5A  of  the  NIA  Act  2002  applies  setting  out
    "considerations" to which the Tribunal  must  "have  ...  regard"  when
    determining the "public interest" issue under Art  8.2.   Section  117B
    sets out generally applicable considerations; whilst  s.117C  sets  out
    "additional considerations"  in  the  context  of  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals which, of course, includes the appellant.

34. Particularly relevant to the appellant's Article 8 claim are ss.117C(5)
    and 117C(6).

35. Section 117C(6), so far as relevant provides:

         "In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2."

36. The relevant exception is Exception 2 which is found in  s.117C(5)  and
    which, so far as relevant, provides as follows:

         "Exception 2 applies where C  has  ...  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the ... child would be unduly harsh."

37. It was accepted by Mr Howells that the appellant does have  a  "genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship" with C1 and C3 and that C1 and C3
    are both a  "qualifying  child"  as  both  are  British  citizens  (see
    s.117D(1)).

38. In NE-A (Nigeria) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  239,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    accepted that  s.117C(6)  provided  a  "final  result  compatible  with
    Article 8 in all cases to which it applies" (at [14]  per  Sir  Stephen
    Richards with whom McFarlane and Flaux LJJ agreed).  The court rejected
    an argument that, as a  result  of  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in
    Hersham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, was  not  the  law.   The  Court  of
    Appeal approved its earlier decision in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ
    803.  At [14]-[15], Sir Stephen Richards said this:

         "14. .... In my  judgment,  the  analysis  of  section  117C(6)  in
             Rhuppiah is correct and  should  be  followed.   There  is  no
             inconsistency between that  analysis  and  what  was  said  in
             Hesham Ali.  The focus in Hesham Ali, as is conceded,  was  on
             the Rules: indeed, Lord Reed noted in terms at paragraph 2  of
             his  judgment  that  it  was  unnecessary  to   consider   the
             amendments to the legislation effected by the Immigration  Act
             2014, i.e.  the  provisions  of  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act.
             Moreover, integral to Lord Reed's reasoning was that the Rules
             "are not law ... but a statement of the Secretary  of  State's
             administrative practice" and they "do  not  therefore  possess
             the same degree of democratic legitimacy as  legislation  made
             by Parliament" (paragraph 17; see also paragraph 53); and that
             they do not govern appellate  decision-making,  although  they
             are relevant to the determination of appeals  (paragraph  41).
             Part 5A of the 2002 Act, by contrast, is  primary  legislation
             directed to tribunals and governing their  decision-making  in
             relation to Article 8 claims in the context of  appeals  under
             the Immigration Acts.  I see  no  reason  to  doubt  what  was
             common ground in Rhuppiah and was drawn  from  NA  (Pakistan),
             that sections  117A-117D,  taken  together,  are  intended  to
             provide for  a  structured  approach  to  the  application  of
             Article 8 which produces in all cases a final result which  is
             compatible with Article  8.   In  particular,  if  in  working
             through the structured approach one gets to  section  117C(6),
             the proper application of  that  provision  produces  a  final
             result compatible with Article 8 in  all  cases  to  which  it
             applies.  The provision contains  more  than  a  statement  of
             policy  to  which  regard  must   be   had   as   a   relevant
             consideration.   Parliament's  assessment  that  "the   public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2" is one to which the tribunal is bound by  law  to  give
             effect.

         15.  None of this is problematic  for  the  proper  application  of
             Article  8.   That   a   requirement   of   "very   compelling
             circumstances" in order to outweigh the public interest in the
             deportation of foreign criminals sentenced to  at  least  four
             years' imprisonment is compatible with Article 8 was  accepted
             in MF (Nigeria) and in Hesham  Ali  itself.   Of  course,  the
             provision to that  effect  in  section  117C(6)  must  not  be
             applied as if it contained some  abstract  statutory  formula.
             The context is that of the balancing exercise under Article 8,
             and  the  "very   compelling   circumstances"   required   are
             circumstances  sufficient  to  outweigh  the   strong   public
             interest  in  the  deportation  of   the   foreign   criminals
             concerned.  Provided that a tribunal has that context in mind,
             however, a finding that "very compelling circumstances" do not
             exist in a case to which section 117C(6) applies will  produce
             a final result, compatible with Article  8,  that  the  public
             interest requires deportation.   There  is  no  room  for  any
             additional element in the proportionality  balancing  exercise
             under Article 8."

39. In applying s.117C(6) the Court of  Appeal  in  NA  (Pakistan)  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662 gave guidance.  At [28]-[33], Jackson LJ delivering
    the judgment of the court (Jackson, Sharp and Sales LJJ)  set  out  the
    structural   approach,   including   consideration   of   whether   the
    circumstances relied upon fell within Exception 1 or  2  and,  if  they
    did, whether they were of a particularly exceptional kind to amount  to
    "very compelling circumstances" that were "over  and  above"  those  in
    Exception 1 and 2:

         "28. The next question which arises concerns the meaning  of  "very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2".  The new para. 398 uses the same language
             as  section  117C(6).    It   refers   to   "very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those  described  in  paragraphs
             399 and 399A."  Paragraphs 399 and  399A  of  the  2014  rules
             refer to the same subject matter as  Exceptions  1  and  2  in
             section 117C, but they do so in greater detail.

         29.  In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applied to those  provisions.   The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and  which  we
             have held is to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  "there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2".  As we have indicated above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

         30.  In the  case  of  a  serious  offender,  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  One might describe that as a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  On the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2",  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8.

         31.  An interpretation of  the  relevant  phrase  to  exclude  this
             possibility would lead to  violation  of  Article  8  in  some
             cases, which plainly was not Parliament's intention.  In terms
             of relevance and weight for a proportionality  analysis  under
             Article  8,  the  factors  singled  out  for  description   in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 will apply with  greater  or  lesser  force
             depending on the specific facts of a particular case.  To take
             a simple example in relation to  the  requirement  in  section
             117C(4)(a) for Exception 1, the offender in  question  may  be
             someone aged 37 who came to the UK aged 18 and hence satisfies
             that requirement; but his claim under Article 8 is  likely  to
             be very much weaker than the claim of an offender now aged  80
             who came to the UK aged 6 months, who by dint of  those  facts
             satisfies that requirement.  The circumstances in  the  latter
             case might well be highly relevant  to  whether  it  would  be
             disproportionate  and  breach  of  Article  8  to  deport  the
             offender, having regard to the guidance given by the ECtHR  in
             Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47, and hence highly relevant  to
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

         32.  Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all  he  could
             advance in support of his Article 8 claim was  a  "near  miss"
             case in  which  he  fell  short  of  bringing  himself  within
             Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be  possible  to  say
             that  he  had  shown  that   there   were   "very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2".  He would need to have a far stronger case  than  that
             by reference to the interests protected by Article 8 to  bring
             himself within that  fall  back  protection.   But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exception 1 and 2.  That decision  maker,  be  it
             the Secretary of State or a tribunal, must  look  at  all  the
             matters  relied  upon  collectively,  in  order  to  determine
             whether they are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high
             public interest in deportation.

         33.   Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in deportation  will  be  rare.   The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as aging parents in
             poor health or the natural love between parents and  children,
             will not be sufficient."

40. At [37], Jackson LJ added this:

         "37. In relation to a serious offender, it will often  be  sensible
             first to see whether his case involves  circumstances  of  the
             kind described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2,  both  because  the
             circumstances so described set  out  particularly  significant
             factors bearing upon respect for private  life  (Exception  1)
             and respect for family life (Exception 2) and because that may
             provide a helpful basis on which an  assessment  can  be  made
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2"  as  is  required
             under Section 117C(6).  It will then be necessary to  look  to
             see whether any of the factors falling within Exceptions 1 and
             2 are of  such  force,  whether  by  themselves  or  taken  in
             conjunction with any other relevant factors not covered by the
             circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2, as  to  satisfy
             the test in Section 117C(6)."

41. In addition, there are a number  of  matters  relevant  to  the  public
    interest set out in s.117B of the NIA Act 2002.

42. First, s.117B(1) states that the: "maintenance of effective immigration
    controls is in the public  interest".   Second,  s.117B(2)  states,  in
    effect, that it is in the public interest that an individual speaks the
    English language.  Third, s.117B(3) states that it  is  in  the  public
    interest, in effect, that an individual is  "financially  independent".
    Fourth, s.117B(4) states that "little weight" should  be  given  to  an
    individual's "private life" or a relationship formed with a "qualifying
    partner"  when  the  individual  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully.   Fifth,
    s.117B(5) also states that  "little  weight"  should  be  given  to  an
    individual's private life established at a time when  the  individual's
    immigration status in the UK was "precarious".

43. Although Mr  Howell  made  reference  to  the  appellant's  immigration
    status, which has been largely unlawful since 2002  apart  from  twelve
    months' discretionary leave, the weight of argument in this appeal  has
    not been focused upon the appellant's relationship with his partner, P.
     It has, instead, focused upon the impact of his deportation  upon  his
    family, in particular C1 and C3.

44. Therefore, I accept that the  appellant's  removal  is  in  the  public
    interest.  Although he speaks English, he is not  as  I  understand  it
    "financially independent" since he cannot work and relies upon  P  who,
    in turn, relies at least in part upon state  support.   To  the  extent
    that weight should be given to his private life in  the  UK  (which  Mr
    Joseph did not seek to pursue in his submissions) or  his  relationship
    with P (which again Mr Joseph did not rely on in  his  submissions),  I
    accept that "little weight" should be given to them.

45. It was common ground before me that the crucial issue in this appeal is
    that  of  proportionality  under  Art  8.2  and,  in  particular,   the
    application of s.117C(6) (read with s.117C(5))  of  the  NIA  Act  2002
    which formed the focus of both representatives' submissions.

46. In approaching s.117C(6), I must first decide whether the  impact  upon
    C1 and/or C3 would be "unduly harsh" (Exception  2  in  s.117C(5))  and
    then secondly, if it is,  whether  the  circumstances  which  make  the
    impact on C1 and/or C3 "unduly harsh" taken  alone,  or  together  with
    other factors, are of sufficient severity to amount to "very compelling
    circumstances" which are "over and above" those which make  the  impact
    of  the  appellant's  deportation  upon  them  "unduly   harsh".    The
    application of s.117C(6) produces  "a  final  result"  compatible  with
    Article 8 (see, NE-A (Nigeria) at [15]).

47.  In  assessing  what  is  "unduly  harsh"  and,   then,   whether   the
    circumstances are "very compelling" over and  above  that,  the  public
    interest must be weighed against the impact  on  C1  and  C3  (see,  MM
    (Uganda)).

48. Section 117C(1) states that:

         "the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest".

49. Further, s.117C(2) states that:

         "the more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal".

50.  I  accept  that  the  appellant's  offence  of  conspiring  to  supply
    controlled drugs in Class B, for which he was sentenced to four  years'
    imprisonment, is a very serious offence indeed.  The appellant has been
    assessed as a "low risk" of re-offending and of  harm  to  the  public.
    The public interest, as identified in OH (Serbia) v  SSHD  [2008]  EWCA
    Civ 694 as explained in Hersham Ali at [70] per Lord Wilson), is highly
    significant and of such weight that only a "very strong" case will give
    rise to "very compelling circumstances"  sufficient  to  outweigh  that
    public interest.

51. In accordance with the Court of Appeal's observations in NA  (Pakistan)
    at [33] I accept that:

         "the common place incidence of family life, such as  aging  parents
         in poor health or the natural love between  parents  and  children,
         will not be sufficient".

52. Further, I accept, as the Court of Appeal pointed out in  PF  (Nigeria)
    at [43], that even where there is "a real and  damaging  impact"  on  a
    partner and children:

         "That is a common consequence of deportation of a  person  who  has
         children in this country.  Deportation will normally be appropriate
         in cases such as the present, even  though  the  children  will  be
         affected  and  the  interests  of  the  children  are   a   primary
         consideration".

53. In other words, the separation of  a  deportee  from  his  partner  and
    children will not, in itself, be  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest (see also CT (Vietnam) at [38] and LC (China) at [24]).

54.  In  respect  of  Exception  2,  the  circumstances  must  be  of  some
    considerable strength and weight,, having regard to the public interest
    weighed against them, to be properly characterised as  "unduly  harsh".
    Further, since the appellant can only succeed if he is  able  to  bring
    himself within s.117C(6), the circumstances must be even  more  weighty
    so as to be "very compelling" and are "over and above" those which  are
    sufficient to make the impact "unduly  harsh"  within  Exception  2  in
    s.117C(5).

55. With those matters of law in mind, I turn  to  the  evidence  and  make
    relevant factual findings in relation to the issues.

Discussion and Findings

56. The appellant, P and C1, C2 and C3 live together as a family.  P is not
    the biological mother of C3 but, by court order  dated  20  July  2016,
    pursuant to a child arrangement order C3 lives with the  appellant  and
    P.  The evidence before me was that C3 has no contact with  his  mother
    who is not allowed to see him.  P is, for  all  intents  and  purposes,
    fulfilling the role of C3's mother.

57. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt  with  C3's  circumstances  on  the
    evidence before her following a hearing on 16 June 2017.   The  judge's
    findings at paragraphs 29-40 of her determination were  not  challenged
    in these proceedings and are preserved.  I set  them  out  in  full  as
    follows:

         "29.  The  circumstances  relating   to   [C3]   require   separate
             consideration.  [C3] has  a  very  troubled  history  and  the
             Appellant has provided a significant  amount  of  evidence  in
             relation to this.

         30.  [C3] was removed from his mother's care when he was  just  two
             years old.  He then lived with his  mother's  sister  and  two
             cousins until he was 7 years old (November 2011) when [C3] and
             both his cousins were placed on a Child Protection Plan  under
             the category of "neglect", although in the social care reports
             there are suggestions of drugs  and  violence  in  his  aunt's
             home.  In March 2012 [C3] was placed with [the appellant]  who
             was assessed as a loving and protective figure.

         31.  The Appellant relies on a PACT letter written by Ms  Bayandor,
             a Family Engagement Worker at HMP Bristol.  She had known  the
             Appellant for around 18 months when she wrote this letter  and
             during this time she says she has come  to  know  his  family.
             She states the Appellant applied  and  successfully  gained  a
             place on every family day that was held during his time at HMP
             Bristol.  These visits were attended by [P],  [C3],  [C1]  and
             [C2].  Places awarded are a reflection of  permissions  gained
             by prison staff based  on  security  and  safety  checks.   Ms
             Bayandour  describes  this  as  "further  evidence   of   [the
             appellant's] positive reputation and actions  within  prison".
             As a result of the particular  difficulties  [C3]  was  having
             extra  visitation  was  organised  due  to  these  exceptional
             circumstances, this was arranged and supported  by  Dr  Flynn,
             [C3's] therapist.  "These visits were encouraged and supported
             with [C3's] class teacher, the Head Teacher and  the  prisoner
             Governor; who deemed the visits so imperative that extra staff
             were deployed to be able  to  facilitate  them.   Ms  Bayandor
             believes "the deportation of [the  appellant]  would  have  an
             irretrievably damaging impact on his son [C3]".

         32.  There is a letter, dated 5 December 2016, from Bernardo's  who
             were asked to support the family by [P]  who  was  finding  it
             difficult to manage [C3's] behaviour.  [C3] was  described  as
             being aggressive towards the other students and he was  banned
             from travelling on school  transport  due  to  his  behaviour.
             This letter says the Appellant  "welcomed  Barnardo's  support
             and became an integral part of the  Team  around  the  Family.
             Bernardo's believes that a major contributory factor to [C3's]
             dramatic turnaround is having his dad, [the  appellant],  back
             in his life".

         33.  The Appellant has provided a letter from Dr Simon Flynn, Child
             and Adolescent Psychotherapist, dated 16 February 2016.   [C3]
             was referred to the Child &  Adolescent  Service  in  November
             2014 due to concerns about his soiling.  He has a  history  of
             family disruption, neglect  and  possible  sexual  abuse.   Dr
             Flynn states "The deportation  of  [the  appellant]  would,  I
             believe, be a disastrous event for [C3].  As a young  boy  who
             has a history of broken attachments and a  significant  period
             of his life when he was neglected and possibly abused...In  my
             clinical Judgment, the  prognosis  for  [C3],  without  normal
             daily  contact  with  the  father,  is  likely  to  make   him
             vulnerable to develop wither more severe mental and  emotional
             problems in adolescence and/or  follow  his  father  into  the
             criminal justice system".

         34.  Dr Flynn has provided a further letter dated 17 May 2017.   In
             this letter he says he cannot stress too much  the  importance
             of [the appellant] joining in  the  sessions  with  [C3].   He
             describes [C3] as still "extremely fragile emotionally and  it
             is very likely that he will need further support from CAMHS in
             the future.  If that is the case, the chances  of  a  positive
             outcome  would  be  minimum  without  the  steady  and  caring
             presence of his father beside him".

         35.  Dr Ifeoma Ameke, Consultant Child Psychiatrist, has written  a
             letter dated 31 May 2017.  In that letter  the  conclusion  is
             "there is no doubt that the positive relationship between [the
             appellant] and [C3] has been instrumental in  [C3's]  recovery
             and continued wellbeing.  Should [C3]  suffer  a  catastrophic
             loss of his father if he were to be deported to Jamaica it  is
             highly likely that [C3] will relapse and his  symptoms  become
             more resistant to treatment".

         36.  A letter dated 19 May  2017  written  by  the  SENDCo,  Joanne
             Blair, at [C3's] school, refers to  the  extreme  difficulties
             [C3] had in managing his behaviour at school.  She  says  that
             since [the appellant's] return home  he  has  been  supporting
             [C3] and there has been a significant  improvement  in  [C3's]
             behaviour.  Ms Blair has provided support plans  generated  by
             the school to evidence her letter.

         37.  The Respondent's only challenge to the evidence relied  on  by
             the Appellant concerning [C3] is to say  it  is  not  accepted
             there would be any serious irreversible  harm  to  [C3]  as  a
             result of the Appellant's deportation.  I  find  the  evidence
             does not support such a conclusion.  It is clear [C3] has been
             significantly affected by the care he received before he lived
             with the Appellant and [P].  His behaviour both at home and at
             school was very challenging and significant  intervention  was
             required to help him.  The Appellant played a  very  important
             role in that intervention and is regarded by  the  experts  as
             being  pivotal  in  achieving  the   improvement   in   [C3's]
             behaviour.

         38.  The professionals, including  [C3's]  Consultant  Psychiatrist
             and his Psychologist, with the best knowledge of [C3] and  the
             Appellant's role in his wellbeing are essentially in agreement
             about the likely impact on [C3] of his  father's  deportation.
             I accept this evidence.  I find, if [C3] were unable  to  have
             normal daily contact with his father this would likely  result
             in a relapse in his  behaviour,  he  would  be  vulnerable  to
             develop more severe mental and emotional problems which  would
             be more resistant to treatment.

         39.  It is unclear what would happen to [C3]  if  his  father  were
             deported.  The Respondent says he could continue to live  with
             [P].  Her evidence is that she  cannot  go  back  to  the  way
             things were with [C3].  I find she has grounds for  expressing
             significant concern about this.  [C3] was  aggressive  towards
             her and his sisters.  She  says  there  were  times  when  the
             situation was so bad she put the girls in the car  to  provide
             them with protection.  Her  evidence  about  [C3's]  anger  is
             corroborated by the evidence from the school and the  evidence
             from the experts involved with  [C3's]  treatment.   There  is
             also evidence which indicates  [C3's]  behaviour  towards  his
             sisters  was  at  times  sexually  inappropriate.   For  these
             reasons [P] felt unable  to  leave  her  daughter's  with  him
             unsupervised.   Given  the  evidence   of   the   impact   the
             deportation would have on [C3's] mental health  it  is  likely
             his behaviour would deteriorate  and  in  these  circumstances
             there is a real risk [P] would decide she was unable  to  care
             for him, given her need to ensure the wellbeing and safety  of
             her daughters.  If [C3] were to lose his home this would  also
             have  a  significant  negative  impact  on  his   health   and
             behaviour.

         40.  Given the likely need for further specialist support  and  his
             fragile emotional condition I find it would not be  in  [C3's]
             best interests to accompany his father to Jamaica.  This would
             result in significant upheaval and change for him, all aspects
             of his life would be affected.  [C3] was born in  the  UK  and
             has lived his whole life here, a move to Jamaica would involve
             the need to adjust to a  new  culture  a  different  schooling
             system at the same time  as  being  removed  from  significant
             members of his family including his sisters and [P].   I  find
             that such upheaval would result  in  deterioration  in  [C3's]
             health and behaviour".

58. The more up-to-date evidence concerning C3 was given by  the  appellant
    and P and most recently in Loren Green's letter dated 3 September  2018
    dealing with both C3 and C1.  I  will  return  to  that  letter,  which
    intermingles the consideration of C1 and  C3's  circumstances,  shortly
    when I deal with C1.

59. In his written statement, the appellant deals with  C3's  circumstances
    acknowledging that he is now making progress in his  behaviour  and  at
    school as follows:

         "My son [C3] has always been a difficult child to  manage,  he  had
         previously suffered from neglect, family  disruption  and  possible
         sex abuse as a child.  He was first referred to the CAMHS  Team  in
         November 2014 by his GP.  He has been working with Dr  Simon  Flynn
         of the Child and  Adolescent  Psychotherapist  Team  (CAMHS)  since
         February 2015.  There has always been ongoing concerns about [C3's]
         behaviour, vulnerability and his development due to the experiences
         he has had in the past.  Since my  release  from  custody  [C3]  no
         longer sees a CAMHS worker.  He  is  still  on  CAHMS  records  but
         currently does not have  a  need  for  regular  appointments.   His
         school work and behaviour has improved from what it had been before
         my release.  His Tutor, [Mr W] has identified  that  [C3]  presents
         more positive behaviour points than negative since  September  2017
         (Exhibit JR/6).  Since that last report [C3] has had very  positive
         and encouraging reports from his school teachers all of  whom  have
         identified [C3] is making good and stead progress.  (Exhibit JR/7).

         We  continue  to  have  meetings  with  the  school  regarding  his
         disruptive behaviour and support plans are in place to help monitor
         his behaviour.  [C3] has been described as having a fragile, mental
         and emotional health, it is believed  by  many  professionals  that
         this is probably the cause of his behavioural problems.   As  such,
         [P] and I continue to care and provide support to him".

60. In his oral evidence, the appellant accepted that  C3  was  progressing
    according to a therapy plan.  He  did  not,  however,  think  that  his
    partner could manage C3 if he were deported as she could not handle him
    when he was detained.  He told me  that  there  had  been  extra  staff
    provided to facilitate visits to the prison by C3.  He  told  me  that,
    whilst he was in prison, there had  been  signs  of  sexual  misconduct
    between C3 and C1.  He said that C3 had smashed windows and was out  of
    control and one of his "mates" had come to help P and calm C3 down.

61. In her oral evidence P also acknowledged that C3 was progressing.   She
    accepted that at present, she had not approached  Social  Services  for
    any support, as it was not needed.

62. In his written statement the appellant also states that

         "... there is no way possible if I am deported that I would be able
         to leave [C3] in [P's] care.  There is also no guarantee [C3] would
         continue to behave.  If I go back to Jamaica I would have no  place
         to take him.  I would have limited income and therefore I would not
         be able to provide him with things that he is used to and we  would
         have no other supporting family.  I  currently  have  no  surviving
         family members who reside in Jamaica".

63. There is now evidence concerning the impact on C1 if the  appellant  is
    deported.   That  is  evidence  of  self-harming,  including  attempted
    strangulation and the taking of overdoses.  C1 has also been  diagnosed
    with ASD.  In his written statement, the appellant deals  with  C1  and
    her problems which led to her referral  to  the  Child  and  Adolescent
    Mental Health Services ("CAMHS") in February 2018.  The appellant  says
    this:

         "Whilst my family have been focusing mainly on [C3], it has  become
         very  clear  recently  that  our  oldest  daughter  [C1]  has  been
         traumatised by my separation from the family whilst I had  been  in
         prison.  Over the last few months [C1] has tried to self harm on  a
         number of occasions.   We  have  had  cause  to  take  her  to  the
         Children's Hospital several times when she has either tried to harm
         herself or threatened to do so and we have felt we  cannot  protect
         her against herself.  She has since  been  diagnosed  as  suffering
         from mental health issues and having an Autistic Spectrum Disorder.
          We will now be working with her school and CAMHS to try to get her
         help.  She has a Mental Health Practitioner Loren Green  who  works
         with  our  entire  family  in  helping  to  manage  her  behaviour.
         (Exhibit JR/8) Ms Green will continue to meet with [C1], [P] and  I
         to support us all during this difficult time.  [C1] also sees  Gwen
         Jenkins who is a Student Nurse and she discusses issues  with  [C1]
         that she may not wish to discuss with  us.   [C1's]  behaviour  has
         been very sudden and her behaviour very erratic, and for us it  can
         be very scary because of how unpredictable she can  be.   [C1]  has
         had to endure a lot of traumatic events during her short life which
         included me being taken away from  her  which  had  left  her  very
         vulnerable.  [C1] had told her mother and I that whilst I was  away
         her brother ([C3]) had forced her to perform a sexual act  (Exhibit
         JR/9).  Whilst this had never happened again, and [C3] had received
         counselling for this incident.  I know that the thought of me being
         taken away again, makes [C1] think she  could  find  herself  in  a
         situation where [C3] could take advantage of  her  again  and  this
         scares her very much.  I believe that [C1] is displaying these risk
         taking behaviours because she is scared I may be taken away  again.
         She knows that I have to go back to court soon and you can tell  by
         her recent quietness she is worried about what this may mean".

64. In his oral evidence, the appellant said  that  C1  had  started  self-
    harming in September last year.  He accepted that  she  had  not  self-
    harmed whilst he was in prison but had suffered from  sleepless  nights
    and crying.  He accepted that she had stopped self-harming by April  of
    this year but that was because they had a safety plan in place and they
    had locked away all the knives and there were no instruments for her to
    use to self-harm.  He told me that they had taken  the  doors  off  her
    bedroom to stop her barricading herself in.  He said the last time  she
    had self-harmed was in August.  She was still subject to a safety plan.



65. In her written statement the appellant's  partner,  P,  described  C1's
    circumstances as follows:

         "Since [the appellant's] last appeal our family is  still  together
         and although we had thought the children were settling,  especially
         [C3], unfortunately it has been [C1] who  has  caused  us  concerns
         recently.  [C1] is a very smart child academically and continues to
         perform well at school as per her  school  reports  (Exhibit  CG/7)
         however she has shown a  real  dramatic  increase  in  risk  taking
         behaviour.  On several occasions over  the  past  few  months  [the
         appellant] and I have found [C1] trying to take her  own  life,  by
         either tying ligatures around her neck or taking overdoses, she has
         also been self harming via cutting her legs and arms.  We have  had
         cause to take her to the children hospital no less than 4 times  in
         five months after [C1] had tried to harm herself.

         [C1's] school are very supportive and gave us an initial  emergency
         referral to Child and Adolescent Mental Health Service  (CAMHS)  in
         February 2018.  As a result our family work very closely with Loren
         Green, she is a Specialist Mental Health Practitioner/Social Worker
         at  CAMHS  and  will  also  be  seeing  a  Student   Nurse/Clinical
         Psychologist Gwen Jenkins.  We have  been  having  family  meetings
         with [C1] and Loren, as regularly as necessary whilst [C1] has  one
         to one sessions with Gwen.  (Exhibit CG/8) Through our  meeting  we
         are trying to learn as a family ways to protect and  manage  [C1's]
         behavioural problems.  We have been advised to  take  caution  with
         her and we have removed locks from all  the  rooms  in  the  house,
         hidden all medication and sharp objects.  All chords and  ligatures
         have also been removed.  We have also removed [C1's]  bedroom  door
         to prevent her from locking us out if we feel she  is  at  risk  to
         herself.

         We have direct access to the relevant services both in and  out  of
         working hours.  We  are  still  within  the  early  stages  of  the
         diagnosis of [C1's] problems but has only on Monday 10th  September
         2018 of this week had an assessment done on  [C1]  wherein  it  was
         confirmed that she has an Autistic Spectrum Disorder.  It is a very
         big relief to know her diagnosis but  it  also  a  very  scary  and
         frustrating time for us all.  It is believed  her  behaviour  stems
         from anxiety and panic, but we do not know what is  triggering  her
         to behave this way.  [The appellant] and I think it has a lot to do
         with there being a chance that [the appellant] may have to leave us
         again, as she suffered very badly when he was away last time and it
         is strange that her behaviour has come on so suddenly over the last
         few months, after we learned about the Home Office were seeking  to
         appeal against the initial decision of the First Tier Tribunal.  We
         think she is scared if he leaves her again I  will  only  focus  on
         [C3] and there will be no one there to protect and look after  her.
         The last time [the appellant] was away [C3] hurt her and  [C1]  did
         not tell us until a long time after.  I think she  feels  only  her
         dad can protect her and so she is worried if he is gone she will be
         alone.

         I am uncertain as to how I would be able to cope if [the appellant]
         is forced to leave the UK.  If he is deported it is  very  unlikely
         that he would be unable to return to the UK.  It is my honest  view
         that I could not continue caring for [C3], my mother, [C1] and [C2]
         alone.  [C3's] behaviour could return at anytime of [the appellant]
         isn't here to control him.  I do not know what is happening to [C1]
         and so I have yet to begin to understand her needs and to tp it all
         off my mother's health continues to worsen.  If [the appellant] has
         to leave I will have no choice but to put [C3] into care as I would
         not be able to cope with him and all of our other issues.

         [C3], the  girls  and  I  have  never  been  to  Jamaica  and  [the
         appellant] has not been for several years.  If forced to  leave  we
         could not go with him, especially due to the commitments I have  to
         my mother and because of the children's needs.

         If [the appellant] is forced to leave the UK, it is  very  unlikely
         that  he  would  never  return.   It  is  very  likely   in   those
         circumstances our relationship would have to end.  Even if I wanted
         to join [the appellant], I could  not  do  so  due  to  my  mother.
         Therefore there is no prospect of our relationship  continuing  for
         an indefinite period of time by phone call or video messaging.

         We are an unusually close family as a result of situations we  have
         had to overcome.  If my family is  forced  to  be  broken  up,  the
         effects on all of us would be quiet devastating".

66. In her oral evidence, P accepted that C1 had not self-harmed whilst the
    appellant was in prison.  She was asked about C1's  reasons  for  self-
    harming and she said that C1 speaks "clearly about fear of  her  father
    not being there".

67. In addition to the evidence of the appellant and P, there is in the new
    bundle  of  documents  a  number   of   letters   written   by   health
    professionals/social workers concerning the circumstances of C3 and C1.
     These cover the period 9 February 2018 (when C1 was first referred  to
    CAMHS) to 3 September 2018.

68. It is not necessary to set out  all  the  evidence  which  was  not  in
    substance challenged  by  Mr  Howells.   Mr  Joseph  placed  particular
    emphasis upon the most recent letter of  3  September  2018  which,  in
    effect, summarises the evolving circumstances of C1 and C3 and provides
    the most up-to-date evidence in relation to them.  Apart, that is  from
    the fact that it is now accepted that  on  10  September  2018  C1  was
    diagnosed with ASD.  The letter focuses substantially upon the position
    of C1 but, as will be clear shortly, summarises  the  position  of  the
    family as a whole including C3.  The letter is written by Loren  Green,
    a Specialist Mental Health Practitioner and Child  Social  Worker,  who
    has been working with the family since  April  2018  after  the  urgent
    referral in February 2018 to CAMHS.  The  letter  is  important  and  I
    should set it out in some detail:

         "Presenting issues:

         [C1] was referred to CAMHS due to an  escalating  pattern  of  risk
         taking behaviours such as tying ligatures, attempted strangulation,
         self harming via cutting her arms and legs  and  taking  overdoses.
         Over  a  period  of  assessment  it  became  clear  that  [C1]  was
         struggling  with  numerous  difficulties   including;   generalized
         anxiety and suicidal ideation and behaviours alongside  an  unusual
         neurodevelopmental profile which has led to her being assessed  for
         Autism.

         We have offered a series of interventions to [C1] as an individual,
         [P] and [the appellant] as parents and the family as a whole.  [C1]
         is seen weekly by  myself  and  the  family  are  attending  Family
         Therapy.  The whole family attend appointments and engage well with
         professional support.  In the past [C3], [C1's]  brother  was  also
         seen by our team for a period of time.

         Mental health:

         [C1] has reported an increase in anxiety  since  her  father,  [the
         appellant] was removed from the family home by Police one  morning,
         arrested and then  went  to  prison  for  three  years.   This  was
         observed at [school], where [C1] has had regular sessions with  the
         school counsellor, but also at home by  [P],  who  noted  a  marked
         increase   in   her   ritualised   behaviours/routines   and    her
         sleeplessness.

         [C1] has since suffered from intrusive thoughts  that  people  will
         leave and never come back, or that  they  will  die,  or  that  bad
         things will happen.  These are pre-occupying and occur on  a  daily
         basis.  This has been exacerbated by the  fact  that  she  and  her
         siblings are aware that their father is facing  deportation.   [C1]
         will ask a lot of checking questions about this and  want  to  know
         details about if/when Dad will be leaving and when they  will  know
         for certain.  [C1] struggles to manage uncertainty  or  change  and
         needs to know the families (sic) routine as well as her  own  daily
         one.  Small unexpected incidents, such as a change of ingredient in
         her favourite meal or someone moving objects on her  bedroom  shelf
         can cause real distress and make it hard for  [C1]  to  manage  her
         emotions, often  throwing  things,  self  harming  or  shouting  at
         parents.

         Whilst [C1] is clear that she loves her family and her friends  and
         has lots of goals for her future,  she  struggles  when  day-to-day
         difficulties become  overwhelming  and  this  causes  her  to  feel
         momentarily  that  life  is  not  worth  living,  or  to  try   and
         demonstrate her distress by harming herself.  Parents  have  worked
         hard with CAMHS to put in  place  a  risk  management/crisis  plan,
         however this has had to be extremely rigorous  as  [C1]  can  react
         unexpectedly and with no visible trigger.  As part of our advice to
         [the appellant] and [P] in order to keep [C1] safe, they  have  had
         to supervise her extremely closely.  On the occasions when this has
         relaxed, [C1] has sought out hidden tablets and stored  them  in  a
         pillow case, and has grabbed a  knife  from  the  kitchen  cabinet,
         amongst other things.  [C1] has presented at [hospital] four  times
         in the past five  months,  having  attempted  to  harm  herself  or
         because she is unable to be kept safe at home.  [C1] is  unable  to
         have a bedroom door because she will barricade herself  inside  and
         parents are unable to intervene to keep her  safe  if  she  uses  a
         ligature or other means of self harm.  [P]  reports  that  she  can
         "fall apart" with worry in these crisis moments.  It has often been
         [the appellant] who has had to intervene to talk [C1] down when she
         is holding a knife or to remove the  cord  from  her  and  then  to
         encourage her to come to appointments at CAMHS.

         [C1] struggles to manage any  unstructured  time,  such  as  school
         holidays.  She requires continual parental input  to  reassure  her
         about  activities,  needing  to  know  exactly  what  is  happening
         throughout the day and at what time.  She has a number of  routines
         and rituals which cause considerable distress  to  her  if  she  is
         unable to follow them.  This means she can become very  angry  with
         her siblings and parents are required to  constantly  navigate  her
         relationships with her brother and sister.

         [C1] also has many traits in  keeping  with  someone  with  a  high
         function Autistic Spectrum condition.

         Family history/context:

         [C1] lives at home with her mother, [P], father,  [the  appellant],
         sister [C2] (age 6) and paternal half brother [C3] (13 years).  [P]
         was employed until recently, but has had to stop work in  order  to
         care for [C1] and her siblings and is a carer for  her  mother  who
         has Dementia.  There is depression in [P's] side of the family.

         [C1] is by her own definition "a daddy's girl".  Growing up she has
         described how she and [the appellant] were incredibly  close.   She
         said she would always choose to go to him with  her  problems,  she
         felt he understood her the best and that he  could  keep  her  safe
         from anything.  [The appellant] and [P]  have  told  me  that  [the
         appellant] did a lot of care for [C1] as a baby  and  young  child,
         particularly when [P] suffered a  severe  depressive  episode  when
         [C1] was five years old and had to  be  away,  or  in  bed  for  an
         extended period of time.  I  have  observed  the  close  attachment
         between [the appellant] and [C1] in the room on numerous occasions.

         [C3], [the appellant's] son, was  removed  from  the  care  of  his
         mother, having experienced emotional  and  physical  abuse  in  her
         care, and came to live with the family when [C1] was still a  young
         child.  He had very challenging behaviour and emotional  needs,  in
         keeping with his traumatic past.  [The appellant] and  [P]  had  to
         work hard with the support of Social  Services  and  Mental  Health
         Services ([C3] was seen by our team for  a  number  of  years),  to
         enable [C3] to manage his difficulties.  [The  appellant]  and  [P]
         worked really well with services at the time, and [C3] was able  to
         engage in education and leisure activities again and  to  start  to
         make friends.  When [the appellant] was in prison, [C3's] behaviour
         escalated again and [P] describes at times having to put  [C2]  and
         [C1] in the car in order to escape his aggressive behaviour.

         [C1] and [P] have told me that [C1] could  not  eat  or  sleep  for
         several months after [the appellant] was  removed  from  the  home.
         [C1] still talks about the day her Dad left as very significant for
         her.  [C1] coped whilst [the appellant] was away  by  commencing  a
         series of ritual/behaviours which she has to complete in  order  to
         get on  with  her  day  or  daily  activities.   She  struggled  to
         understand why [the appellant]  could  not  come  back  as  he  had
         promised  (this  is  in  keeping  with  a  child  on  the  Autistic
         Spectrum).  She continually sought reassurance from  [P],  but  [P]
         found it very difficult to manage the emotional needs of all  three
         children - [C2] was very young, [C3]  had  very  complex  emotional
         needs and so [P] reports that [C1] had to cope by herself  and  did
         not get the input she needed, in her father's absence.

         While [the appellant] was in prison [C1] also  disclosed  that  her
         brother, [C3] had asked her to perform a sexual act  on  him.   All
         agencies were involved a[t] the time and support was offered.

         When [the appellant] returned from  prison,  family  life  resumed.
         [C3's] school reported at a recent multi-agency meeting (July 2018)
         that he has made significant progress this year as  a  result,  and
         his attendance is now 100%.  His behaviour is no longer  a  concern
         at home or at school and he told my colleagues  in  Family  Therapy
         that he feels quite settled when  Dad  is  home.   However,  he  is
         likely to  have  significant  ongoing  emotional/behavioural  needs
         throughout his life due to his traumatic childhood and the abuse he
         experienced.  It was evident from  meeting  the  family  that  [C3]
         relies on [the appellant] to provide this sense  of  safety  as  he
         sits right next to dad in the room, leaving almost no gap, and does
         not like to engage in family life or  family  therapy  unless  [the
         appellant] is present.

         Education:

         [C1] is a very bright girl who is already covering aspects of  GCSE
         curriculum at the age  of  11.   She  has  just  transitioned  from
         [primary school] and is beginning Secondary School at [].  She  had
         friends and made good use of the support offered by the  counsellor
         there.

         Social life/hobbies:

         [C1]  plays  for  a  girls  Football  team  where  [the  appellant]
         volunteers  to  assist  with  coaching.   [C1]  told  me  that  she
         particularly enjoys the car rides to and from football with her Dad
         as they listen to music, she can ask him questions  and  they  have
         time to talk just the two of them.  [C1] loves  Art  and  this  has
         been her main hobby since she was a very small child".

69. The letter then goes on to summarise C1's circumstances and Ms  Green's
    concerns about the impact on the family if the appellant is deported as
    follows:

         "Summary:

         [C1] is a young lady with a  complex  family  history,  an  unusual
         developmental history and a high  level  of  mental  health  needs,
         particularly given  her  young  age.   She  is  likely  to  require
         intensive support for the foreseeable  future,  from  services  and
         most importantly from both her parents.  It is clear  from  working
         with [C1] that [the appellant's] absence whilst he  was  in  prison
         has had a very detrimental impact on her anxiety levels, playing  a
         big part in much of  the  current  risk-taking  behaviour.   [C1's]
         neurodevelopmental difficulties means that she  struggles  to  make
         sense of and regulate her emotions, so things which are distressing
         will result in her harming herself.  Some of these  incidents  have
         been extremely serious.  The stress to the family  system  of  [the
         appellant] facing deportation is evident and impacts on all of them
         - it places financial strain on the family as  [the  appellant]  is
         unable to work, it makes them unable to plan for the future  beyond
         the immediate one, and unable for the children to relax  and  enjoy
         their father being at home with them  without  wondering  how  long
         they have got him there for.

         My concerns about the impact on the family should their  father  be
         forced to leave this country are summarised as follows:

           . [C3] will be left with no legal guardian.  [P] has stated  she
             would struggle to manage him  alone  and  he  would  therefore
             likely be taken into the care of the state.   There  is  clear
             evidence that the care system is detrimental to  the  outcomes
             of children, as well as incredibly costly to the state.   [C3]
             has been observed to have a clear and secure attachment to his
             father, and [the appellant]  has  been  actively  involved  in
             supporting his son and working with services to give  him  the
             best chance.

           . [C1's] anxiety is likely to continue to  grow  and  her  needs
             become more complex as she gets older.  Without her father she
             will lose one of her biggest attachment relationships.  He has
             been the person who she has turned to for reassurance,  safety
             and security throughout her very early life, particularly when
             [P] was unwell.  When [the appellant] was  in  prison,  [C1's]
             mental health worsened considerably and she is unable to  make
             further progress in coming to terms with this  trauma,  whilst
             the threat remains that her father  will  be  taken  from  her
             again.  She needs a safe place at home in order to be able  to
             access the therapeutic support she needs to move forwards.   I
             am concerned that without her father  at  home,  [C1's]  risks
             will increase and it will be much harder to keep her safe.

           . [P] will be left as a single parent of three children, two  of
             whom have very complex needs.  [P] has a history of depression
             and has spoken openly with CAMHS about how difficult she found
             the three years when [the appellant] was away.   She  is  also
             currently caring for her mother with Dementia -  without  [the
             appellant] at home to take care of the children  she  will  be
             unable to do this, leading to further emotional and  financial
             pressure for the family.

           . [The appellant] engages very well with services and takes  his
             role as a father extremely seriously.  He researches and  puts
             into practice actions discussed  in  meetings  and  is  honest
             about any challenges he  faces.   [The  appellant]  has  shown
             himself to be dedicated to his children's wellbeing.   He  and
             [P] have had to work as a team to ensure  [C1]  is  unable  to
             continue taking risks with her own life, and this has involved
             24/7 supervision and support, something  that  would  be  very
             challenging for [P] to do by herself,  particularly  when  her
             relationship with [C1] can be difficult and [C1] can refuse to
             listen or to follow through on boundaries set by [P]".

70. In addition to the impact upon C1 and C3, the  evidence  also  confirms
    P's role as the carer for her mother who was diagnosed in January  2018
    with vascular dementia and in respect of whom P has in place a  lasting
    power of attorney in relation to her mother's health, welfare, property
    and financial affairs.  In her witness statement, P says this:

         "Due to my care commitments to  my  mother  and  our  children,  in
         particular our eldest daughter [C1], I am unable to work.  (Exhibit
         CG/4) Last July I was granted lasting  power  of  attorney  for  my
         mother for  health  and  welfare,  as  well  as  her  property  and
         financial affairs (Exhibit CG/5).  It was only in January  2018  we
         had the final diagnosis that my mother has vascular dementia.  With
         this diagnosis it is expected her health will continue  to  decline
         as a result of her disease.  Exhibit GC/6).

         As her full time carer, I have to go to  my  mother's  home  daily;
         every morning, during the day  for  lunch  and  every  evening.   I
         should have a support worker who will work and support  us  once  a
         week to help me understand her needs but that is not yet  arranged.
         My brothers and sisters are still unable to help with her care.  My
         oldest brother is addicted and misuses drugs.

         My older brother is currently serving a prison sentence in  custody
         and he has an extended licence sentence attached to  his  sentence,
         as yet there is no indication as to when he would be released.   My
         sister who lives in Devon is unable to have my mother live with her
         as she foster's children.  My other sister who lives in Bristol has
         learning difficulties and is herself in need  of  support.   As  my
         mother's health is deteriorating it will inevitability be the  case
         that we will have to  merge  our  homes  into  a  bigger  and  more
         suitable accommodation where she can live with my family and I".

71. As I have already set out, P (perhaps not unexpectedly), states in  her
    witness statement that it would not  be  possible  for  her  to  go  to
    Jamaica with the appellant not least because of her care commitments to
    her mother.

72. The evidence of P and the appellant as to  their  family  situation  is
    heart-rending.  The evidence of Ms  Green  is  measured,  informed  and
    persuasive. I state at this juncture that I accept the evidence  before
    me which was not subject to any real challenge by Mr Howells.

73. Dealing first with C3, Judge Lebasci, on the evidence before her at the
    hearing on 16 June 2017, concluded that it would not  be  in  his  best
    interests to accompany his father to Jamaica and, if  his  father  were
    deported, there would be a "significant negative impact on  his  health
    and  behaviour".   The  further  evidence  before  me  reinforces  that
    conclusion.  It would not be in C3's best interests  to  accompany  his
    father.  In the UK, I accept that P would struggle to  look  after  him
    given his previous behavioural problems.  It is clear to  me  that  the
    presence of the appellant has provided stability and,  with  the  other
    support provided, allowed C3's behaviour to improve.  There is,  in  my
    judgment, a very real risk that C3 would have to be taken into care  if
    the appellant were removed as a stabilising force in the family.

74. I emphasise, in reaching my findings, that I am satisfied  on  all  the
    evidence that the  appellant  and  P  form  a  stable  couple  mutually
    supporting each other in raising their children.  They  face,  however,
    significant family problems arising out of the behavioural  and  mental
    health problems of both C3 and C1.

75. In relation to C1, the evidence undisputably demonstrates that she  has
    mental health problems and has been diagnosed with ASD.  As  a  couple,
    the appellant  and  P  have  struggled  together,  again  with  outside
    agencies' support since February 2018, to provide  a  safe  environment
    for C1.  In my judgment,  she  clearly  continues  to  need  that  safe
    environment in order to sustain any improvement in her  mental  health.
    I accept the evidence that her last act of self-harming was in August -
    just over a month ago.  There is in  place  a  safety  plan  which,  in
    effect, seeks to minimise her opportunities  to  engage  in  self-harm.
    The danger and risk of that nevertheless exists.  I accept the evidence
    that C1 is concerned about the appellant's deportation.  Whether or not
    there is a real risk of C3 acting "sexually inappropriately", I  accept
    that that is a very real fear of C1.  If the appellant is removed  from
    the family context, as I have already noted, C3's behaviour and  mental
    health problems are likely to deteriorate.

76. The conclusions of Ms Green, who has been actively  involved  with  the
    family since April 2018, clearly support my conclusion that it  is  not
    in the best interests of either C3 or C1 to be deprived of the  support
    of the appellant.

77. Of course, that the  appellant's  deportation  is  not  in  their  best
    interests is only a primary consideration,  it  has  to  be  determined
    first whether his deportation would have an "unduly harsh" impact  upon
    C1 and C3.

78. In my judgment, I am satisfied that would be the impact  upon  both  C3
    and C1.  The appellant and P, as I have already  said,  function  as  a
    mutually supportive couple bringing up their children and  dealing,  in
    particular, with the problems raised in bringing up C3 and C1.   Whilst
    P managed to  an  extent,  when  the  appellant  was  imprisoned,  C1's
    problems were not then as they are now.  Stripped of the support of the
    appellant, the burden upon P will  increase.   She  will  also,  and  I
    accept this evidence, have the responsibilities of the primary carer of
    her mother who suffers from vascular dementia.  Although that does  not
    directly impact upon C1 and C3, it does so indirectly.  P will, if  the
    appellant is deported, be the children's sole carer and her ability  to
    do so will necessarily be indirectly impacted by the time and care  she
    must devote to her mother.  I entirely accept that P is a conscientious
    mother and carer.  But, in the real world, I accept that she will  face
    serious difficulties and hurdles in carrying the burden  of  being  the
    sole carer of the children and her mother.  I accept her evidence  that
    none of her siblings are in  a  position  to  provide  support  to  P's
    mother.

79. In my judgment, left  to  bring  up  the  children  alone  because  the
    appellant has been deported, is likely to have  a  serious  detrimental
    effect upon both C1 and C3's mental health and behaviour.   Their  need
    for  support  is  constant.   In  particular,  C1's  mental  health  is
    precarious.  The future care  she  requires  because  of  her  recently
    diagnosed ASD is yet to  be  resolved.   She  will,  undoubtedly,  have
    support needs.  In addition, there are her mental  health  needs  which
    can only be exacerbated, as the evidence from Ms Green makes plain,  if
    the appellant is taken away from the family context.

80. I find that it is likely that if the appellant is deported  there  will
    be such a deterioration in the mental health of both C1 and C3 that  C3
    is likely to  return  to  a  situation  where  his  behaviour  is  very
    difficult to manage and, without the appellant, it is likely  that  his
    behaviour will be  impossible  to  control  or  modify.   Likewise,  in
    relation to C1 I am satisfied that she is likely to suffer a heightened
    state of anxiety that is likely to lead her, despite the  best  efforts
    of a safety plan, to attempt self-harming of the  sort  she  previously
    engaged in, including cutting, attempted strangulation  and  taking  of
    overdoses.

81. The impact upon C1 and C3, if the  appellant  is  deported,  goes  well
    beyond  the  impact  upon  children  necessarily  following  from   the
    deportation of their father.  This is simply  not  such  a  case.   The
    impact upon them is likely to be severe, not  transitory  and  (in  the
    case of C1) potentially life threatening.

82. I take fully into account the seriousness of the appellant's  offending
    and I adopt, without repeating, what I set out above at paras 48-50.  I
    have full regard to the sentencing judge's comments in respect  of  the
    appellant's offending.  He  played  a  "significant"  role  in  a  very
    serious drugs offence.  The public interest in his deportation,  having
    been convicted of the very serious  offence  of  conspiracy  to  supply
    Class B drugs with a custodial sentence of four years, is great and  is
    entitled to considerable weight.  The appellant is assessed as  a  'low
    risk' of re-offending and of harm to the  public.   This  is  his  only
    conviction and he has not re-offended since release from detention.

83. Carrying out the balancing exercise,  and  having  regard  to  all  the
    circumstances, I am satisfied that in relation to both C1  and  C3  the
    appellant's deportation would  be  "unduly  harsh".   I  find  that  in
    respect of both C1 and C2, Exception 2 is established.

84. Of course, that is not sufficient for the appellant to succeed  because
    he must establish that he falls within  s.117C(6)  on  the  basis  that
    there are "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above"  those  in
    Exception 2.

85. In considering that issue, I take fully into account the impact upon C1
    and C3 that I have set out above which is likely if  the  appellant  is
    deported.  I acknowledge, as the Court of Appeal has made  plain,  that
    it will be "rare" for an individual to  succeed  in  establishing  that
    their deportation is not in the public interest by virtue of s.117C(6).
     I am, however, satisfied that this is one of those "rare" cases  where
    the circumstances are "very compelling".  The appellant's case  is,  in
    my judgment, "very strong".  Despite the very  serious  nature  of  the
    appellant's offending which I take fully into account together with the
    need to deter other foreign nationals from committing offences and  the
    "low risk" posed by the appellant of future offending, I  am  satisfied
    that the disastrous consequences that are likely  to  follow  for  this
    family  if  the  appellant  is  deported  amount  to  "very  compelling
    circumstances" that are "over and above" simply being  "unduly  harsh".
    The future of both C1 and C3, without the  appellant  as  part  of  the
    supportive family with P, and  despite  P's  undoubted  commitment  and
    willingness to care for their  children,  is  likely  to  be  dire  and
    riddled with real  and  tangible  dangers  to  the  mental  health  and
    wellbeing of C1 and C3.  The public interest does not, in my  judgment,
    despite its great weight in this case, outweigh  the  impact  upon  the
    children if, as will be the case, they are left to be cared by P  alone
    in the UK.  The impact upon P, and indeed potentially upon  her  mother
    whose care may well also suffer if P is  'dragged  between  pillar  and
    post' by the severe stresses and strains of looking  after  C1  and  C3
    alone, is a relevant matter that I take into account in  having  regard
    to whether there are very compelling  circumstances  "over  and  above"
    those described in Exception 2.

86. For these reasons, therefore, I am satisfied that the  appellant  falls
    within  s.117C(6)  in  that  there  are  established  "very  compelling
    circumstances, over  and  above"  (and  I  emphasis  those  words)  the
    circumstances described in Exception 2.  As a result of the application
    of s.117C(6), the public interest is outweighed and  does  not  require
    his deportation.

87. Consequently, I am satisfied that the appellant's deportation would  be
    disproportionate and a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

88. For the reasons set out in my decision dated 11 April 2018, the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision to allow the appellant's appeal under  Article
    8 involved the making of an error of law.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision was, accordingly, set aside.

89. I re-make the decision allowing the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             11 October 2018

