
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
hu/05554/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 September 2018                    | On 01 October 2018                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR KABESA MWANSA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Olufunwa, Legal Representative, Immigration Law
Practice


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The  appellant  (hereinafter  the  Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)  has
    permission to challenge the decision of Judge Meyler of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) posted on 12 June 2018 allowing on human rights  grounds
    the appeal of the respondent (a citizen  of  Zambia)  (hereinafter  the
    claimant) against the decision made by the  SSHD  on  9  February  2018
    refusing leave to remain.

2.   The judge  allowed  the  appeal  because  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    claimant met the requirements of  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and that therefore there was no public  interest  in  removing  a
    person who qualifies under the Rules.  The  judge  was  also  satisfied
    that the  SSHD  had  not  proven  that  the  claimant  had  made  false
    representations.

3.   The written grounds raised no challenge to  the  judge's  finding  that
    there had not been fake representations nor to the judge's findings  on
    all the requirements of paragraph 276B dealt with in the decision.  The
    grounds were confined to the submission that the judge failed  to  make
    any findings on paragraph  276B(iv)  in  respect  of  demonstration  of
    sufficient knowledge of the English language and  sufficient  knowledge
    about life in the UK in accordance with Appendix KoLL.

4.   I am satisfied that the judge fell into error in not dealing  expressly
    with paragraph 276B(iv), but  I  am  equally  satisfied  this  did  not
    constitute a material error of law  since  (as  Mr  Tan  conceded)  the
    author of the SSHD's grounds overlooked that the  claimant  had  indeed
    demonstrated sufficient knowledge both of the English language and life
    in the UK and had produced satisfactory evidence to show he had done so
    in the form of a Pass Notification letter stating that  he  had  passed
    the Life in the UK test on 6 May 2018 and a  certificate  from  Trinity
    College, London confirming the award to the claimant of a Grade 5  CEFR
    Level B.1 with Distinction.  Whilst therefore  the  judge  should  have
    addressed paragraph 276B(iv) specifically, the fact of  the  matter  is
    that  the  appellant  met  its  requirements  and  therefore  met   the
    requirements of  paragraph  276B  in  full.   Accordingly  the  judge's
    finding that because the requirements of 276B were  met  there  was  no
    public interest in removing the appellant, was unimpeachable.

5.   At the outset Mr Tan sought to raise an  issue  regarding  the  judge's
    treatment of the deception issue pointing out that section 7.3  of  the
    application form he filled in does request of applicants  whether  they
    have received any other penalty, e.g. a caution (to which the  claimant
    had incorrectly stated "no").  Leaving aside that the  same  form  also
    contains wording referring to arrest or  charge  (on  which  the  judge
    relied), I am not prepared  to  accept  any  amendment  of  the  SSHD's
    grounds to include this matter.  It was not raised in the  grounds  and
    in the nature of the issue (an allegation of  deception  on  which  the
    burden rested on the SSHD) it would be quite  inappropriate  to  permit
    the matter to be re-ventilated at this stage, when it was not raised in
    the grounds.

6.   For the above reasons I conclude that the SSHD's  grounds  have  fallen
    away and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                                 Date: 26 September 2018
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

