
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05900/2016
     HU/03130/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On January 19, 2018                          |On January 23, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                         MR LAWRENCE EMELIKE UKANDA
                         MRS OMOLIZE LAWRENCE UKANDU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and
               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Unigwe, Counsel, instructed by Melvyn Everson and
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellants are  Nigerian  nationals.   The  second-named  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom as student on October  1,  2006  with  valid
    leave until November 30, 2009. Two applications to extend her leave  as
    Tier 4 (General) student were refused but on  April  12,  2010  further
    leave was granted which ultimately extended her stay in  this  category
    until November 12, 2012. She then applied on March 21, 2012  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 Post Study Migrant and  this  was  granted  until
    June 1, 2014. The first-named appellant entered the United  Kingdom  as
    his wife's dependant in March 2013. Two children have since been born.

 3. Subsequent applications to remain as Tier 1 Entrepreneurs and dependant
    were rejected on  June  27,  2014  and  August  5,  2014.  Appeals  and
    administrative reviews were refused.

 4. On September 16, 2015 the appellants applied for  settlement  based  on
    long residence. The respondent refused their  applications  on  January
    15, 2016.

 5. The appellants lodged grounds of  appeal  on  February  1,  2016  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    Their appeals came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Wilson
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on July 17, 2017  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on August 2, 2017 the  Judge  refused  their  appeals  both
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 6. The appellants appealed the decision on August 16, 2017. Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingsworth on
    November 27,  2017.  In  giving  permission  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hollingsworth found the Judge may have erred by not  attaching
    weight to the extensive lawful period of 9 year 8 months the appellants
    were in this country when considering proportionality.

 7. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Unigwe adopted the grounds of appeal and  submitted  the  Judge  had
    erred by failing to consider article 8 extensively and in particular by
    failing to attach weight to the period  of  lawful  residence  in  this
    country and the  role  they  played  in  the  siblings'  lives.  Having
    accepted the appellants would face significant  difficulties  and  some
    economic disadvantages the Judge should have allowed the appeals.

 9. Mr Nath adopted the Rule 24 statement  dated  December  20,  2017.  The
    Judge was fully aware the appellant fell just short of  the  ten  years
    required and noted the difficulties  they  would  face  but  ultimately
    concluded they were not enough. A "near miss" was insufficient  and  on
    its own would not amount  to  compelling  circumstances  to  allow  the
    appeal  outside  the  Rules.  The  Rules  are  an  expression  of   the
    respondent's position on such applications. In this case the Judge  had
    regard to all the factors and whilst a different judge may have reached
    a different conclusion this decision was open to the Judge.




    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

10. At the original hearing the second-named appellant  accepted  that  her
    total lawful residence totalled just under ten years  and  consequently
    she could not meet the long residence  provisions.  Whilst  being  here
    lawfully she had obtained a Bachelor of Arts and Master of  Science  in
    business economics. She contributed  to  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    through her community work, her work  with  the  church  and  by  being
    economically self-sufficient. The Judge found her to be a credible  and
    honest witness.

11. At [6] of his decision the Judge  noted  the  second-named  appellant's
    parents and brother were alive and living in Nigeria.  The  Judge  also
    accepted that she had two UK siblings one of whom provided her and  her
    family with accommodation and some  financial  support  and  the  other
    owned a small shop which provided additional income. The Judge accepted
    life would be more difficult in Nigeria. At [7]  the  Judge  considered
    the best interests of the children and concluded their  best  interests
    were with their parents and that was the  most  important  relationship
    regardless of the fact they had uncles and cousins in this country. The
    Judge assessed the claim under paragraph 276ADE(vi) HC  395  and  found
    there  would  be  no  significant  obstacles.  This  finding  was   not
    challenged in the grounds of appeal.

12. At [9] the Judge set out the arguments advanced by  their  Counsel  and
    then between [11] and  [13]  the  Judge  considered  the  appeal  under
    article 8 ECHR. The Judge noted the second-named appellant had built up
    a considerable private life amounting to 9 years 8 months lawfully. The
    Judge  reminded  himself  that  refusing  the   appeals   would   cause
    significant difficulties for a family relocating to  Nigeria  and  that
    such a move would present some economic  disadvantages  for  them.  The
    Judge also mentioned "near miss" in the environment of article 8 ECHR.

13. In SS (Congo) and Others 2015 EWCA Civ 387 it was held  that  the  fact
    that  a  case  was  a  'near  miss'  in  relation  to  satisfying   the
    requirements of the  rules  would  not  show  that  compelling  reasons
    existed requiring the grant of the leave to remain outside  the  Rules.
    If a claimant could show however that there were  individual  interests
    at stake covered by  Article  8,  which  gave  rise  to  a  claim  that
    compelling circumstances existed to justify the grant of leave  outside
    the rules, the fact that the case was a 'near-miss' might be a relevant
    consideration, which tipped the balance in his or her favour."

14. At [13] and [14] the Judge identified  circumstances  relevant  to  the
    appellants but was not satisfied they were sufficient  to  depart  from
    the Rules. Mr Unigwe raised the relationship  between  the  appellants'
    family and the second-named appellant's brothers but this was addressed
    by the Judge in [13] of his decision.

15. The main thrust of appeal was that the Judge had failed to consider the
    lawful residence, the relationships they had in this  country  and  the
    fact  they  would  face  significant  difficulties  and  some  economic
    disadvantage.

16. Having listened to the submissions I am not persuaded the Judge  erred.
    The Judge was fully aware of the law and the correct approach  to  take
    in such cases. Taking the decision as a whole I am satisfied the  Judge
    did have regard to the lengthy period of lawful residence and it  would
    be wrong to suggest no regard was given to this. A reading of  [11]  to
    13] demonstrates engagement with these issues. The Judge also took into
    account the difficulties they may face and the loss of  direct  contact
    with UK family but concluded removal was not disproportionate.

17. As Mr Nath conceded a  different  Judge  may  have  reach  a  different
    conclusion but I am satisfied there is nothing in this  decision  which
    amounts to an error in law.

    DECISION

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  original
    decision and I dismiss this appeal.


Signed                              Date     19/01/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No award is made as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     19/01/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





