
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05316/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 November 2018                           |On 17 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                              mr Liton Hossain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 12 October 2018 I set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.  I now remake that decision.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born on 6 March 1987, is
    appealing against the decision of the respondent on 8 February 2018 to
    refuse his application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of
    his private life and under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The appellant's case is that he came to the UK on 29 December 2015 as a
    Tier 4 (General) Student with leave until 31 May 2017 in order to study
    English language and applied linguistics at Coventry University.  He
    claims that because of medical issues arising from excruciating pain in
    his teeth he was unable to attend a number of classes and as a
    consequence Coventry University terminated him from the course.  He
    claims that his family invested substantial funds in supporting his
    education and will be greatly disappointed and upset if he returns to
    Bangladesh without concluding his education.

 4. The appellant also claims that he is an active blogger who has taken a
    firm view against religious extremism and that he is a member of the
    Bangladesh Secular Humanist Movement.  He expressed concern that upon
    return to Bangladesh he would be unable to continue with what he
    described as his non-conventional agnostic beliefs.

 5. He expressed a wish to be given the opportunity to complete his studies
    so that he can obtain employment in another country and avoid returning
    to Bangladesh where he believes his freedom to disavow his religious
    heritage would be stifled.

 6. Mr Lindsay drew attention to the absence of any documentary evidence to
    support the appellant's contention that the reason his studies at
    Coventry University were terminated were because of medical problems.
    He also noted the absence of any letter or other evidence from a doctor
    concerning an inability to study because of the teeth difficulties.

 7. With respect to the appellant's claim that he fears being unable to
    express his beliefs in Bangladesh Mr Lindsay noted that this had not
    been raised prior to today's hearing and that there was an absence of
    any evidence to support the claim.

 8. The only evidence adduced by the appellant was a printout from Facebook
    which sets out what appears to be the principles or agenda of the
    Bangladesh Secular Humanist Movement.  However, as noted by Mr Lindsay,
    there is nothing in these documents to indicate that they were written
    or endorsed by the appellant.

Analysis

 9. This is an appeal pursuant to Section 84(1)(c) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") (that removal of the
    appellant from the UK would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human
    Rights Act 1998) where the appellant contends that his removal would
    breach his right to respect for private and family life under Article 8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.

10. The appellant is not able to satisfy any of the routes to leave to
    remain under the Immigration Rules. The only paragraph of the Rules he
    could potentially avail himself of his 276ADE(1)(iv), on the basis that
    there would be very significant obstacles to his integration into
    Bangladesh.

11. However, the appellant has spent the vast majority of his life in
    Bangladesh and has not submitted any evidence to show that he does not
    have family in Bangladesh or that he would face difficulties in the job
    market or integrating into life in Bangladesh.

12. The appellant claims that he would face challenges in Bangladesh
    because of his rejection of conventional Islam.  However, as pointed
    out by Mr Lindsay, the appellant has not submitted any evidence to
    substantiate this claim. The appellant submits that he is an active
    blogger but no documents showing the blogging activity were adduced.
    He submits that he is a member of and active in the Bangladesh Secular
    Humanist Movement but no documents were submitting demonstrating this.
    The only document adduced is a Facebook page of the Bangladesh Secular
    Humanist Movement where no reference is made to the appellant.  I
    therefore do not accept the appellant's claim that he has non-
    conventional agnostic beliefs which have been expressed publicly.  In
    any event, the appellant has not submitted any objective evidence to
    show that having his claimed belief system would place him at risk or
    create difficulties for him in Bangladesh.  I therefore do not accept
    that the claimed agnostic beliefs and/or activities would be an
    obstacle to integrating into Bangladesh.

13. It is clear that the appellant has a strong desire to remain in the UK
    and complete his studies but this does not constitute an obstacle, let
    alone very significant obstacle, to integration into Bangladesh.

14. I now turn to consider the appellant's claim outside the Immigration
    Rules having regard to the considerations enumerated in Part 5A of the
    2002 Act.

15. The appellant speaks English and is financially independent as he has
    been able to rely on his family to support him.  The factors at
    paragraphs 117B(2) and (3) of the 2002 Act therefore do not weigh
    against him.

16. The appellant's private life in the UK was established when his
    immigration status was precarious as he entered the UK as a student
    with no reasonable expectation of a right to settle.  Therefore, in
    accordance with Section 117B(5), little weight should be given to his
    private life.

17. I balance the factors under Article 8 outside the Rules as follows:

18. Weighing in favour of the appellant is that he has spent almost three
    years in the UK and that he and his family have invested in his
    education.  He also speaks English and is not a burden on the tax
    payer.

19. Weighing against him is that:

        . The maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public
          interest and there is no lawful basis for the appellant to remain
          in the UK.

        . The appellant came to the UK as a student with no reasonable
          expectation of permanent settlement.

        . His private life in the UK was established when his immigration
          status was precarious.

        . He has been in the UK for only a short period of time.

        . He has not established a family life with a partner or children in
          the UK.

20. Balancing the aforementioned factors it is, in my view, overwhelmingly
    clear that removing the appellant from the UK would not be
    disproportionate under Article 8(2) ECHR. His appeal is therefore
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 11 December 2018              |

