
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber Appeal Number: HU/05701/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House (remotely)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 12 April 2021                    |On: 23 April 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                                     MHB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson, counsel instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the remaking of an appeal against  the  refusal  to  grant  the
    appellant entry clearance to join her minor British  citizen  child  in
    the United Kingdom, which was made in a decision dated 12 March 2019.

Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously and is  reiterated  below  because
    this case involves a minor.

Background

 3. The appellant's youngest child, "R" is a British citizen  and  came  to
    the United Kingdom  in  2009  in  order  to  undertake  his  education,
    residing with his older siblings thereafter. He was aged 14 at the time
    of the appellant's latest entry clearance application. R's father  died
    in 2008. The appellant made a series of applications  for  visit  visas
    between 2014 and 2018, all of which were unsuccessful. On  13  December
    2018 she sought entry clearance for settlement to join R, in the United
    Kingdom as his parent. It is the refusal of that application, by way of
    a decision dated 12 March 2019, which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. According to the said decision letter, the appellant did not  meet  the
    eligibility  requirements  because  she  had  not  submitted  a   birth
    certificate confirming that she was the biological  parent  of  R.   In
    addition, the appellant had not provided a death  certificate  relating
    to R's father which was required as evidence  that  the  appellant  was
    solely responsible for R. The evidence of contact between the appellant
    and R was considered to be inadequate. The  appellant  also  failed  to
    meet the English language requirement. While the respondent noted  that
    the appellant had provided medical evidence to support her claim to  be
    exempt from the said requirement, the respondent did  not  accept  that
    the appellant's mental health diagnoses meant that she could  not  take
    the test. The  respondent  decided  that  the  circumstances  were  not
    exceptional; that the appellant did not enjoy a family  life  with  her
    son and that even if she did, her exclusion from the United Kingdom was
    a proportionate decision. No  concerns  were  raised  with  either  the
    suitability or financial requirements of the Rules.

 5. An Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) reviewed the  matter  on  15  November
    2019  but  maintained  the  ECO's  initial  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cole was set aside, following
    a paper consideration of the error of law issue which took place on  27
    October 2020. The reasons were as follows.

    "There is rightly agreement between the  parties  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in the  dismissal  of  the  medical  evidence
    relating to the  appellant's  claim  to  be  exempt  from  the  English
    language requirement. Accordingly, the judge's decision in relation  to
    this aspect is set aside. However, this was not the only issue advanced
    in the grounds. Issue was taken with the judge's Article  8  assessment
    and it was  said  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  section  55  into
    consideration. The grant of permission did not  address  these  matters
    and nor was permission refused in relation to  them.  The  respondent's
    Rule 24 response does not comment on the remaining grounds.  Given  the
    lack of consideration given to the second  and  third  grounds  in  the
    written submissions, the safest option is for the judge's  decision  to
    be set aside in its entirety. "

The rehearing

 7. At the start of the hearing, there was some  discussion  regarding  the
    parameters  of  the  appeal.  Essentially,  Ms  Isherwood  accepted  Mr
    Timson's submission that the respondent had not taken issue with any of
    the other findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  that  those
    findings ought to be preserved.

 8. I agreed with the parties that  it  would  be  right  to  preserve  the
    previous findings that the appellant was the  biological  mother  of  R
    [31] and that she had sole parental responsibility for  R  [36],  which
    left only the issue of whether the appellant was  exempt  from  meeting
    the English language requirement under the terms  of  the  respondent's
    policy. Mr Timson therefore had no need to call his  witnesses  as  the
    issue for consideration was fully addressed by the medical evidence.

 9. For the appellant,  Mr  Timson  relied  on  the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance, namely "Assessing  the  English  language  requirement"  V3.0
    dated 6 April 2021 (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  Guidance).   In
    essence, he argued that the medical evidence provided by the  appellant
    was sufficient to demonstrate that she had  a  mental  condition  which
    prevented her from taking the test. The veracity of that  evidence  had
    not been challenged by the respondent.

10. Ms Isherwood argued that there was a lack of evidence as to the  impact
    of the appellant's illness on her sons and that  the  medical  evidence
    now made mention of dementia which had not been raised previously.  She
    pointed to the fact that the CT scan results reported no abnormalities.
    Ms Isherwood heavily relied on the authority  of  SD  (British  citizen
    children  -  entry  clearance)  Sri  Lanka  [2020]   UKUT   00043(IAC),
    emphasising that the  appellant's  case  was  wrongly  focused  on  her
    medical condition and that having a British child was  not  a  powerful
    factor. Turning to the Guidance, Ms Isherwood argued that there was  no
    evidence  that  the  appellant's  conditions  severely  restricted  her
    ability  to  take  the  English  language  test  nor  that  they   were
    sufficiently serious. The evidence provided did  not  explain  how  the
    appellant met the test set out in the Guidance.

11. In reply, Mr Timson expressed concern that there had been an attempt to
    widen the issues. He urged me to note that the appeal solely  concerned
    whether the appellant  had  provided  sufficient  evidence  as  to  her
    inability to take the English language test. The witness statements did
    not address this point because  it  was  a  medical  issue.  Mr  Timson
    offered his non-expert view that a CT scan could not give a  definitive
    diagnosis of dementia to counter Ms  Isherwood's  similarly  non-expert
    opinion. Thereafter Mr Timson took me through the  policy  and  medical
    evidence in some detail, emphasising that  the  appellant's  conditions
    severely restricted her ability to learn English or take the  test.  He
    submitted that the appellant's doctor gave the reason she cannot  learn
    which are linked to her medical conditions and her  medication  and  it
    had not been suggested that the  doctor  was  not  telling  the  truth.
    Considering section 55, if the Rules are met, the decision of the Entry
    Clearance Officer is disproportionate.

12. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision.

Discussion

13. In reaching this decision, I have considered all  the  evidence  before
    me, contained in the appellant's three  bundles  and  the  respondent's
    bundle as well as the submissions made.

14. The appellant established that she met the requirements  of  the  Rules
    for entry as a parent of a British child  with  the  exception  of  the
    English  language  requirement.  As  is  apparent  from  the  foregoing
    paragraphs, she claims an exemption on the  basis  of  her  mental  and
    physical conditions which  it  is  argued  prevent  her  from  studying
    English and taking the test.

15. The current evidence in  relation  to  the  exemption  claimed  by  the
    appellant was not before the  respondent,  however  I  am  required  to
    determine the relevant factual issues for myself on the  basis  of  the
    evidence  before  me,  giving  proper  consideration  and   weight   to
    respondent's decision, applying MS (Pakistan) [2020] UKSC 9.

16.  The  appellant  relies  on  two  medical  reports  from  her  treating
    physician, Dr Rahman. The CT  scan  results  show  no  abnormality  and
    therefore do not advance her case. I have not had sight of  the  report
    of Dr Rahman which was before the ECO and which was dated  13  December
    2018.

17. The first report is dated 31 October 2019 and states that the appellant
    is suffering from hypertension and anxiety disorder for  which  she  is
    prescribed various medication. The report explains that the appellant's
    capacity for acquiring new knowledge, specifically English, is affected
    by her diagnoses because she "struggles to  maintain  new  information"
    and her medications bring about  side  effects  including  "depression,
    headaches, confusion." The doctor goes on to state that the appellant's
    existing knowledge of English is  lacking  and  that  his  professional
    medical opinion is that the appellant would not be able to undertake an
    English language course at the time of the report or in the future. The
    second report of Dr Rahman is dated 1 February 2020  and  confirms  his
    earlier opinion in full. In addition, a diagnosis of dementia has  been
    added and two further types of  medication  are  prescribed,  making  a
    total of five. The appellant's medical records also show that Dr Rahman
    has been treating her for her various conditions since 1 February 2017.
    The reliability of this evidence has not been challenged and I can  see
    no obvious reason to reject it. The  reports,  in  particular,  provide
    diagnoses,  details  of  treatment,   are   reasonably   detailed   and
    demonstrate sufficient knowledge of  the  appellant  as  a  patient.  I
    therefore accord considerable weight to these reports and find them  to
    provide reliable evidence as to the physical and mental  state  of  the
    appellant.

18. I now turn to  the  Secretary  of  State's  Guidance,  with  particular
    emphasis on exemption from the English language requirement. Page 27 of
    the Guidance explains that there  is  no  specified  evidence  for  the
    medical exemption under Appendix English  Language  but  that  original
    current  medical  evidence  from  a  medical  practitioner  "must"   be
    provided. In this instance, there were  two  such  pieces  of  evidence
    which meet that description before  me.  An  example  provided  in  the
    Guidance as to when an exemption can be claimed is where an  applicant:
    "is suffering from a long-term or ongoing illness or disability  (which
    may last for years) that severely  restricts  their  ability  to  learn
    English or to take the test."  The  evidence  before  me  is  that  the
    appellant  is  suffering  from  anxiety  disorder  and,  in   addition,
    experiences depression, headaches  and  confusion  owing  to  the  side
    effects of her medication. There is no evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant's health is likely to improve. On the contrary, she has  been
    treated by Dr Rahman for these conditions for over four years  and,  on
    balance, I accept that her conditions are long-term.   I  am  satisfied
    that the effect of the appellant's conditions  and  medication  on  her
    mental state  severely  restrict  her  ability  to  learn  English  and
    therefore to take the test. Accordingly, the  appellant  qualified  for
    the exemption claimed.

19. Neither representative made lengthy  submissions  regarding  Article  8
    ECHR. Mr Timson argued only that if the appellant could show  that  she
    met the Rules, combined with the best interests of her minor child this
    sufficed to render the ECO's decision a  disproportionate  outcome.  Ms
    Isherwood did not argue otherwise, her submissions being based  on  the
    premise that the appellant could not meet the Rules.

20. The appellant's son R, who is still only aged 16, has been waiting  for
    his mother to join him in the UK since  the  application  was  made  in
    2018. In his statement he describes his desire for her to join him here
    and his feeling of deflation when her application  was  refused.  Given
    that R's brother "K," who has been caring for him, wishes to hand  over
    day to day care of R to the appellant so that he can  marry,  I  accept
    that it is in R's best interests that the appellant is granted entry to
    the UK. I am satisfied that the appellant  and  R  have  established  a
    family life, indeed she is solely responsible for  his  upbringing,  as
    found by the First-tier Tribunal. The ECO's decision has prevented that
    family life from resuming in the UK, where R has been living  for  more
    than a decade. That decision was lawfully made at the time on the basis
    of the  evidence  before  the  respondent  and  rightly  concerned  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control. It  is  non-controversial
    that the Immigration Rules reflect the position  of  the  Secretary  of
    State on proportionality and reflect how the balance should  be  struck
    between individual rights and the public interest.  The  appellant  has
    demonstrated that she meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph  EC-P  of
    Appendix FM to the Rules and that her exclusion from the United Kingdom
    is  disproportionate.  The  appellant's   human   rights   appeal   is,
    accordingly, allowed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:                                 Date 13 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
for the following reason. The evidence which  led  to  the  appellant  being
able to demonstrate that she met the  requirements  of  the  Rules  was  not
before the Entry Clearance Officer.


Signed                                  Date: 13 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email




