
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05300/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 May 2017                             |On 30 May 2017                    |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                 Asij Gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Rai, Counsel, instructed by Sam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen of Nepal.   On  21
    August 2015 the appellant (hereafter the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  or
    ECO) refused his application for an entry clearance to settle in the UK
    as the adult dependant relative of his  father  who  is  an  ex-Ghurkha
    soldier.  At the time of his application the claimant was aged 31 years
    and 2 months.  The ECO considered his application in  relation  to  the
    Home Secretary's policy as outlined in Annex K, IDI Chapter 15  Section
    2A 13.2 as amended on 5  January  2015.   The  claimant  appealed  that
    refusal.  In  a  determination  sent  on  21  October  2016  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) Judge A Kelly allowed his appeal on Article 8 grounds.

2.   The ECO's grounds of appeal were fourfold.  It was submitted  that  the
    judge erred in (1)  reversing  the  burden  of  proof;  (2)   making  a
    finding of financial and emotional  dependence  that  was  against  the
    weight of the evidence; (3)  failing to correctly apply the  provisions
    of s.117B of the NIAA 2002; and (4) incorrectly treating  the  claimant
    as a victim of historical injustice.

3.   I am grateful to both representatives for their concise submissions.

4.   I can be relatively brief in addressing grounds (1) - (3).  In  respect
    of (1), Miss Fijiwala did not seek to pursue it further and I think she
    was right not to do so because it seems  clear  that  in  referring  in
    paragraph 24 to there being "no other compelling reasons for  excluding
    the appellant from the United Kingdom" the judge was simply  trying  to
    encapsulate what she took to be the guidance  given  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Gurung and others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong;  weight)
    especially paragraph 5 of the headnote in Ghising.   Whilst  the  words
    used could be read as reversing the burden of proof, it is sufficiently
    clear that the judge was simply meaning to convey she had  applied  the
    guidance given in Gurung and Gising.

5.   As regards (2,) whilst in my view the judge's  findings  on  dependency
    are at the extreme end of a spectrum of reasonable decisions that could
    have been made about the claimant's dependency, I  cannot  accept  that
    such findings were not open to the judge.  Even  though  the  appellant
    was aged 31, was not in full-time education and appeared  not  to  have
    sought  employment  out  of  choice,  the  judge's  assessment  of  his
    situation was nevertheless characterised by dependency in that he still
    relied on his parents  emotionally  (and  in  this  context  the  judge
    attributed  weight  to  Nepalese  cultural  and  family  patterns)  and
    financially and that would remain the case until he married.  In short,
    I consider the ECO's second ground amounts to a disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings of fact rather than identification of an error of law.
     Miss Fijiwala's trawl through case law to try and demonstrate an error
    in the judge's finding of fact has not persuaded me there was  such  an
    error.

6.   In relation to ground (3), it is first of all clear that the judge  had
    regard to s.117B consideration generally: see paragraph  19.   However,
    it does seem to me that the judge misapplied s.117B(2).   At  paragraph
    20 she stated:

         "20. This case concerns Article 8 family life, so that  subsections
             (4) (5) & (6) of section 117B are inapplicable in  this  case.
             In respect of section 117B(2), I am  not  satisfied  that  the
             appellant speaks English.   The  sponsor's  witness  statement
             states that the appellant's education was minimal and that  he
             only completed his  studies  up  to  grade  10.   This  counts
             against him.  However, he is physically fit and healthy and  I
             see no reason why  he  could  not  learn  English  and  obtain
             employment in this country once he has adapted to life here."

7.   The judge's reasoning here betrays an error of approach.  The  test  as
    set out in s.117B provides that:

         "It is in the public interest and in particular in the interests of
         the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek
         to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English."

     The provision is in the present tense.  It does  not  contemplate  that
    this requirement will be met simply because it is considered  a  person
    could learn English after arrival in the UK.  Mr Rai  sought  to  argue
    that this provision had to be read in the light of s.117B(2)(a)  -  (b)
    which identify the reason for this consideration as being:

         "because persons who can speak English ...


         (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers; and


         (b)  are better able to integrate into society."


    He pointed out that the judge found that the appellant would not  be  a
    burden on taxpayers and would be able to "adapt"/integrate.  However, I
    am not persuaded that subparagraphs (a) and  (b)  justify  a  purposive
    rather than an ordinary meaning construction of s.117B(2).  The purpose
    of subparagraphs (a)  and  (b)  is  to  identify  the  public  interest
    rationale for imposing these considerations; it is nor to  alter  their
    meaning.


8.   A further error in the judge's treatment of s.117B is that  she  wholly
    misapplied the relevance of s.117B(3) which identifies that  it  is  in
    the public interest that persons who seek to enter or remain in the  UK
    "are  financially  independent".   It  was  central  to   the   judge's
    assessment of the claimant's case that he  was  financially  dependent.
    Whilst that lent support to the judge's assessment  that  the  claimant
    met one of the requirements of the relevant  policy,  it  should  still
    have been weighed in the Article 8 proportionality  assessment  against
    the claimant. The appellant's  was  an  appeal  brought  on  Article  8
    grounds only; it could not be brought on the  basis  of  accordance  or
    otherwise with the Immigration Rules as such. (For the same reasons  as
    given above for concluding that s.117B(2)(a) - (b)  do  not  assist  in
    interpreting s.117B(2).  I do not consider that subparagraphs  (a)  and
    (b) of s.117B(3) can assist the claimant either.  The fact was that  he
    was not financially independent.  Hence the  judge's  understanding  of
    and application of s.117B consideration was vitiated by legal error.

9.   Turning to ground (4), I consider  that  here  too  the  respondent  is
    right to identify legal error.  The judge clearly considered  that  the
    claimant should be regarded as someone who had suffered  an  historical
    injustice.  At paragraph 22 the judge stated:

         "22. I am quite satisfied that  had  the  appellant's  family  been
             afforded the opportunity to  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom
             prior to 2010 then they  would  have  done  so.   The  sponsor
             applied for entry clearance immediately after the respondent's
             policy towards Ghurkha veterans changed in 2009  and  he  made
             the necessary arrangements to travel to this country  as  soon
             as his entry clearance visa was granted.  The respondent's own
             policy towards Ghurkhas was changed once again on 5th  January
             2015 to allow a child of a Ghurkha who was over 18  but  under
             31 to join their parent in the United Kingdom.  By this  time,
             the appellant had turned 31 and  so  narrowly  missed  out  on
             being able to benefit from this change  in  policy.   However,
             the respondent's policy does not have the status of law and  I
             am  not  bound  to  reflect  what  is  arguably  an  arbitrary
             distinction between a person who is under the age  of  31  and
             one who is just over the age of 31."

10.  Further at paragraph 21  the  judge  treated  the  claimant's  case  as
    falling within the  "historic  injustice"  category  for  an  erroneous
    reason. He stated it was because "... the appellant [claimant's] father
    was deprived of the opportunity to settle in the UK in the 1970s.   Had
    he done so I find that it is unlikely that the  [claimant's]  childhood
    would have been spent in the UK".  There is more than one fault in  the
    judge's assessment that the claimant's case  fell  into  the  "historic
    wrong/injustice" category.  First of  all,  there  is  nothing  in  the
    decided authorities to support the view that the claimant's case is one
    of historic injustice.  In Gurung at paragraph 18 the Court  of  Appeal
    stated that the Ghurkha had to be  able  to  show  that  "but  for  the
    historic injustice he would have settled in the UK at a time  when  his
    dependant (now) adult child would have been  able  to  accompany  him."
    The policy as set out in Annex K (dated  22  January  2015)  stated  at
    paragraph 17 that:


         "Historical Injustice


         17.  In order to qualify for settlement under this policy the  Home
             Office needs to be satisfied that the former Gurkha would have
             applied to settle in the UK upon discharge with the  dependent
             child if they had been born by then (but otherwise  the  child
             would have been born here)."


    In the claimant's case there was no basis for concluding he would  have
    been born in the UK.  The claimant's father  left  Ghurkha  service  in
    1971.  The claimant was  not  born  until  January  1984.   The  policy
    arrangements announced in May 2009 required applicants to normally meet
    a number of conditions including:


         "6.  The applicant was under 18 years of age at  the  time  of  the
             former Ghurkha's discharge ..."


    As stated in Annex K of the Home Office guidance dated 22 January 2015:






         "Age at time of former Ghurkha's discharge


         16.  The applicant must have been under 18 years of age at the time
             of the former Ghurkha's discharge.  If this age  condition  is
             not met, the application must be refused under this policy  on
             this basis.  Please note that an adult child  born  after  the
             sponsor's discharge will qualify  under  this  policy  if  all
             other conditions are met."

11.  Secondly, the claimant did not meet all the  other  conditions  of  the
    policy, he did not meet the condition that he be "4.  ... 18  years  of
    age or over and 30 years of age or under on  the  date  of  application
    ...".  Thirdly, in seeking to disregard the failure of the claimant  to
    fulfil this condition the judge erroneously  relied  on  a  'near-miss'
    argument.  The only reason given for not accepting the  limits  of  the
    policy was that the distinction between a person who is  under  31  and
    one [like the claimant] who is just over the age of 31 was that  it  is
    "arguably an arbitrary distinction".   Leaving  aside  that  "arguable"
    arbitraririness is not the same as established arbitrariness; the judge
    provided absolutely no reasons for concluding that this age  limit  was
    arbitrary.  It is common sense that there had to be some age limit  and
    that dependency as continuing into adulthood even to 30  years  was  if
    anything an overgenerous point at which to draw the line.  As stated by
    the Tribunal in Ghising at 20, the policy by its terms was "capable  of
    addressing the historic injustice and contained within it a flexibility
    which would avoid conspicuous unfairness."

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge erred in  law  and  her
    decision should be set aside.  I consider I am in a position to re-make
    the decision without further  ado.   The  claimant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date of decision  and  did
    not fall within applicable Home Office policy on adult dependants of ex-
    Ghurkha soldiers. Whilst still emotionally and financially dependent on
    his parents, his dependency was  not  such  as  to  warrant  him  being
    granted settlement to join his parents.   His  parents  make  clear  in
    their witness statement that they have put in place "core arrangements"
    for their son.  Understandably they do not feel that  they  can  "fully
    support" the claimant whilst he is  living  in  Nepal,  but  I  do  not
    consider they have substantiated their claim  that  he  is  "completely
    alone" in Nepal.  He  may  be  without  close  family  there,  but  the
    evidence does not suggest that he is without any  network  of  friends.
    There is no evidence of any significant medical difficulties.  Further,
    the claimant and his parents have been able  to  maintain  family  life
    ties through several visits the parents have paid to Nepal.  The  three
    also communicate regularly by electronic means.  In a certain class  of
    cases it will not be enough to expect a dependent child and his or  her
    parents to maintain contact at a geographical distance, but  given  the
    age of the claimant and the fact that he  is  able  to  live  in  Nepal
    without financial hardship, I do  not  consider  that  his  case  comes
    within such a class.

13.  For the above reasons I conclude  that  the  decision  of  the  ECO  to
    refuse the claimant entry clearance  was  not  contrary  to  his  human
    rights as it was a proportionate reason in the context of his  specific
    circumstances.  At the date of decision I do not  consider  there  were
    compelling circumstances warranting a grant of entry clearance.  Whilst
    unlike the ECO I  have  accepted  there  was  emotional  and  financial
    dependency, I do  not  consider  this  outweighs  the  public  interest
    consideration applicable in this case.

14.  For the above reasons:


    The FtT materially erred in law and her decision is set aside.


    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

15.  No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 26 May 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

