
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05474/2017
                                                               HU/05473/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2018                         |On 12 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     AO
                                     FF
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Canter, Counsel, of 1215 Chambers
For the Respondents:   Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellants appeal against a decision of judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal G C Solly (the judge), promulgated  on  8  February  2018,
        dismissing their appeals against a decision of the respondent dated
        23 March 2017 refusing their human rights claims.

Background

     2. The appellants are both nationals of Nigeria. The 1st appellant was
        born on 2 October 1972 and is the mother of the 2nd appellant.  The
        2nd appellant is female and was born on 24 December 2000.

     3. The 1st appellant was granted entry clearance to visit  the  UK  in
        December 2004. In January 2005 the 1st  appellant  entered  the  UK
        accompanied by the 2nd appellant. The 2nd appellant was 4 years old
        at the time, although very close  to  her  5th  birthday.  The  2nd
        appellant has not left the UK since her arrival in January 2005. At
        the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing she had just turned  17
        years old and had lived in the United Kingdom for 13 years.

     4. The  2nd  appellant's  father  is  OF.  The  1st  appellant  had  a
        relationship with OF during a separation from her  former  husband,
        AO. The 2nd appellant was  born  from  the  relationship.  The  1st
        appellant's relationship with OF ended during the pregnancy and  he
        and the 1st appellant have only had contact on 3  occasions  during
        the  2nd  appellant's  life.  The   1st   appellant   resumed   her
        relationship with AO in 2001. The 1st appellant has 2 children from
        her relationship with AO, one born in 1998, the other born in 2003.
        Both these children live with AO and his new wife in Nigeria.

     5. The 1st appellant claims that AO was  treating  the  2nd  appellant
        differently from his other children  and,  after  sending  the  1st
        appellant to live with her mother in  Nigeria,  the  1st  appellant
        hatched on a plan to bring the 2nd appellant to  the  UK.  The  2nd
        appellant stayed with  a  friend  of  the  1st  appellant  and  was
        registered at a school soon after her  arrival  in  2005.  The  1st
        appellant travelled back and forth to the UK  to  stay  in  contact
        with her daughter, but she separated from AO in 2007 and they  were
        divorced in 2009. The 1st appellant last entered the UK on 12 April
        2009 pursuant to a visit into clearance. She overstayed.


     6. The 1st appellant made an application for an EEA residence card  on
        17 September 2012 based on  a  proxy  marriage  with  a  Portuguese
        national, with the 2nd appellant named as a dependent  child.  This
        was refused on 13 February 2013 and an appeal dismissed on 13  June
        2013. On 6 August 2013 an application was then made  for  leave  to
        remain on the basis of the appellants' family and private lives but
        this was refused on 6 January 2014. A further  application  for  an
        EEA residence card was made by the 1st appellant on  8  July  2014,
        with the 2nd appellant as dependent, but this  was  refused  on  13
        September 2014 and an appeal dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal
        on 22 December 2014. Although permission to appeal was  granted  by
        the Upper Tribunal, the appeal was ultimately dismissed on 12 April
        2015.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had   rejected   the   1st
        appellant's claim to have been in a durable relationship with an EU
        national,  or  to  have  contracted  a  valid   marriage.   Further
        representations were made on behalf of the appellants and these led
        to the respondent's decision dated 23 March 2017.

The respondent's decision

     7. The respondent was not satisfied that the  1st  appellant  met  the
        requirements of Appendix FM of the immigration rules  as  a  parent
        because it was considered reasonable to expect the 2nd appellant to
        return to Nigeria. The respondent noted, inter alia, that  the  2nd
        appellant's  half  siblings  and  other  family  members  lived  in
        Nigeria, that her father lived in Nigeria until  she  was  4  years
        old, that the official language of Nigeria was English and that  an
        education system was available, and that  she  would  be  returning
        with her mother. Nor  was  the  respondent  satisfied  that  either
        appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE. With respect to
        the 1st appellant it was noted that she lived in Nigeria until  the
        age of 36, that she spent the formative years of her life there and
        that she still had family in the country (although  the  respondent
        noted the 1st appellant's claim in a statement  dated  14  February
        2017 that her mother now resided in America, there was said  to  be
        no evidence in support). With respect to  the  2nd  appellant,  the
        respondent noted that, at that stage, she was 16 years old and  had
        lived in the UK for 12 years.  The  respondent  however  considered
        that the 2nd appellant could reasonably be expected  to  return  to
        Nigeria where her mother would help her make  any  adjustments  and
        where her two half siblings lived. The respondent was not satisfied
        there were any exceptional circumstances outside of the immigration
        rules which, consistent with the right to respect  for  family  and
        private life under Art 8, warranted a grant of leave to remain. The
        respondent  considered  that  the  1st  appellant  could  use   her
        experience as a support worker to find employment  in  Nigeria  and
        that her private life was established when  she  had  no  right  to
        work. The  respondent  noted  that  while  the  2nd  appellant  had
        completed the majority of her education in the UK and  was  due  to
        complete her exams, she would be able  to  use  her  qualifications
        gained in the UK to further his studies in Nigeria.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     8. The judge set out the immigration history  (although  she  got  the
        dates of birth of both appellants wrong) and correctly outlined the
        burden and standard of proof and the provisions of Art 8. The judge
        noted that the 2nd appellant was now  in  Year  12  at  school  and
        accepted that there was no dispute as to the  immigration  history.
        The judge heard oral evidence  from  both  appellants  and  from  a
        number of the 2nd appellant's friends. From [28] onwards the  judge
        set out her findings of fact and reasons.


     9. The judge noted the 1st appellant's  claim  that  her  relationship
        with her former partner in the UK ended in February 2015. The judge
        found, at [35], that the 1st appellant's father  was  deceased  and
        that, since August 2016, her  mother  had  resided  in  the  United
        States. The judge found that the 1st  appellant  had  a  sister  in
        Ireland whose children often came to the UK  for  summer  holidays.
        The judge additionally found that the 1st appellant had sisters  in
        Italy. In the UK the 1st appellant had a few 1st cousins,  an  aunt
        and uncle and two sisters as well as well-established friends.  The
        1st appellant's other 2 children, who were 14  and  19  years  old,
        were in the custody of her former husband and his new wife and they
        lived in Nigeria.

    10. The 2nd appellant  indicated  that  she  spoke  to  her  family  in
        Nigeria, consisting of her half siblings and  her  mother's  former
        husband, every 1 to 2 months, whenever her mother  telephoned.  The
        judge therefore found that both appellants spoke to family  members
        in Nigeria. The judge found that the 1st appellant spoke Yoruba but
        that the 2nd appellant new only a  few  phrases  or  words  of  the
        language. The judge noted the 1st appellant's employment history in
        Nigeria and that she worked as a hairdresser when  she  arrived  in
        the UK in 2009 and then as a support worker with  the  elderly  and
        the disabled. The judge found that the 1st  appellant's  experience
        in  hairdressing  and  support  work  would  be  useful  skills  in
        obtaining work in Nigeria. The judge  found  that  both  appellants
        were in good health.

    11. At [44] the judge noted that the 2nd  appellant  only  had  limited
        recollection of life in Nigeria, that she completed  her  GCSEs  in
        2017 attaining 10 grade A to C passes,  and  was  now  studying  A-
        levels. The judge found that the 2nd  appellant  had  "...  clearly
        established good friendships in the UK as  is  illustrated  by  the
        willingness of the witnesses to attend court on her behalf and give
        evidence in accordance with their letters."  The  judge  identified
        four witnesses who were all "prepared to give up their time whether
        from school or otherwise" and noted this as, "...  A  testament  to
        the depth of the relationship they have with the 2nd appellant  and
        their faith in her." The judge noted that none of this evidence had
        been  challenged.  The  judge  additionally  noted  that  the   2nd
        appellant had achieved a National Citizen service certificate, that
        she was in the school netball team, and that she wished to go on to
        further education.

    12. At [45] the judge stated that the only issue, so  far  as  the  1st
        appellant was concerned under the immigration  rules,  was  whether
        there were 'insurmountable obstacles'  to  her  reintegration  into
        Nigeria. The judge found that no 'insurmountable obstacles' existed
        because the 1st appellant spoke Yoruba and English, which  was  the
        official language, that she worked in several jobs in Nigeria, that
        she had 2 children in Nigeria whom she spoke  to  every  one  or  2
        months, and that, although the family  home  in  Nigeria  had  been
        sold, the 1st appellant would be able to find other employment. The
        judge noted the absence of any background evidence to  support  the
        1st appellant's claim that she would face  difficulties  getting  a
        job in Nigeria.

    13. At [46] to [48] the judge considered whether, under the immigration
        rules, it would be reasonable to expect the 2nd appellant to  leave
        the UK. At [47] the judge stated that the 2nd appellant  was  at  a
        stage in her life when she was rapidly developing contacts  of  her
        own whilst legally remaining a child. The judge accepted  that  the
        2nd appellant had developed social  and  cultural  and  educational
        ties in the UK and that she wished to remain here with them and her
        extended family.  At  [48]  the  judge  found  that  education  was
        available in Nigeria and that,  on  the  basis  that  the  official
        language was English, the 2nd appellant would  be  able  to  access
        education in Nigeria. Whilst accepting that the 2nd  appellant  had
        limited  knowledge  of  Yoruba  the  judge  found  that,  with  the
        assistance from her mother, the 2nd appellant's  proficiency  would
        increase to a working knowledge of the language.  The  judge  noted
        that the 2nd appellant's mother would be able to  support  her  and
        help the 2nd appellant reconnect with  her  half-siblings  and  her
        "father" to whom she spoke on the telephone. The  judge  said  that
        the 2nd appellant would be able to maintain links with  her  family
        elsewhere in the world and her friends in the UK  by  social  media
        which she already uses. The judge concluded that, because of  these
        reasons, she could not say that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
        expect the 2nd appellant to leave the UK.


    14. The judge then proceeded to  consider  the  appeals  under  Art  8,
        outside of  the  immigration  rules.  the  judge  directed  herself
        according to the authorities of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and Zoumbas v
        SSHD [2013] UKSC 74  and  her  duty  under  s.55  of  the  Borders,
        Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. At [55] the judge stated,

             I have considered all the circumstances of the 2nd  appellant,
             examining them  carefully.  It  is  clear  that  she  is  well
             established in the UK having both friends and family,  and  is
             finding her path successfully through education here. Although
             the 2nd appellant benefits from remaining in the UK there  are
             advantages to her, were she to live in Nigeria she would be in
             closer contact with her sibling and father. Taking  this  into
             account together with my findings I therefore conclude that it
             is not in her best interests to remain in the UK.

    15. The judge then found, at [57], that the 2nd appellant had never had
        leave to remain in the UK and that the 1st appellant had only had a
        very limited period of leave. The judge took into account the  fact
        that the 2nd appellant was, on  arrival,  a  child  and  under  the
        control of her mother. At [59] the judge stated,


             It is not in the interests of the legitimate  public  end  for
             those who have no right to remain in the UK to do so.


    16. It is only at this stage that the judge considered the authority of
        MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the application  of)  v  Upper  Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705, noting
        in particular what was said at paragraph 49 of the Court of  Appeal
        decision[1]. The judge then stated that she gave significant weight
        in favour of the 2nd appellant taking into account  the  time  that
        she has been in the UK, the family that she  has  been  in  contact
        with in the UK and the private life she has  built  up.  The  judge
        then proceeded to consider the public interest factors in s.117B of
        the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  noting  in
        particular that the 2nd appellant had ever been granted  leave  and
        that this weighed against both appellants.


    17. At [65] the judge, again, considered whether it was  reasonable  to
        expect  the  2nd  appellant  to  leave  the  UK.  Given  that   the
        'reasonableness' assessment under s.117B(6) is  the  same  as  that
        under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v), it is unclear why the judge sought to
        assess reasonableness  twice.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  2nd
        appellant, as a child, will have  had  little  influence  over  her
        status, although noting that the 2nd appellant said in her  witness
        statement that she was now  aware  of  this  and  that  it  created
        uncertainty for her. The judge  stated  that  the  conduct  of  the
        mother was weighed in the scales when public interest in  effective
        immigration control was considered, and that it weighed against the
        appellants. The judge referred to her previous indication  that  it
        would not be unreasonable to expect the 2nd appellant to leave  the
        UK  and,  taking  into  account  factors  in  the   proportionality
        assessment, the judge found again that it would not be unreasonable
        to expect the 2nd appellant to leave the United  Kingdom.  At  [66]
        the judge stated that, in the event  that  the  2nd  appellant  had
        satisfied her that it was in her best interests to  remain  in  the
        UK,  the  judge  would  have  found  that   the   public   interest
        considerations of immigration controls and the other  factors  that
        weigh in the balance against cumulatively,  outweighed  those  best
        interests. The judge consequently dismissed the appeals.

Grounds of appeal, grant of permission, and parties submissions

    18. The grounds level a variety of criticisms at the judge.  They  note
        that the  judge  applied  the  wrong  legal  test  under  paragraph
        276ADE(1)(vi) in respect of the 1st appellant (the judge considered
        whether  there  were  'insurmountable   obstacles'   to   the   1st
        appellant's return to Nigeria, and not  whether  there  were  'very
        significant obstacles'), and that the judge  failed  to  appreciate
        that there had to be 'strong' reasons for not granting leave  to  a
        child who had resided in the UK for 7 years  under  MA  (Pakistan),
        and that the judge failed to identify those 'strong  reasons'.  The
        grounds  further  contend  that  the   judge's   'best   interests'
        assessment was flawed because there was no consideration of the 2nd
        appellant's  own  views,  because  she  wrongly  believed  the  2nd
        appellant was on contact with her 'father' in Nigeria, and  because
        the judge failed to appreciate that the  2nd  appellant  was  at  a
        critical stage of her education. The grounds further  contend  that
        the judge's Art 8 assessment was based on a  flawed  assessment  of
        the 2nd appellant's best interest, and that the judge  treated  the
        appellants' lack of leave to remain  ass  'trump  cards,  and  that
        there had been insufficient consideration of the impact on the  2nd
        appellant's life in the UK.


    19. In granting permission judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Birrell
        noted that, in a case where the unchallenged history was  that  the
        2nd appellant came to the UK when she  was  5  years  old  and  had
        therefore accrued 13 years continuous residence in the UK,  it  was
        clearly arguable that the judge failed to identify  the  strong  or
        powerful reasons in accordance with the guidance given in MA. It is
        also arguable that, in the assessment of best interests, there  was
        no acknowledgement either of the weight  to  be  given  to  such  a
        lengthy period of residence, or that the 2nd appellant's views  had
        been taken into account.

    20. Mr canter relied upon and expanded his grounds, contending that the
        judge's 'best interests' assessment  went  against  the  weight  of
        evidence from both  the  2nd  appellant  and  her  mother.  It  was
        apparent from the 1st appellant's statement that the 2nd  appellant
        did not have any contact with her own father,  and  that  the  only
        contact she now had was with the former husband of her  mother  and
        her half siblings. Mr Canter submitted that  the  judge  failed  to
        identify any strong or powerful reasons such as  to  undermine  the
        starting point that the 2nd appellant ought to be granted leave  to
        remain. He invited me to find that there had been  an  insufficient
        consideration of the impact on the 2nd appellant  of  the  proposed
        removal  in  the  judge's  reasonableness  assessment.   Ms   Kelly
        submitted that the judge was entitled  to  take  into  account  the
        precarious immigration status of the appellants and that  they  had
        contact with family members in Nigeria. It was submitted  that  the
        judge did acknowledge the 2nd appellant's own view at [47]. Even if
        the was an error in respect of the "best interests" assessment, the
        judges overall assessment was still one open to her  and  that  the
        grounds essentially amounted to a disagreement.

Findings and assessment

    21. I am  satisfied,  for  the  following  reasons,  that  the  judge's
        decision is vitiated by material legal errors.


    22. The judge's "best interests" assessment is premised  on  a  factual
        mistake. The judge finds that there would be advantages to the  2nd
        appellant returning to Nigeria as she would be  in  closer  contact
        with her sibling "and father". The unchallenged evidence before the
        judge however was that the 2nd appellant had no  contact  with  her
        biological father, and that he played no part in her  life.  It  is
        possible that the judge meant to say that the 2nd  appellant  would
        be able to enjoy closer contact with  the  former  husband  of  her
        mother, but this is not sufficiently clear from the decision. There
        is no indication that the judge considered the length  of  the  2nd
        appellant's very significant separation from her half siblings  and
        from her mother's former husband, or that she adequately considered
        the nature of their relationship as it existed at the date  of  the
        hearing. Nor is it sufficiently clear that  the  judge  fully  took
        into account, when determining the 2nd appellant's best  interests,
        her own wishes. I  accept  that  the  judge  referred  to  the  2nd
        appellant's  wish  to  remain  in  the  UK  at   [47],   but   this
        acknowledgement did not occur in the context of the  judge's  "best
        interests" assessment. I am, in any event, entirely satisfied  that
        the  judge's  conclusions  in  respect  of  the  "best   interests"
        assessment was one she was not rationally entitled to reach on  the
        basis of the evidence before her. The 2nd appellant entered the  UK
        as a 4-year-old and was 17 years old at the date  of  the  hearing.
        She had resided in the UK for over 13 years. She was in the  middle
        of  her  A-levels.  The  unchallenged  evidence  contained  in  her
        statement indicated that she considered British traditions  as  her
        own and that she considered the  UK  as  her  home,  and  that  she
        enjoyed deep relationships with friends and extended family in  the
        UK. In these circumstances it is extremely difficult  to  ascertain
        how the judge could rationally conclude that  the  2nd  appellant's
        best interests were to return to Nigeria. I find that  the  judge's
        conclusion was perverse.


    23. I am additionally, and independently, satisfied that the judge fell
        into legal error in her "reasonableness" assessment. Firstly, it is
        concerning  that  the  judge  appears  to   have   undertaken   the
        'reasonableness' assessment at two separate parts of  her  decision
        (at [48], and then again at [65]). The assessment of whether it  is
        reasonable to expect a qualifying child to leave the UK is the same
        under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and s.117B(6) (see MA (Pakistan),  at
        [13]). The judge only identified the 2nd appellant's best interests
        in respect of her assessment outside of the immigration rules,  and
        not in respect of her assessment under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  It
        is therefore not clear whether the judge took into account the  2nd
        appellant's best interests at all  when  determining  that  it  was
        reasonable for her to leave the UK. Moreover, whilst the judge  has
        identified, at [48], a number of factors that could ameliorate  the
        impact on the 2nd appellant of having to return to Nigeria, nowhere
        does the judge adequately assess the impact of such a move  on  the
        2nd appellant's private life.  Whilst  the  judge  acknowledges  in
        several paragraphs that the  2nd  appellant  has  established  good
        friendships in the UK and that she has  rapidly  developed  social,
        cultural  and   educational   ties   to   the   UK,   the   judge's
        'reasonableness' assessment does not consider the impact on the 2nd
        appellant of being separated from the life she has  established  in
        the UK and her social and cultural expectations and experience. The
        judge primarily and narrowly focuses on the 2nd appellant's ability
        to integrate into Nigerian life  rather  than  the  impact  on  her
        social  identity  which  she  established  through  her  very  long
        residence from a very young  age.  In  short,  there  has  been  no
        adequate assessment of the disruption to the 2nd appellant's  life,
        a very significant factor in the assessment of reasonableness.


    24. I am further satisfied that the judge failed to adequately identify
        the 'powerful' reasons as to why, as  a  starting  point,  the  2nd
        appellant should not  be  granted  leave.  No  such  assessment  is
        carried out when the judge purports to consider the appeal  of  the
        2nd appellant under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). At [65] the judge does
        refer to the conduct of the 1st appellant as weighing in favour  of
        the  public  interest  in  effective   immigration   control,   and
        previously referred to the  fact  that  the  appellants  never  had
        lawful leave  to  remain  in  the  UK,  but  there  is  no  further
        clarification  or  explanation  as  to  why  the  1st   appellant's
        immigration  history  is  sufficiently  powerful   to   render   it
        reasonable to expect the 2nd appellant to return to Nigeria.

    25. Finally, I am satisfied that the judge applied the wrong legal test
        when assessing whether there were 'very significant  obstacles'  to
        the 1st appellant returning  to  Nigeria,  asking  herself  instead
        whether  there  were  'insurmountable   obstacles'   to   the   1st
        appellant's return.

    26. I am satisfied, for the reasons given above, holistically assessed,
        that the judge's determination is unsafe and must be set aside.

Remaking

    27.  Having  identified  material  legal  errors  in   the   First-tier
        Tribunal's decision, I was invited  by  Mr  Canter  to  immediately
        remake the decision. there  was  no  objection  from  Ms  Kelly.  I
        therefore heard evidence from both appellants.

    28. The 2nd appellant adopted her statement. There was no  examination-
        in-chief. In cross-examination the 2nd appellant did not believe it
        was reasonable for her to return  to  Nigeria  because  her  "whole
        life" was here. All of her connections were  here,  everything  she
        knew when she was growing up. The thought of returning  to  Nigeria
        seemed like an alien concept to her. She referred to her family  in
        the UK, which included 2 aunts, and her various  cousins.  She  saw
        them quite often, for example at birthdays and during the holidays,
        and especially in the summer. She confirmed she was in Year 13. She
        hopes to go to university to study either Photography or Media  and
        Communications. She also hoped to do a lot of travelling to see the
        places she had been unable to visit. Outside of her studies she was
        interested in art and music, and had recently stopped her athletics
        in order to focus on her exams. Her main memory of  Nigeria  was  a
        large gathering at her grandmother's house. Apart  from  that,  she
        did not really remember anything. She did not have much  memory  of
        her half siblings she was much closer to her cousins in the UK than
        to her half siblings in Nigeria. When  asked  how  she  would  feel
        about not being close to  her  half  siblings,  the  2nd  appellant
        answered, "not as devastated as I would be if I was not  surrounded
        by the cousins I grew up with." The 2nd appellant did not  find  it
        that easy to make friends and had to be around people  for  a  long
        time before she could consider them as a real friend.  In  response
        to questions from me the  2nd  appellant  confirmed  that  she  was
        currently working on her A-levels.

    29. The 1st appellant adopted her statement. There was no  examination-
        in-chief. In cross-examination the 1st appellant explained that she
        had to get her daughter out of her home in Nigeria because the  1st
        appellant's husband was not treating her daughter fairly.  The  2nd
        appellant had no father who  wanted  to  stay  with  her.  The  2nd
        appellant spoke to her half siblings once every 2 months.  The  2nd
        appellant had a lot of cousins  in  the  UK.  Taking  her  back  to
        Nigeria would be like taking  her  back  to  square  one.  The  2nd
        appellant was getting older and was forming her own life.  The  1st
        appellant tried to remind her daughter of things they did when  she
        was young, such as Nigerian food, but the 2nd appellant  could  not
        really remember. The 2nd appellant did not speak Yoruba  but  could
        understand the basics of the language. The 1st  appellant  did  not
        believe she would find employment in Nigeria because the healthcare
        employment was not like that in the UK. It was  not  reasonable  to
        expect the 2nd appellant to rekindle her relationship with her half
        siblings after 13 to 14 years. The  1st  appellant  said  that  her
        daughter's childhood was spent in the UK. He had focus on what  she
        wanted to do and the 1st appellant would not want to take this away
        from her. The 2nd appellant made friends easily and was still  good
        friends with those she met in  grammar  school.  Although  the  2nd
        appellant was averagely sociable she was also shy.

    30. Ms Kelly adopted the Reasons For Refusal Letter and submitted  that
        the 2nd appellant was an intelligent young lady with good ambitions
        and there was no reason  why  she  would  not  be  able  to  access
        education in Nigeria. She still had family in Nigeria, albeit  that
        her grandmother was not there any  longer.  Given  the  immigration
        histories, it was reasonable to expect the 2nd appellant to  return
        to Nigeria and the public interests outweighed her wishes to remain
        in the UK. Mr Canter submitted that the 2nd appellant  was  in  the
        middle of  her  A-level  studies  and,  given  the  length  of  her
        residence in the UK and her connections  with  friends  and  family
        here, it would not be reasonable to expect her to return to Nigeria
        as she would have to adapt to a completely  different  system.  She
        was brought up by a friend of the family for some years in  the  UK
        and the 2nd appellant was still very  close  to  this  person.  The
        evidence relating to her deep friendships was accepted in the First-
        tier Tribunal. It was not disputed that the  1st  appellant  had  a
        subsisting parental relationship with  the  2nd  appellant.  I  was
        invited to allow the appeal the basis that it would be unreasonable
        to expect the 1st appellant to return to Nigeria, and that, as  the
        2nd appellant has a subsisting parental relationship with  the  1st
        appellant, it would be disproportionate to expect the 2nd appellant
        to leave her daughter.

Findings and reasons

    31. The 2nd appellant is a child, albeit she is now towards  the  upper
        end of the age spectrum. She entered the UK  as  a  four  year  old
        (although nearly 5), and was, at the date of her application  under
        paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), 15 years old. I  must  ascertain  the  2nd
        appellant's  best  interests  pursuant  to  s.55  of  the  Borders,
        Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. I remind myself  that,  while
        her best interests are a primary  consideration,  they  are  not  a
        paramount consideration and that even though it may be in her  best
        interests to remain in the UK this can be  outweighed  by  opposing
        public interest factors.

    32. In EV (Philippines) &  Ors  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2014] EWCA Civ  874  (at  [35])  the  Court  of  Appeal
        explained that a decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of
        children will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their  age;
        (b) the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long  they
        have been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;
        (d) to what extent they have become distanced from the  country  to
        which it is proposed that they  return;  (e)  how  renewable  their
        connection with it may be;  (f)  to  what  extent  they  will  have
        linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting  to  life  in
        that country; and (g) the extent to which the course proposed  will
        interfere with their family life or their rights (if they have any)
        as British citizens.

    33. The first headnote of Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions  affecting
        children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 reads, "As  a  starting
        point it is in the best interests of children to be with both their
        parents and if both parents  are  being  removed  from  the  United
        Kingdom then the starting point suggests that so  should  dependent
        children who form part of their household unless there are  reasons
        to the contrary." Headnote (ii)  reads,  "Lengthy  residence  in  a
        country other than the state of origin can lead to  development  of
        social cultural and educational ties that it would be inappropriate
        to disrupt, in the absence of compelling reason  to  the  contrary.
        What amounts to lengthy residence is not clear  cut  but  past  and
        present policies have identified seven years as a relevant period."
        Headnote (iv) of the same case indicates, "Apart from the terms  of
        published policies and rules, the Tribunal notes that  seven  years
        from age four is likely to be more significant to a child that  the
        first seven years of life."

    34. I consider  and  apply  the  principles  enunciated  in  the  above
        decisions in assessing the 2nd appellant's best interests. The  2nd
        appellant has lived in the UK since she was almost 5 years old  and
        is now 17 years old. She has not  returned  to  Nigeria  since  she
        entered the UK and therefore spent the formative years of her  life
        here. She has studied in the UK for over 12 years,  and  has  never
        studied in Nigeria.  She is currently in the middle of her  A-Level
        studies and, according to the letter from  the  headmaster  of  Sir
        Thomas Rich's School, is due to complete  her  A-level  studies  in
        June 2019. I find that she is at a critical stage of her education.
        The letter from the school  additionally  indicated  that  the  2nd
        appellant contributes to  extra-curricular  activities  and  was  a
        committed member of the netball team.

    35. The bundle of documents before the First-tier Tribunal contained  a
        number of letters and statement from the 2nd  appellant's  friends,
        four of whom attended the First-tier Tribunal hearing. I note  that
        the First-tier Tribunal judge found that the willingness of the 2nd
        appellant's friends to attend the court was "... a testament to the
        depth of the relationship they have  with  the  2nd  appellant  and
        their faith  in  her."  The  unchallenged  evidence  from  the  2nd
        appellant's friends indicates that she has established several very
        close friendships, characterised by strong bonds and  high  degrees
        of trust and mutual support. The supportive letters  refer  to  the
        2nd appellant's involvement as a volunteer in a care home  and  the
        various photographs show the 2nd appellant at many  stages  of  her
        life in the UK with many different friends. In  her  statement  the
        2nd appellant refers to her strong relationship with TE, with  whom
        she lived in the UK until her mother's last entry to  the  UK.  The
        2nd appellant also describes her various friendships and her social
        and cultural experiences such as shopping and staying with  friends
        all night, carrying out the Duke of Edinburgh  Expedition  and  her
        involvement  with  an  athletics  club.  She  also  describes   her
        relationship with her cousins in the UK and that  her  grandmother,
        the person to whom she was closest in Nigeria, has now moved to the
        USA. This evidence was not challenged by Ms Kelly. In her statement
        the 2nd appellant stated that it would be unfair to expect  her  to
        suddenly change her way of life against her will and that,  in  her
        mind, she considers the UK her home. "I  know  nothing  else."  She
        states that she  considers  "British  traditions  as  my  own."  No
        challenge was made to the 2nd appellant's claim to understand  only
        basic Yoruba.


    36. I accept that the 2nd appellant has half-siblings in  Nigeria,  and
        that she communicates with them and with their father (her mother's
        former husband) every one to two months, and that the 1st appellant
        would be able to support her daughter through any transition period
        if they were required to  return  to  Nigeria,  and  that  the  2nd
        appellant may be able to access the education  system  in  Nigeria.
        Although  she  may  struggle  linguistically  given  her  lack   of
        proficiency in Yoruba, she is  likely  to  be  able  to  learn  the
        language relatively quickly given her obvious intelligence and  the
        support of her mother, and I note, in any event,  that  English  is
        the official language. I find however, based  on  the  written  and
        oral evidence, that the solidity of  the  2nd  appellant's  private
        life relationships,  including  those  with  her  cousins  and  her
        friends, is firmly centred  in  the  UK  and  that  she  has  fully
        integrated into British society.

    37. Given  the  2nd  appellant's  age  and  length  of  residence,  her
        establishment of relationships outside her  immediate  family,  the
        extent of her integration and the critical stage of her education I
        find, pursuant to my duty under s.55, that her best  interests  are
        to remain in the UK with her mother.

    38. Having identified the 2nd appellant's  best  interests,  and  given
        that she has lived continuously in the UK for at least 7  years,  I
        must now consider whether it is be reasonable for her to leave  the
        UK, pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). I  proceed  on  the  basis
        that she would be accompanied by her mother and that the  immediate
        family  unit  will  remain  intact.  In  assessing  the  issue   of
        reasonableness I have to take  into  account  all  relevant  public
        interest considerations, including the 2nd appellant's conduct  and
        the conduct of her mother.

    39. In MA (Pakistan) Lord Justice Elias stated, at [46],


         Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact  that  a
         child has been here for seven  years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed, the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in  the  form
         of Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family Life  (as
         a partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it
         is  expressly  stated  that  once  the  seven   years'   residence
         requirement is satisfied, there need to be  "strong  reasons"  for
         refusing leave (para. 11.2.4).  These  instructions  were  not  in
         force when the cases now subject to appeal were determined, but in
         my view they merely confirm what is implicit in adopting a  policy
         of this nature. After such a period of time the  child  will  have
         put down roots and  developed  social,  cultural  and  educational
         links in the UK such that it is likely to be highly disruptive  if
         the child is required to leave the UK. That may be  less  so  when
         the children are very young because the focus of their lives  will
         be on their families, but the disruption becomes more  serious  as
         they get older. Moreover, in these cases  there  must  be  a  very
         strong expectation that the child's  best  interests  will  be  to
         remain in the UK with his parents as part of a  family  unit,  and
         that must rank as a primary consideration in  the  proportionality
         assessment.

    40. At [47] of MA (Pakistan) Lord Justice Elias stated,

         However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK  for  seven
         years  would  need  to  be  given  significant   weight   in   the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons:  first,  because
         of its relevance to determining the nature  and  strength  of  the
         child's best interests; and second, because it  establishes  as  a
         starting point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are
         powerful reasons to the contrary.

    41. The 2nd appellant's removal would undoubtedly  have  a  deleterious
        impact on  the  life  she  has  established  in  the  UK.  Although
        established when her immigration status was precarious  she  cannot
        be held accountable for the decisions of her mother and her private
        life was rooted through no fault of her own. I find  that  she  has
        fully integrated into  British  society  having  lived  in  the  UK
        throughout the formative years of her life. Although she still  has
        half-siblings in Nigeria has little recollection or  experience  of
        life in that country. Her  removal  would  effectively  severe  the
        friendships and relationships that now form the core of her private
        life and, while she may be able to retain  some  contact  with  her
        friends through remote means, the impact on her social  integration
        is likely to be profound.


    42. The 2nd appellant is due to undertake her A-Levels in the summer of
        2019 and is consequently at a critical stage of  her  education.  I
        find that the disruption caused to her education  by  her  proposed
        removal, at a critical stage of her studies when she is undertaking
        important examinations that could determine her  future  prospects,
        is likely to be significant.

    43. In assessing whether it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  2nd
        appellant to leave the UK  I  must  consider  the  relevant  public
        interest  factors,  including  those  detailed  in  s.117B  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  I  note  the  public
        interest in the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls,
        detailed in s.117B(1). I note, pursuant to s.117B(2) and  (3)  that
        the 2nd appellant is  proficient  in  English  (her  oral  evidence
        before me demonstrated a high level of proficiency), but  that  she
        is not currently financially independent as she is still a minor in
        education. The 1st appellant gave her  evidence  in  English  to  a
        relatively high standard, and I note that she previously worked  in
        the UK and would be able to do so again if granted the  appropriate
        immigration status. Pursuant to Rhuppiah v Secretary of  State  for
        the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803  and  AM  (S  117B)  Malawi
        [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) I regard both the 1st  and  2nd  appellants'
        English language proficiency and the 1st appellant's ability to  be
        financially independent as neutral factors. I take into account  as
        a relevant public interest factor the fact that the appellants have
        always resided in the UK  without  lawful  leave,  and  that  their
        private  lives  have  nevertheless  been  established  when   their
        immigration status was precarious (s.117B(5)). This is  of  greater
        relevance to the 1st appellant as the 2nd appellant has always been
        a minor and would have no control or influence over her immigration
        status or the precarious nature of her  residence.  I  must  attach
        little weight to the private life established by the 1st in the UK.
        In identifying and considering the relevant public interest factors
        I additionally take into account the likelihood of the  appellants'
        use of NHS resources and the drain on the public purse of educating
        the 2nd appellant. I also take into  account  the  1st  appellant's
        poor immigration history. I note that she brought the 2nd appellant
        to  the  UK  with  the  intention  of  leaving   her   here,   thus
        circumventing the immigration rules, and that she  applied  for  an
        EEA residence card in circumstances where the  First-tier  Tribunal
        found her relationship was not genuine. I also note that she worked
        in the UK without lawful authority. I attach appropriate weight  to
        the public interest in ensuring those who abuse immigration control
        should not benefit from their actions. I note however  the  absence
        of any suggestion that she has used false identities or  sought  to
        obtain public funds by deception, and  that  she  has  no  criminal
        convictions.

    44. I now draw together the public interest factors  identified  above,
        and weight them against the impact of removal on the 2nd  appellant
        and the extent of the disruption to her private life. I  note  once
        again that her best interests are a primary  but  not  a  paramount
        consideration.  The  evidence  that  I  have  carefully  considered
        indicates  that  the  daily  social  and  cultural  experience  and
        expectations of this 17-year-old girl, who  has  lived  in  the  UK
        since she was  almost  5  years  old,  have  been  moulded  by  her
        residence to such an extent that she would  encounter  considerable
        difficulty integrating to  life  in  Nigeria,  despite  having  the
        support of her mother and  half-siblings.  I  find  also  that  her
        removal would cause significant upheaval to her education which  is
        at a critical stage. The extent of her integration and the solidity
        of the 2nd appellant's relationships established in the UK are such
        that to uproot her from all that she has known and  grown  up  with
        over 13years would render her removal unreasonable. I  consequently
        find that the 2nd appellant meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
        276ADE(1)(iv). As such, it would be disproportionate to remove her.



    45. I turn to the appeal of the 1st appellant. She lived in Nigeria for
        most of her life and worked as a hairdresser and a care  worker  in
        the UK. She can use these skills to obtain further work. The  older
        children from her former marriage live in  Nigeria.  She  therefore
        has social and family links. Nigeria is a country she  is  familiar
        with, culturally and socially, and  she  speaks  Yoruba.  In  these
        circumstances I find there are no 'very significant  obstacles'  to
        her integration in Nigeria.

    46. I must consider the position  of  the  1st  appellant  outside  the
        immigration rules and determine whether  there  are  compelling  or
        exceptional reasons for allowing her appeal on  article  8  grounds
        (SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387;  MF  (Nigeria)  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, at
        [42]). I note again that the 2nd appellant is  not  independent  or
        self-sufficient and remains living with the  1st  appellant.  There
        was no challenge to Mr Canter's submission that the  1st  appellant
        has a genuine parental relationship with the 2nd appellant. The 2nd
        appellant enjoys a close  and  loving  relationship  with  the  1st
        appellant,  and  this  mother/minor  child  relationship   includes
        elements of reliance and dependency. Any separation  would  have  a
        very significant detrimental impact on this relationship.

    47. In  assessing  the  proportionality  of  the  refusal  of  the  1st
        appellant's human rights claim, I  again  consider  and  apply  the
        factors identified in s.117B of the 2002 Act,  as  detailed  in  my
        assessment  at  paragraph  43  above.  Given  the  relatively   low
        threshold for establishing a breach of Art 8, I am  satisfied  that
        Art 8 is triggered in respect of the 1st appellant. I find that her
        proposed removal is in accordance with the law and in pursuit of  a
        legitimate aim.

    48. Section 117B(6) states,
         In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.
    49. In MA(Pakistan) the Court held, at [17],

         Subsection (6) falls into a different category again. It does  not
         simply identify  factors  which  bear  upon  the  public  interest
         question. It resolves that question in the context  of  article  8
         applications which satisfy the conditions in  paragraphs  (a)  and
         (b). It does so by stipulating  that  once  those  conditions  are
         satisfied, the public interest will not  require  the  applicant's
         removal. Since the interference  with  the  right  to  private  or
         family life under article 8(1) can only be justified  where  there
         is a sufficiently strong countervailing  public  interest  falling
         within article 8(2), if  the  public  interest  does  not  require
         removal, there is  no  other  basis  on  which  removal  could  be
         justified. It follows, in my judgment, that there can be no  doubt
         that section 117B(6) must be read as a self-contained provision in
         the sense that Parliament has stipulated that where the conditions
         specified in the sub-section are satisfied,  the  public  interest
         will not justify removal.

    50.  The  1st  appellant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
        relationship with the 2nd appellant, and I have  already  concluded
        that it would be unreasonable to expect the 2nd appellant to  leave
        the UK. I consequently find  that  the  public  interest  does  not
        require the 1st appellant's  removal  even  having  regard  to  the
        countervailing public interest considerations. Having regard to the
        assessment conducted outside the immigration rules in PD and Others
        (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016]  UKUT  00108
        (IAC), at [43], I am satisfied that the effect  of  dismissing  the
        1st appellant's appeal would be to stultify my  decision  that  the
        2nd appellant qualifies for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
        in accordance with the immigration rules and Art 8  considerations.
        Undertaking the s.117B(6) balancing exercise, and in  light  of  my
        previous analysis and findings, I am satisfied  that  the  test  of
        compelling or exceptional circumstances is satisfied.


Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision contains material legal errors and  is  set
aside.

I remake the appeals, allowing both appeals on human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellants  in
this appeal are granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               8 October 2018

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


-----------------------
[1] "The fact that a child has been in the UK for 7 years would need  to  be
given significant weight in  the  proportionality  exercise  for  2  related
reasons: 1st, because  of  its  relevance  to  determining  the  nature  and
strength of the child's best interests; and 2nd, because it  establishes  as
a starting point that leave should be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
reasons to the contrary."

