
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/05618/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 September 2019                 |On 21 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    T C P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani of Counsel instructed by Migrant
                    Legal Action Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because it is part of the appellant's  case  that  he  fears
    criminal gangs  in  the  United  Kingdom  and,  by  implication,  their
    associates in Jamaica. Publishing his identity could create a risk  for
    the appellant.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  He was born in  November  1998.
    He appeals against a decision of the respondent  on  22  February  2018
    refusing him leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 3. This appeal has previously been  dealt  with  unsatisfactorily  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This led to an appeal by the Secretary of  State.
    An error of law was found and the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  was
    set aside.   The  Upper  Tribunal  directed  that  the  appeal  be  re-
    determined in the Upper Tribunal when  the  appellant  must  prove  his
    case.  It is for this reason that,  in  the  title  above,  the  person
    seeking to remain in the United Kingdom is named, and is  described  as
    the "Appellant", and the Secretary of State for the Home Department  is
    described as the "Respondent".

 4. The appellant is subject to deportation.  The appellant  was  convicted
    at the Crown Court at Woolwich of possessing a firearm with  intent  to
    cause fear or violence and was sent to Youth Offenders Institution  for
    four years. Clearly he is liable to deportation but he has lived in the
    United Kingdom since he was 3 months old and he is now aged  almost  21
    years. It is the appellant's case that the deporting  him  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his private and family life.

 5. I have read the judge's sentencing  remarks  and  the  essence  of  the
    appellant's criminality was taking with him to a public park a  firearm
    and ammunition.  He was showing off. I do not find the details  of  the
    criminal offence to be particularly important. What matters is that the
    offending attracted a custodial sentence of four years.

 6. Although unsatisfactory for many reasons the First-tier  Tribunal  made
    sensible findings of fact which bind me.  I consider below the findings
    that I consider to be of relevance.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted evidence that the appellant  has
    contact with both his parents and their respective partners  and  other
    relatives in the United Kingdom.  The judge found that he is  "socially
    and culturally integrated" into the United Kingdom and that neither the
    appellant nor his mother have been to Jamaica  since  arriving  in  the
    United Kingdom when the appellant was 3 months old.  The appellant  has
    had some modest work as a painter and wants to  work  in  construction.
    The appellant's maternal grandmother and aunt live in Spanish  Town  in
    Jamaica but the appellant's grandmother has  a  medical  condition  and
    would not be able to look after the appellant. It was  the  appellant's
    case that his mother's relatives, other  than  his  grandmother,  spend
    most of their time in the USA and are not in a position to help.

 8. Mr Bandegani's skeleton argument listed the findings of  fact  that  he
    considered important.  He added to  the  above  that  the  relationship
    between the claimant and his mother and his father and  their  partners
    and other family  were  categorised  as  "family  life"  and  that  the
    appellant had not developed an independent life but  still  lived  with
    his mother.  The appellant had done anger management courses in  prison
    but had managed  to  lose  the  certificates.   Spanish  Town  is  very
    dangerous and the appellant would have nowhere to go in Jamaica  if  he
    were deported.  The appellant's mother felt able to  keep  him  out  of
    trouble if he remained in the United Kingdom.  The appellant identifies
    as "British" rather than "Jamaican".

 9. Mr Bandegani also set  out  the  appellant's  immigration  history.  He
    entered the United Kingdom when he was three months old. The respondent
    says that the appellant entered with leave as his mother's dependant in
    February 1999. She applied to extend their leave  but  the  application
    was unsuccessful and their leave ran out in February (or perhaps  early
    March) 2000. Mr Bandegani said that the appellant had leave  from  2012
    but the leave stopped when the deportation order was made in 2016. This
    is supported by the respondent's "Decision to  Refuse  a  Human  Rights
    Claim". Importantly, whilst the appellant clearly cannot be blamed  for
    overstaying as a child, he has  not  resided  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom for over half his life.

10. I accept Mr Bandegani's points are a fair summary of the decision and I
    have kept them in mind.

11. I have also read the statements that were relied upon in the First-tier
    Tribunal. These included a statement from the appellant's father in the
    United Kingdom. He said that his only relatives  in  Jamaica  were  his
    parents. They live in Portmore which I understand from  a  map  in  the
    respondent's papers, to be  a  coastal  region  between  Kingstown  and
    Spanish  Town.  However  the  appellant's  paternal   grandmother   was
    preoccupied caring for her husband who has dementia.

12. It has been a feature of this case that there has been concern that the
    appellant might have some kind of mental illness  which  needed  to  be
    considered.  There is no evidence to show that the appellant does  have
    serious mental health problems.

13. I have seen a psychological assessment from  a  Mr  James  Perkins  (no
    relation to me). Mr Perkins has assessed the appellant following  their
    contact  through  the  charity  "Safer  London".   Mr  Perkins   is   a
    psychotherapist   with   appropriate    graduate    and    postgraduate
    qualifications.  The "measurable assessments" following an  examination
    in June 2019 show that the  appellant  showed  "very  high"  levels  of
    stress,  emotional  stress,  behavioural  difficulties,   concentration
    difficulties and  difficulties  forming  relationship.   The  appellant
    achieved "slightly low" for kind and  helpful  behaviour.   Mr  Perkins
    concluded that the appellant was  at  a  high  risk  of  some  kind  of
    disorder  and  a  high  risk  of  behavioural  disorder.   However,  he
    emphasised that this was not to a diagnosis of an illness but  findings
    that warranted an assessment by, at least initially, a general  medical
    practitioner.  As far as I am aware no such report  has  been  done.  I
    discount there being any question of a significant mental illness  that
    ought to be considered.  There were  perfectly  proper  reasons  to  be
    concerned which had been identified but that is as far as the  evidence
    goes.

14. There is a letter from the probation officer dated 19  September  2019.
    It is largely positive and refers to  the  appellant  having  "attended
    most probation appointments as instructed" and having  maintained  good
    communication throughout the supervision period.  The appellant is  now
    removed from Lewisham to a different part of the country and there have
    been no "police incidents" that have  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    probation officer.

15. There was also a statement from a Ms Melanie Nelson who  gave  evidence
    before me.  Her statement  is  dated  24  September  2019.   Ms  Nelson
    describes herself as a "personal adviser".  Her role was to assist  the
    appellant to find employment or  education  and  integration  into  the
    community.  She was frustrated because the appellant  is  not  able  to
    engage in many activities because  of  restrictions  arising  from  his
    immigration status.  I note that the  appellant  and  his  family  were
    removed from their former home on the advice of the police  who  feared
    for their safety.  Ms Nelson gave evidence before me  and  adopted  her
    statement.  She said that the  appellant's  presently  lives  somewhere
    that she believed that was safer for him.

16. There was also a signed additional statement from the appellant.   This
    confirmed his reasons for removing which  are,  essentially,  that  the
    police visited him and advised him to relocate because his life was  in
    danger. He said that "the Trident Gang Unit of the Met Police  came  to
    see me at home and told me that my life  was  in  danger  my  name  was
    mentioned during shootings and that someone had  been  shot  when  they
    were looking for me".

17. The appellant said he had not been charged with any crime since  coming
    out of prison. He concluded by saying in his statement  that  he  would
    like to continue his involvement with Safer London.  He  had  developed
    an understanding of how he should behave.   He  would  like  to  get  a
    driver's licence and start working.

18. There is an unsigned statement in the bundle from someone identified as
    the appellant's partner. She did not give  evidence  and  I  attach  no
    weight to the alleged relationship. It was  never  suggested  that  the
    appellant has established a home with a partner. Before removing  to  a
    different part of London he lived with his mother.

19. I am satisfied that the people who gave evidence before  me,  including
    the appellant, gave truthful evidence in the sense that  they  believed
    what they said. It does not follow that any fears that  were  expressed
    are well founded.

20. The appellant also relied on a report of Yvonne McCalla Sobers dated 23
    September 2019.  Ms Sobers  identifies  as  a  human  rights  activist,
    writer, educator, and management consultant.  She said  that  a  "major
    focus of my work is lobbying and advocating for  changes  in  Jamaica's
    justice  and  security  systems  especially   as   regards   the   most
    vulnerable".

21. Ms Sobers said that she is familiar with the  Jamaican  justice  system
    because of her work, experience and residence in Jamaica.

22. I regard her report with a degree of caution.  I  accept  that  she  is
    honest in the  sense  that  she  is  advancing  an  opinion  she  holds
    sincerely.  I also accept that she is informed by reason  of  her  work
    and her report is cross-referenced to independently published  sources.
    However, although she claims to be writing as an expert  she  does  not
    claim to be a sociologist, anthropologist or  political  scientist  and
    she does not claim to have published articles in peer reviewed  learned
    journals.  I do not regard her as someone who is trained in objectivity
    or professional detachment but neither do I regard her as  a  charlatan
    or rabble  rouser.   I  am  cautious  about  her  objectivity  not  her
    integrity.

23. It is, I find, important  to  consider  exactly  what  she  says.   Her
    concern is that people who have been deported from the  United  Kingdom
    will be spotted because of their foreign accents  and  general  conduct
    because they are new arrivals to the area where they live. Deportees in
    Jamaican society regarded as the lowest of the low.  They are  rejected
    by  the  established  community  because  they   have   squandered   an
    opportunity of doing well in a rich country  and  they  will  often  be
    assumed to be some kind  of  pervert  or  offender  of  a  particularly
    repugnant kind.   She  researched  examples  of  people  who  had  been
    deported and had not done well and were  frightened  of  continuing  to
    live in Jamaica. She  drew  attention  to  the  particularly  troubling
    statistic that during the fourteen months preceding May 2019  five  men
    who had been deported from the United Kingdom were killed.

24. She  also  speculated  that  the  appellant  would  be  the  victim  of
    homophobic anger and would be vulnerable to corruption by  gangs.  This
    concern arises from an incident in the Appellant's  past  involving  an
    allegation of sexual  misconduct.  There  was  sufficient  evidence  to
    warrant a  police  investigation  but  no  charges  were  brought.  The
    appellant is not a sex offender and I see no point in giving details of
    allegations which were not substantiated. There is no  reason  for  the
    appellant to be suspected of such behaviour. If challenged he  can  say
    truthfully that he has one criminal conviction for a firearms offence.

25. Ms Sobers also suggested there would be no effective protection because
    the police could not be trusted.  Spanish Town, where the appellant  is
    thought to have a relative is a particularly unattractive place to go.

26. I reflected on these things.  The difficulty is that although there may
    well be accurate reports of what happened in  particular  cases  it  is
    difficult to look at the report and distil anything that will enable me
    to predict the risk generally.  For example, I know nothing  about  the
    five people who had been deported and were then  murdered.   (I  assume
    they were murdered; the report refers to their being "killed").   I  do
    not know, for example, if they went back expecting trouble  with  gangs
    and looking for protection on a specific basis which they did not  get,
    or if they had been involved in gangs in the United  Kingdom  and  that
    was one of the reasons they got into trouble and  one  of  the  reasons
    they were removed.  The statistic is too general to be helpful although
    it is a shocking number.  I do not find the report a helpful indication
    of what is reasonably likely to happen to this appellant.

27. Mr Lindsay produced two Home Office documents, one a country background
    note on Jamaica dated September 2019, and the other  a  Country  Policy
    and Information Note on Jamaica entitled "Fear  of  organised  criminal
    groups".

28. Mr Lindsay relied particularly on the CPIN  Report.   This  noted  that
    although the murder rate is high, most murders  are  committed  against
    those involved in gang-related activities.  The report  concluded  that
    "in general, a person who is not involved in gang-related activity will
    not be at real risk of  serious  harm  or  persecution".   There  is  a
    general willingness by  the  state  to  provide  effective  protection.
    There might be reasons to doubt the effectiveness of that protection in
    the case of  a  person  who  is  targeted  specifically.   The  country
    background note refers to the high  level  of  corruption  amongst  the
    Jamaican police but that is not  a  difficulty  unless  there  is  some
    reason to think that the appellant will attract enemies.

29.  Mr  Lindsay's  submissions  were,  understandably,  predictable.    He
    referred to the very high degree of public interest in deportation.  He
    reminded me, uncontroversially, of the requirements of Section  117C(6)
    which provides:

         "In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2".

30. Exception 1 applies where a person has been lawfully  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom for  most  of  his  life,  is  socially  and  culturally
    integrated into the United Kingdom and there would be very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into the  country  to  which  he  will  be
    deported, and Exception 2 applies in  the  case  of  parents  and  life
    partners. The appellant has not been lawfully resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for half of his life. He is not a parent and does  not  have  a
    partner.

31. It is the thrust of Mr Bandegani's submissions  that  "very  compelling
    circumstances" exist here.

32. He also maintained that there are "very significant obstacles"  to  the
    appellant's integration into the country to which he would be deported.

33. Clearly these concepts are different. The "very significant  obstacles"
    test goes  to  the  difficulties  people  might  have  in  establishing
    themselves in a different country but "very  compelling  circumstances"
    includes all of the reasons why a person should not be removed. I doubt
    if there are "very significant obstacles" that do not amount  to  "very
    compelling circumstances" but clearly there  can  be  "very  compelling
    circumstances" that are not "very significant obstacles".

34. I do not  agree  that  there  are  "very  significant  obstacles".  The
    appellant has not visited Jamaica since he left when he  was  about  12
    weeks old. He does not know his grandmothers  or  his  aunt.  I  cannot
    assume that he has any relatives who have  either  the  inclination  or
    ability to help him but he is physically fit and willing  to  work.  He
    speaks  English  which  is  commonly  spoken  in  Jamaica.  He  is  not
    incapacitated by poor mental health. I accept the evidence that  he  is
    likely to attract some opprobrium because  he  will  be  identified  as
    someone who has been deported but I do  not  accept  that  he  will  be
    ostracised as a sex offender. I accept too that he will  be  vulnerable
    to corruption but not that he cannot be expected to resist  inducements
    from the criminal community. He is an adult and will have to  find  the
    moral fibre to behave.

35. I have a lurking concern about how he  might  be  treated  by  criminal
    gangs in Jamaica. There is independent evidence that he had  to  remove
    in the United Kingdom on police advice because his life was at risk.  I
    do not have the figures but it must be only a very small percentage  of
    the population of the United Kingdom that receives such advice and I am
    aware of the risks faced by people  who  return  to  Jamaica  who  have
    enemies in gangs because it is explained  in  the  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note on Jamaica dated August 2019. However it is also clear
    that  some  people  with  a  well-founded  fear  of  gangs  can  expect
    protection in Jamaica. Although  the  appellant  made  clear  that  the
    police advised him to change his address he has not laid the evidential
    foundation to support a finding that  there  is  a  real  risk  of  his
    troubles with gangs in the United Kingdom following him to Jamaica and,
    as an abundance of caution, I have ordered anonymity in this appeal. In
    short, there is nothing that give substances to my lurking concern.

36. I do not accept that there are "very significant obstacles" in the  way
    of reintegration.

37. However, even if  I  am  wrong  about  that  it  does  not  assist  the
    appellant.  There have to be "very compelling circumstances,  over  and
    above" those described in the Exceptions to satisfy the requirements of
    Part 5A.

38. Mr Bandegani relies on  a  matrix  of  facts  to  establish  the  "very
    compelling circumstances" and starts with the fact that  the  appellant
    has spent nearly all of his life in the United Kingdom. This  may  well
    be a telling factor in an application for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds  and  was,  no  doubt,  a  significant  feature  in  his
    application for leave in 2012 being successful.  The  problem  for  the
    appellant is that he is a foreign criminal who has been punished with a
    sentence of detention for at least 4 years. I do not  have  to  explain
    why it is in the public interest to deport him because Parliament  says
    that it is and that determines my  approach.  Further,  Parliament  has
    decided that the more  serious  the  offence  the  greater  the  public
    interest in deportation. The  offence  involves  the  possession  of  a
    firearm in a public place. That is a serious matter as reflected in the
    sentence of 4 year's detention  imposed  on  a  young  person  with  no
    previous convictions. There is nothing in the offence  that  diminishes
    the imperative of deportation.  It  follows  that  there  is  a  strong
    interest in his being deported. If I gave great weight  to  his  having
    lived for nearly all of his life in the United Kingdom then I treat him
    as if he was not a foreign criminal but a British national and that,  I
    find, would be incompatible with the clear requirements of Part 5A.

39. I accept that the  appellant's  deportation  will  interfere  with  the
    "private  and  family"  lives  of  his  father  and  mother   and   the
    interference will be at the "family" rather than "private" life end  of
    the continuum but not that such interference, even with other  factors,
    will be disproportionate.

40. I accept too that the appellant  seems  to  have  benefitted  from  the
    support given him  by  the  probation  service  and  by  Safer  London.
    Everything is too recent to conclude that he has turned around his life
    but he is doing the right things.  There are reasons to suggest that he
    will not be in trouble again in the United Kingdom. He has removed from
    the bad influences and has avoided further conviction. It will be  much
    harder for him to continue to behave in Jamaica where he will  not  get
    the support that has benefitted him in the United Kingdom.

41. If the worth things postulated by Ms Sobers actually happened the  case
    might be made out, albeit tragically  too  late.   If  everything  that
    could go wrong did go wrong then the appellant could be in trouble  but
    I am not  able  to  discern  from  this  evidence,  notwithstanding  Mr
    Bandegani's realistic and thoughtfully put submissions,  anything  that
    would support a finding that there is a real risk of the  very  serious
    harm  which  would  be  necessary   to   establish   "very   compelling
    circumstances, over and above ..." that would permit me  to  allow  the
    appeal with reference to.

42. I pause and reflect on the evidence before me.  I confirm that  I  have
    read all of the papers including the bundles prepared for  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal and the Supplementary  Bundle  and  both
    skeleton arguments prepared by Mr Bandegani.  This  appeal  concerns  a
    young man who has committed a serious criminal offence for which he has
    been punished by the law.  He has been in the United Kingdom  for  most
    of his life.  It is not his fault that he overstayed his leave when  he
    was a baby and he has had leave since 2012.  His  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom has been problematic and the support given  him  following  his
    conviction appear to have done him good.

43. He has been sent to custody for four years.  I do not accept  that  his
    alleged lack of support and length of time in the United  Kingdom  even
    cumulatively amount to  "very  compelling  circumstances".   Since  the
    deportation order was made, or indeed since he was sent to  prison,  he
    could have returned to Jamaica at any time.  He cannot  be  allowed  to
    make much of the fact that he has not  been  able  to  work  since  the
    deportation order was made.  He has no status in the United Kingdom but
    he does not have to remain in the United Kingdom.

44. It is to the appellant's credit that  he  has  not  been  convicted  of
    anything since he has come out of custody.  He  has  not  been  out  of
    custody for a long time but it is often a  dangerous  time  for  people
    when they have just come out of prison.  Clearly, his bad behaviour has
    caused everyone involved in his life to reflect on what has been  going
    on, it is unsurprising that people things could have been  done  better
    to  support  him  but  these  are  not  anyway  near  "very  compelling
    circumstances".  They are, more realistically, what happens to  someone
    who has been sent away.

45. I have little doubt that if the appellant were allowed to remain in the
    United Kingdom people will  continue  to  support  him  and  there  are
    reasons to think that he will continue  to  keep  out  of  trouble  and
    become an industrious citizen and contribute to society. Certainly,  he
    has expressed resolve to do that and there are signs that he will do it
    but that is as far as it goes.  All resolutions towards good  behaviour
    can go with him to Jamaica.  What cannot go with  him  is  the  support
    mechanisms that have been developed in the United Kingdom but he is not
    entitled to those as a human right.

46. The difficulty  he  faces  is  the  very  demanding  tests  imposed  by
    parliament.  They are not discharged here.  I must and do dismiss  this
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

47. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 October 2019                |

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05618/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2018                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    T C P
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Action


                      REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana)  allowing  the
    appeal  of  the  respondent,  hereinafter  the  claimant,  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to deport him.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is clearly wrong  in  at  least
    two important respects.  First, it has regard to the appeal  provisions
    of the Immigration Rules in an  old  version  of  paragraph  364  which
    created the "exceptional circumstances test". It was deleted  from  the
    Rules in 2012 and really should not be  mentioned  in  a  determination
    promulgated in 2018.

 3. Second, and even  more  remarkably,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal seems to have no regard whatsoever to the requirements of part
    5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  which  is  the
    statutory regime which judges are required to take  into  account  when
    engaged in an Article 8 balancing  exercise.   We  have  no  hesitation
    whatsoever in setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
    record that Mr Bandegani made it clear that he  could  not  defend  the
    decision.

 4. We have given some through about  the  best  way  to  proceed  in  this
    matter.

 5. Certainly there are findings of fact about the claimant and his  family
    which are helpful to the claimant.  We make no particular comment about
    those except to say that they are  unchallenged  findings  and  on  the
    principles set out in the well-known case of Devaseelan (Second Appeals
    - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702, they
    would be a necessary staring point.

 6. We have decided that the best approach on this occasion is to keep  the
    matter in the Upper Tribunal and it will be listed in due course.

 7. We have noted that Mr  Bandegani  asked  for  time  to  gather  further
    evidence but we make no ruling on that application at this  stage.   It
    may  well  be  that  the  ordinary  listing  processes  will  give  him
    sufficient time but if they do not then we  encourage  him  to  make  a
    detailed application because we do understand the potential  importance
    of a proper medical diagnosis in this case and proper evidence  of  the
    considerable difficulties that the claimant says he would face  in  the
    event of return to Jamaica, although we also note these are  things  he
    has had time to consider.

 8. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and we direct  the
    case be determined again in the Upper Tribunal on a date  to  be  fixed
    before any panel.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 February 2019               |

