
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05507/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27 July 2017                       |On 11 August 2017                     |
|Prepared 27 July 2017                 |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     S N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Suri, Legal Representative of M K Suri & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a  national  of  Pakistan,  date  of  birth  [  ]  1979,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision of 9 February  2016  whereby
    leave to remain was refused in respect of both the  Appellant  and  her
    dependent children, [AH], a national of Pakistan dated  of  birth  [  ]
    2004, [SH] a national of Pakistan, date of birth [ ] 2005 and [AS],  at
    the time a national of Pakistan, date of birth [ ]  2008.   The  latter
    child has recently obtained British nationality.

2.   Her appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  Eldridge  (the
    Judge), who on 13 November 2016 dismissed the appeal  by  reference  to
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.  Permission  to  appeal  that
    decision was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge N Osborne in a decision
    which is undated but which I take to be prior to 29 June 2017.

3.   The Respondent made a Rule 24 response by letter of  29  June  2017  in
    which the Respondent indicated that it did not oppose  the  Appellant's
    application for permission to appeal as  it  is  clear  the  Judge  was
    mistaken  as  to  the  Appellant's  husband's  status  in  the  UK   as
    highlighted in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  The Respondent  invited
    the Tribunal to determine the appeal with  a  fresh  oral  (continuance
    hearing) to consider whether or not the matter should  be  remitted  to
    the  First-tier  for  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  claim  under
    Appendix FM and Article 8 ECHR.

4.   It was indicated to me  that  there  were  arguments  for  and  against
    retaining this matter in the Upper Tribunal.  Part of  those  arguments
    include the fact that the Appellant and the  other  siblings  have  now
    accumulated sufficient time to make an application on the basis of  ten
    years' lawful residence in the UK.  I expressed no view on the  merits,
    but it simply indicated yet again, as it is now accepted,  the  husband
    of the Appellant has ILR and is present and settled in the UK. There is
    no particular urgency in resolving  the  issue,  bearing  in  mind  the
    Appellant's dependent children  are  a  relevant  factor  not  only  in
    respect of such applications as will be made but also  in  relation  to
    Section 55 BCIA 2009 considerations.

5.   In the circumstances it  seemed  to  me  that  there  are  on  hand  no
    apparent reasons why there could not be a further and full  hearing  of
    the matter in the Upper Tribunal. In the  circumstances  of  the  case,
    seeking to cherry pick amongst the decision to retain some  findings  I
    concluded it would be better and safer to have a further hearing in the
    First-tier Tribunal. In addition  the  Appellant  is  not  present  nor
    available to attend the hearing today.

6.   Accordingly I find the Original Tribunal's decision cannot  stand,  the
    matter will have to be remade.

DIRECTIONS
1.   Re-make this appeal in the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Not  before  F-t  T
Judges Eldridge or   Osborne.
 2.   Time estimate an hour and a half.
3.    No interpreter required.
4.    Any further directions to be given by the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  a
CMR hearing.

ANONYMITY ORDER
In view of the ages of the dependent  children,  it  seems  to  me  that  an
anonymity order is necessary and appropriate.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 8 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
