
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/05632/2018
                                                               hu/05635/2018
                                                               hu/05637/2018
                                                               hu/05639/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th January 2019                          |On 14th February 2019         |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         gopal [t] (first appellant)
                       Shantana [t] (second appellant)
                          [s t1] (third appellant)
                          [s t2] (fourth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Dey (Legal Representative), Lexpert Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nepal.  They were born  respectively  on
    27th March 1972, 2nd October 1978, 20th September 2001  and  19th  June
    2008.  They are a family of mother, father  and  two  children.   Their
    immigration histories are set out in  some  detail  in  the  Notice  of
    Refusal.  On 17th March 2017 the Appellants made a human  rights  claim
    for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of their family life  within
    the UK.  That application was refused by Notice of Refusal  dated  12th
    February 2018.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeals came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Cohen sitting at Taylor house on 1st October 2018.  In  a
    determination  and  reasons  promulgated  on  19th  November  2018  the
    Appellants' appeals were allowed on human rights grounds.

 3. On 26th November 2018 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  On 3rd December 2018 Immigration Judge  Lambert
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Lambert noted that the  third  and
    fourth Appellants, who were non-British qualifying  children,  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv) and that the appeal of  the  first
    Appellant, their father, had to be allowed under the  Respondent's  own
    guidance as to the reasonableness of expecting his  children  to  leave
    the United Kingdom and in accordance with the Court of Appeal  decision
    in MA (Pakistan).  The  circumstances  of  the  second  Appellant  were
    virtually identical.

 4. Judge Lambert noted that the grounds maintained a failure by the  judge
    to consider or make findings in relation to alleged use of a  proxy  in
    obtaining an English language  test  result  and  that  this  issue  is
    material  to  the  proportionality   exercise   and   public   interest
    considerations.   The  absence  in  the  decision   of   any   apparent
    consideration or discussion of this issue  rendered,  in  the  view  of
    Judge Lambert, that the ground was  arguable.   Further,  reliance  was
    placed in terms of the issue of reasonableness on  the  recent  Supreme
    Court decision in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 which may not  have  been
    before the judge but was nevertheless not taken into account.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the purpose  of  continuity  throughout
    the appeal process I refer herein to the Thapa family as the Appellants
    and to the Secretary of State as the Respondent albeit that I note that
    this is an appeal by the Respondent.  The Appellants appeared by  their
    instructed legal representative Mr Dey.  Mr Dey is familiar  with  this
    matter having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Bramble.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Bramble relies on all grounds and submits  that  there  has  been  a
    failure by the judge to  resolve  a  conflict  of  material  fact.   He
    submits that the second Appellant would not speak English and that  her
    TOEIC test was taken by a proxy.  He takes me to the  findings  of  the
    Immigration Judge, particularly at paragraphs 5, 6 and 7, pointing  out
    that the judge ignores  this  factor  and  as  to  whether  the  second
    Appellant can meet the suitability criteria.  He accepts that it may be
    arguable that that alone does  not  constitute  a  material  error  but
    thereafter he takes me to paragraph 24 of the decision finding that the
    position of the second Appellant is virtually identical to that of  the
    first Appellant and consequently submits that the judge has  completely
    sidestepped the issue and that the proxy test is a matter of relevance.



 7. He indicates that the case should now be looked at in  accordance  with
    the guidelines set out in KO (Nigeria) and whilst he does  not  dispute
    the reasonableness of the third and fourth Appellants' applications  he
    submits that the judge  has  failed  to  consider  the  guidance  given
    therein and that "reasonableness" has to  be  considered  in  the  real
    world in which the children find themselves and the real world in  this
    case is that they will remain with their parents.

 8. He consequently submits that in allowing the determination on behalf of
    all four Appellants the judge has failed to take into consideration the
    position of the second Appellant in considering her proxy taking  of  a
    TOEIC and that this goes to suitability and a failure to  consider  the
    public interest.  He points out that if the first and second Appellants
    do not have leave all four Appellants would leave the UK  as  a  family
    unit and that is why the failure of the judge to consider  this  factor
    is material and the case needs to go back and be reassessed.

 9. In response Mr Dey submits since there are no detailed findings on  the
    second Appellant other than to  conclude  that  her  circumstances  are
    virtually identical to the first Appellant it cannot be said  that  the
    second Appellant has committed an offence.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. There are two principal areas here which need consideration.  One leads
    to another.  The issue turns very largely on  the  suitability  of  the
    second Appellant  to  remain  in  this  country  bearing  in  mind  the
    allegation that is made that she took a TOEIC test by  proxy.   Careful
    scrutiny of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision completely ignores
    that factor.  It is a relevant and material factor  to  be  taken  into
    account and consequently on that basis alone there is a material  error
    of law particularly when looked at against the assessment by the  judge
    that the position of the first two appellants is identical.

13. Secondly, it  is  an  issue  that  needs  to  be  considered  when  the
    reasonableness of returning the family, in this case to Nepal is  given
    due consideration.  Whilst it may not have been before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge the Supreme Court in the  recent  authority  of  KO,  at
    paragraph 18 of KO Lord Carnwath delivering the judgment of  the  court
    said:

         "As the IDI  guidance  acknowledges,  it  seems  to  me  inevitably
         relevant in both contexts to consider where the parents, apart from
         the relevant provision, are expected to be, since it will  normally
         be reasonable for the child to be with them.  To  that  extent  the
         record of the parents may become indirectly material, if  it  leads
         to their ceasing to have a right to  remain  here,  and  having  to
         leave.  It is only if, even on that hypothesis,  it  would  not  be
         reasonable for the child to leave that the provision may  give  the
         parents a right to remain."

14.  That  paragraph  along  with  the  conclusion  at  paragraph  19  that
    reasonableness is to be considered in  the  real  world  in  which  the
    children  find  themselves  shows  that  the  position  in  which   the
    children's application has be considered must  take  into  account  the
    factors involving the parents and that unless it  is  argued  that  the
    children should remain to the exclusion of the parents (and  that  does
    not appear to be suggested here) then the  children's  case  cannot  be
    considered in isolation.

15. Against that background it is essential that  the  principal  questions
    posed by Mr Bramble and posed in the Grounds of  Appeal  are  addressed
    and they have not been.  To that  extent  the  decision  is  materially
    flawed and I agree  with  Mr  Bramble  that  the  appeal  needs  to  be
    considered afresh against this background and with both parties  making
    their  further  appropriate  representations.   Consequently,  to  that
    extent I find there are material errors of law in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and I set it aside and I give directions  for
    the rehearing of this matter.

Notice of Decision


16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error
    of law and is set aside.  Directions  are  given  hereinafter  for  the
    rehearing of this matter.

      1) That on finding that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge is set aside with none of the findings of  fact
         to stand.


      2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor
         House to be heard before any Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other
         than Immigration Judge Cohen.


      3) The estimated length of hearing be two hours.


      4) That there be leave to either party to file and serve a  bundle  of
         such further subjective and/or objective evidence upon  which  they
         seek to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.


      5) That a Nepalese interpreter will attend the restored hearing.

17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date:  11th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 11th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


