
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05573/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2020                  |On 3 December 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               mudassar munir
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, further to directions issued  by  the
Upper Tribunal on 18 September 2020.

The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 4 August  1988.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 17 April 2011. On 18 June 2013 he  married  Shabana
Hussain McMackin, a British citizen. On 21 November 2018  he  made  a  human
rights claim on the basis of his family life with his wife,  but  the  claim
was refused on 8 March 2019.

The appellant's claim was refused on the grounds that it  was  not  accepted
that he could meet the requirements of Appendix FM  or  paragraph  276ADE(1)
of the immigration rules on the basis of his family and  private  life,  and
that there were no compelling circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave
outside the immigration rules.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms McMackin,  owing
to various inconsistencies in their evidence given at a  marriage  interview
on 27 February 2019.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision.  His  appeal  was  initially
listed for hearing on 17 June 2019 and the appellant and his  wife  attended
that hearing. The record of the marriage  interview  was  not  available  at
that time, but the hearing proceeded nevertheless  and  the  appellant  gave
oral evidence  before  the  judge,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Morris.  It
appears from  the  Tribunal's  record  of  proceedings  that  there  was  an
objection by the appellant's representative to the  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer's  cross-examination.  Following  an  adjournment  for   lunch,   it
transpired that the Home Office Presenting Officer had left the Tribunal  to
go to hospital. As a result, despite the objections made by the  appellant's
representative, the judge adjourned the proceedings and  directed  that  the
appeal be heard afresh on another day.

The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain on  8  October
2019, but there was no appearance by  or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.  A
previous adjournment request, made on medical grounds, had been refused  and
the appellant's representatives  had  then  requested  that  the  matter  be
determined  on  the  papers.  Judge  Hussain  heard  submissions  from   the
respondent and then dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  14
November 2019. In so doing he concluded that  the  appellant's  relationship
was not  a  genuine  and  subsisting  one,  that  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules were therefore  not  met  and  that  the  decision  was  a
proportionate one and  did  not  breach  the  appellant's  Article  8  human
rights.

Permission was sought by the appellant to appeal  the  judge's  decision  to
the Upper Tribunal, on three grounds: firstly, that the judge had not  acted
fairly as he had heard submissions from the respondent despite  the  request
having been made for the appeal to be determined on the papers and  that  he
had failed to take account of the previous, adjourned hearing at  which  the
appellant and his wife had attended; secondly, that the  judge  had  wrongly
considered that the burden of proof lay upon  the  appellant  despite  there
being an allegation of deception; and thirdly that the judge had  failed  to
consider that the majority of the appellant's and his  wife's  evidence  had
been consistent.

Permission was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal McClure on  22  May
2020.

The case was reviewed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  due  to  the  circumstances
relating to Covid 19. In a Note and Directions sent out on 8  October  2020,
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen indicated that he  had  reached  the  provisional
view that  the  question  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
involved the making of error of law and, if so, whether the decision  should
be set aside, could be made without  a  hearing.  Submissions  were  invited
from the parties.

Neither party has responded  to  the  Tribunal's  directions  and  the  time
limits therein have expired. There is therefore no indication as to  whether
either party objects to the error of law  matter  being  determined  on  the
papers. It seems to me that, given the view I have taken below  in  relation
to the error of law, there is no reason why the matter cannot be  determined
without a hearing and I do not consider that either party is  prejudiced  if
I do so.

It is quite apparent to me that the judge's decision  cannot  stand,  albeit
not solely  for  the  reason  given  in  the  grant  of  permission.  Whilst
permission was granted on the second ground, in relation to  the  burden  of
proof, the decision made by Judge McClure did not specifically restrict  the
challenge to that ground. It seems to me that the most  concerning  part  of
the judge's decision is raised in the second part of the  first  ground,  at
[3] and [4] of the grounds, which Judge McClure did not address.

Although it is the case that the appellant requested a papers  determination
of his appeal, and whilst I agree with Judge McClure that [2] of  the  first
ground has no merit, [3] and [4] of the first ground  nevertheless  properly
state that the judge failed to have  any  regard  to  the  first,  adjourned
hearing. Although Judge Morris, at that first  hearing,  directed  that  the
following hearing would be a de novo hearing,  and  although  the  appellant
and his wife chose not to attend that hearing, the fact  remains  that  they
did attend the first hearing and the appellant did  give  evidence  and  was
cross-examined, and that he objected to the hearing being abandoned  because
the presenting officer had left the building.  Failing  to  take  that  into
account is a significant  omission  for  the  judge  to  have  made  in  his
decision, when holding against the appellant the fact that he had  requested
a papers determination. It also seems to me  that  there  is  merit  in  the
third ground, in that the judge's  adverse  credibility  findings  are  very
short and focus on the inconsistent evidence without assessing the  evidence
as a whole and taking account of the positive aspects of the evidence.

It may be that the judge would have reached the  same  decision  if  he  had
assessed the evidence as a whole, given the nature of the discrepancies  and
inconsistencies the respondent had identified in the refusal  decision,  and
it may also be that the appellant could not succeed in his Article  8  claim
either within or outside the immigration rules even if the relationship  was
found to be genuine. However, the fact that the judge simply  dismissed  the
appellant's case without giving full consideration to the  evidence  is,  in
my view, a material error of law, such that his decision cannot stand.

Accordingly, I find that the judge's  decision  is  not  sustainable  and  I
therefore set it aside. The appropriate course  is  for  the  matter  to  be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo before  a  different
judge.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard afresh before any judge aside from Judge Hussain.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 25 November 2020
