
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05185/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14 February 2018                   |On 8 March 2018                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     mm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation (father representing)
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
herein is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's
family.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of
court proceedings.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen or Zimbabwe, born [ ] 2005.  On or around 15
    December 2015 he  made  an  application  for  entry  clearance  as  the
    dependent child of his UK based father. On 8  February  2016  an  entry
    clearance officer refused this application, pursuant to  paragraph  EC-
    C.1.1 (d) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  (with  reference  to
    paragraphs E-ECC.1.6.(b) and (c) thereof).

 2. It is of significance that as  of  the  date  of  the  entry  clearance
    officer's decision the appellant's father had limited leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom,  conferred  until  18  September  2017  -  as  a
    consequence of his marriage to a British citizen.

Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 3. At his appeal  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  the
    appellant was represented by his father, and the Secretary of State  by
    Counsel.  Counsel for the Secretary of State asserted to the  FtT  that
    the entry clearance officer had applied the wrong immigration  rule  in
    his assessment of the appellant's application, and that  paragraph  297
    of HC 395 should, instead, have been applied.

 4. The FtT (Judge M A Khan) acceded to this submission and went on to deal
    with the substance of the appeal on the basis  of  a  consideration  of
    paragraph 297 of the Rules and, thereafter,  Article  8  ECHR.   It  is
    accepted by Mr Duffy that Counsel was incorrect in this submission  and
    that  the  entry  clearance  officer  had,  in  fact,  considered   the
    appellant's application under the correct immigration  rule.   Although
    the appellant's father now has indefinite leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom this was not the case as of the date  of  the  entry  clearance
    officer's decision.  The  relevant  rules  the  FtT  were  required  to
    consider were, therefore, those contained  within  paragraph  E-ECC  of
    Appendix FM.

 5. As it turns out, the relationship requirements under both paragraph  E-
    ECC of Appendix FM and paragraph 297 of the Rules  are  the  materially
    identical. The appellant is required to demonstrate  either  that:  (i)
    his father "has had sole responsibility for [his] upbringing;  or  (ii)
    that "there are serious and compelling family or  other  considerations
    which make  exclusion  of  the  [appellant]  undesirable  and  suitable
    arrangements have been made for the [appellant's] care".

 6. The only material difference in the  relationship  requirement  between
    the two rules is the length of period of leave to remain the sponsoring
    parent is required to have. Under paragraph 297 the  sponsoring  parent
    must be present and settled in the United Kingdom  (or  being  admitted
    for settlement on the same occasion), whereas under paragraph E-ECC.1.6
    of Appendix FM the sponsoring parent need only be in the United Kingdom
    with limited leave to enter or remain (or  applying  as  a  partner  or
    parent under Appendix FM).



Discussion and Decision

 7. I turn first turn to the FtT's analysis of the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant's father has had  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant's
    upbringing. In this regard the sponsor asserts that the FtT  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for its conclusion and also failed to  take  into
    account material matters.

 8. Consideration of these submissions requires a careful analysis  of  the
    FtT's decision. I refer first to paragraph 17  thereof,  in  which  FtT
    observes that:  "The  sponsor,  the  appellant's  adopted  his  written
    witness  statement  dated  10/02/2017".   Other  than  the  grammatical
    errors, this observation has two obvious flaws.  First,  the  appellant
    did not adopt a  statement  before  the  FtT  because  he  was  not  in
    attendance before the FtT. Second, the sponsor  has  never  produced  a
    statement dated 10 February 2017 and therefore cannot have adopted such
    statement  before  the  FtT.  The  appellant's  father  did  produce  a
    statement dated 10 May 2017 and, it appears, adopted this statement  in
    evidence before the FtT. It to this statement that I assume the FtT was
    referring in paragraph 17 of its decision.

 9. The statement of 10 May 2017 was not, however, the only  statement  the
    appellant's father put before the FtT.  The appellant's father (jointly
    with his wife) also submitted a lengthy  statement  dated  29  February
    2016. This statement is neither explicitly referred to by the FtT,  nor
    in my view can it be implied from anything said by  the  FtT  that  the
    contents of the statement were taken into account. For the reasons that
    follow, I find this failure amounts to  an  error  of  law  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal.

10.  On  the  issue  of  whether  the  appellant's  father  has  had   sole
    responsibility for the appellant's upbringing,  the  FtT  concluded  as
    follows:

         "26. The sponsor adopted his  statement  and  gave  oral  evidence,
             which is noted above.  The sponsor came to the United  Kingdom
             in October 2005, the appellant was six months old at the time,
             he next went back to Zimbabwe in 2011 and then in  2014.   The
             appellant's mother left him in 2007 when he was 2  years  old.
             The sponsor has been supporting the appellant and  his  mother
             financially and there  is  evidence  in  the  bundle  of  this
             support.

         27.   The  appellant  is  currently  residing  with  his   paternal
             grandmother   in   Zimbabwe.    The    question    of    "sole
             responsibility" was settled by the Upper Tribunal in the  case
             of  TD  (paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole  responsibility")  Yemen
             [2006] UKAIT 00049, where in the headnote it is stated:

                  "Sole responsibility is a factual  matter  to  be  decided
                  upon all the evidence.  Where one parent is  not  involved
                  in  the  child's  upbringing  because  he  (or  she)   has
                  abandoned or abdicated responsibility, the issue may arise
                  between the remaining parent and the others who have  day-
                  to-day care of the child abroad.  The test is whether  the
                  parent has  continuing  control  and  direction  over  the
                  child's upbringing, including all the important  decisions
                  in the child's life.   However,  where  both  parents  are
                  involved in a child's upbringing, it will  be  exceptional
                  that one of them will have sole responsibility."

         28.   I  find  on  the  evidence  before  me,  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities,  for  the  above  mentioned  reasons  that  the
             sponsor in this case has not had the sole  responsibility  for
             his son that his mother, the appellant's grandmother has  been
             responsible for the appellant's needs, education  and  day  to
             care (sic) and decision-making process."

11. Even on the evidence that the FtT took into account it is difficult  to
    understand the reasoning process by which  it  is  concluded  that  the
    appellant's  grandmother  has  been  responsible  for  the  appellant's
    "needs, education and day-to-[day] care and decision-making process".

12. The inadequacy of the FtT's  reasoning  in  this  regard  is,  however,
    significantly accentuated when viewed in the context of  the  statement
    of the 29 February 2016.  Therein the appellant's father and his  wife,
    inter alia, assert that it was the  appellant's  father  who  made  the
    decision to transfer the appellant to a different school in  2013  and,
    in particular, to move  him  to  a  boarding  school  (1.3),  that  the
    appellant's father makes welfare  decisions  concerning  the  appellant
    (1.5), that the appellant's father does the appellant's  homework  with
    him over the telephone during the holiday period (2.2.8), and  that  it
    was the appellant's father who wrote the authorisation letter  relating
    to the registration process for the school.

13. All these matters are relevant to a proper assessment  of  whether  the
    appellant's father has had  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant's
    upbringing.  As  I  have  already  identified,  nowhere  in  the  FtT's
    decision is there reference to the statement of 29 February  2016  nor,
    more significantly, can it be implied from reading the  FtT's  decision
    that it had this evidence in mind.

14. Had the FtT taken such  evidence  into  account  and  found  it  to  be
    truthful then it would have been  open  to  it  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant's father had, and would continue to have, sole responsibility
    for the appellant's upbringing.   In  the  face  of  such  evidence,  a
    contrary conclusion would require reasoning  of  significantly  greater
    depth than that found in the instant decision.

15. I find,  therefore,  that  the  FtT  erred  in  considering  the  wrong
    immigration rule and, more significantly, in its assessment of  whether
    the appellant's father had  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant's
    upbringing. These errors clearly impinge on the FtT's lawful assessment
    of whether the ECO's decision to refuse  entry  clearance  leads  to  a
    breach of Article 8 ECHR, the sole ground deployed by the appellant  in
    the appeal before the FtT. It is to be recalled in particular that  the
    Immigration Rules reflect the SSHD's (and ECO's) view as to whether the
    public interest lies in the proportionality assessment under Article 8.
    A failure to lawfully assess whether the requirements of the Rules  are
    met clearly, therefore, impinges on the assessment of where the  public
    interest lies in the overarching  proportionality  assessment  required
    under Article 8.

16. I next turn to the issue of whether such errors should lead me  to  set
    aside the FtT's decision. Although it is apparent  that  the  appellant
    cannot meet the maintenance requirements  of  paragraph  E-ECC  of  the
    Rules because the evidential requirements of Appendix  FM-SE  have  not
    been met I, nevertheless, accept that the FtT's decision should be  set
    aside.

17. The appellant's father now has indefinite leave  to  remain.  Mr  Duffy
    consented, pursuant to section 85(5) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, to the Tribunal considering this new matter  on  a
    re-making of the decision under appeal.  This is of importance  because
    any re-making would now fall to be considered under  paragraph  297  of
    the Rules and not paragraph E-ECC of Appendix FM, as Mr Duffy concedes.
    This is of benefit to the appellant because under paragraph 297  he  is
    not being obliged to adhere to the evidential requirements of  Appendix
    FM-SE when the financial aspects of the rule are under consideration.

18. Taking all of this into account I conclude that the correct  course  is
    for me to set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  to
    remit the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal to consider afresh.  I
    re-iterate that the Secretary of State has given consent to consider as
    a new matter the fact that at the appellant's father now has indefinite
    leave to remain.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the FtT to be determined afresh.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 O'Connor
Date: 8 March 2018






