
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05278/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 July 2017                              |On 03 August 2017             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                      MISS JAHNZELLE CHRISMILE LORILLA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry clearance officer - manila
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Catalina Lorilla, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of the Philippines, appeals against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Beg sitting at Taylor  House
    on 8 November 2016) dismissing her appeal against the decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer to refuse her entry clearance for the  purposes
    of settlement under Rule 297.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that the appellant  requires
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.



The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. The application for permission to appeal was settled by Counsel who did
    not appear below.  Counsel advanced three grounds of  appeal:  (1)  The
    Judge had applied too high a standard of proof; (2) The Judge  had  not
    given  sufficient  consideration  to  section  55   of   the   Borders,
    Citizenship & Immigration Act 2009 and (3) The Judge failed to consider
    Article 8 ECHR.

The case on Ground 3

 3. Counsel pleaded that the judgment made no reference  to  the  appellant
    and  her  mother's  Article  8  rights.   There  appeared  to   be   no
    consideration of any Article 8 case  law  which  might  have  warranted
    entry clearance on a  discretionary  basis.   The  appellant  shared  a
    parental/child  relationship  with  her  sponsor  and  the  absence  of
    consideration of Article 8  clearly  demonstrated  a  failure  to  give
    careful consideration to their relationship and  the  evidence  in  the
    round.

Permission granted on Ground 3 only

 4. On 6 June 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly granted  permission  on
    Ground 3 only.  Given that the appellant was required by section 84  of
    the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 (as amended  by  section
    15 of the Immigration Act 2014) to bring her appeal on the sole  ground
    that the respondent's decision was contrary to her human rights, it was
    arguable that it was an error of law for the Tribunal not to  give  any
    consideration at all to the question of whether family life between the
    appellant and her mother could reasonably be expected to be enjoyed  in
    the Philippines.

The Rule 24 Response

 5. On 19 June 2017, a member of the Specialist Appeals Team settled a Rule
    24 response opposing the appeal.  In summary, the respondent  submitted
    that  the  Judge  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   directed   herself
    appropriately.  The complaint that the Judge  had  failed  to  consider
    whether family life between the appellant  and  the  sponsor  could  be
    enjoyed in the Philippines was without merit.  Whilst this was a  human
    rights appeal, the Immigration Rules were Article  8-compliant  in  the
    absence of compelling circumstances (SS  Congo).   The  Judge  did  not
    simply find that the sponsor did not have sole responsibility.  He also
    found that there were "no serious, compelling or  other  considerations
    which made exclusion undesirable" at paragraph 19.   The appellant  did
    not meet the Immigration  Rules  and,  in  the  absence  of  compelling
    circumstances, the scales fell against her.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 6. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, the sponsor and her husband appeared in person.  Upon  enquiry,  I
    established that the legal representative  who  had  appeared  for  the
    appellant in the First-tier Tribunal had  offered  the  services  of  a
    Barrister for the hearing in the Upper Tribunal, but  the  sponsor  had
    decided to decline this offer.  She confirmed that she  was  happy  for
    the appeal to proceed without legal representation for her daughter.





Discussion

 7. The background to this  appeal  is  that  the  sponsor  is  a  Filipino
    national, who has leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  the  spouse
    of a British national.  She was formerly married to the father  of  the
    appellant, and they lived together in the Philippines as a family  unit
    until January 2011 when the sponsor decided to  leave  the  Philippines
    for the UK. The appellant's father remained in the Philippines.

 8. The appellant applied for entry clearance  some  five  years  later.  A
    telephone interview was  conducted  in  Tagalog  with  the  appellant's
    maternal uncle, Mr Villafranca, and the answers which he gave  at  that
    interview, lasting 33 minutes, underpinned the  reasons  given  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer for the subsequent refusal decision made on  30
    October 2015.

 9. The application  was  refused  on  two  grounds.   Firstly,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not satisfied  that  the  sponsor  had  had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant's upbringing.  He considered that  the
    appellant's father continued to be involved in her upbringing, and  she
    had not provided evidence as to why she could not live with her  father
    in the Philippines.  She had also not provided any  explanation  as  to
    why she could not continue to live with her uncle  and  cousin  in  the
    Philippines.   It was noted that her uncle attended meetings  with  her
    teachers and signed  her  school  reports,  whilst  his  daughter  (the
    appellant's cousin) helped  her  with  her  homework  and  acted  as  a
    guidance councillor for her.

10. The second ground of refusal was based on a consideration of  her  best
    interests as a child.  He noted how close she appeared  to  be  to  her
    uncle and cousin, and he had nothing before him to show that  it  would
    be in her best interests to be removed from everything she knew in  the
    Philippines to live in the UK with her mother, and with her step-father
    whom she appeared never to have met.

11. At the hearing before Judge Beg, both parties were legally represented.
     The Judge received  oral  evidence  from  the  sponsor  and  from  the
    sponsor's husband, Mr Ian French.  The Judge set out the evidence which
    she received in considerable detail at paragraphs [4]  to  [9]  of  her
    subsequent decision.

12. The Judge's findings were set out at paragraph [10] onwards.  She found
    that the  evidence  given  by  the  sponsor  was  contradicted  by  the
    information which her brother,  the  appellant's  maternal  uncle,  had
    given in interview on  28  July  2015.   He  stated  that  he  was  the
    appellant's guardian.  He stated that the appellant began  living  with
    him when her mother left for the UK. The Judge found that this directly
    contradicted the evidence of the sponsor, who said that her brother had
    never lived with the appellant.

13.  The  Judge  also  did  not  find   the   sponsor   credible   in   her
    characterisation of the appellant's father.   At  paragraph  [14],  she
    found that there was no credible evidence before her  that  the  father
    was dangerous or that he showed no love or affection to his daughter.

14. The Judge found that the sponsor had not seen the appellant since  last
    year.  She found that there was no credible  evidence  of  the  sponsor
    being in contact with the appellant's school  to  find  out  about  her
    educational progress.  She observed that there were no  school  reports
    in the appellant's bundle.   She  found  that  there  was  no  credible
    evidence as to who chose the appellant's school.  She  found  that  the
    sponsor's repeated use of the words "I have sole responsibility" showed
    some level of rehearsal.  She did  not  find  the  sponsor  a  credible
    witness.

15. With regard to the evidence given by Mr French, the Judge found that he
    knew very little about  the  appellant  who  he  had  never  met.   She
    accepted that he was prepared to support his  wife  in  supporting  the
    appellant,  but  she  found  that  he  did  not  know  much  about  the
    appellant's circumstances, including which family members  she  had  in
    the Philippines.

16. The Judge reached the following conclusion at paragraph [19]:

       "In considering the evidence in the round  and  on  the  balance  of
       probabilities,  I  do  not  find  that  the  sponsor  has  had  sole
       responsibility for the appellant.  I find that after  she  left  the
       Philippines in 2010 the appellant was cared  for  by  the  sponsor's
       aunt and her cousin... I find that the appellant lives in a property
       owned by her mother.  I do not find  that  there  are  any  serious,
       compelling  or  other  considerations  which  make  the  appellant's
       exclusion from the United Kingdom  undesirable.   I  find  that  the
       appellant is receiving education in the Philippines and  she  has  a
       number of relatives to whom she can turn to if she  needs  to.   The
       sponsor gave evidence that she has a sister and two brothers in  the
       Philippines.  Aside from Mr Villafranca, there  is  another  brother
       who lives in the next  town  to  where  the  appellant  lives.   The
       sponsor also gave evidence that she had a large number of friends in
       the Philippines  who  have  helped  her  to  obtain  documents.   In
       conclusion, I find that the appellant has failed  to  discharge  the
       burden of proof.  She does not meet the Immigration Rules."

17. As Mr Bramble concedes, the Judge ought to have considered  the  appeal
    through the prism of  a  human  rights  claim  under  Article  8  ECHR.
    However, her failure to do so does not translate into a material  error
    of law.  This is  because  there  was  no  realistic  prospect  of  the
    appellant succeeding in a claim under Article 8 ECHR  in  circumstances
    where the Judge had made sustainable findings that she could not  bring
    herself within the scope of Rule 297.

18. The appellant's real complaint is about the Judge's fact-finding.   The
    sponsor told me that her brother had given  wrong  information  in  the
    telephone interview.  However, it was open to the Judge to  prefer  the
    evidence of the maternal uncle to that of the sponsor, insofar as there
    was a conflict between the  two  of  them,  and/or  to  find  that  the
    credibility of the sponsor's evidence was undermined by the respects in
    which it was contradicted by the information given by the uncle.

19. The appellant was not given permission to argue Ground 1. However it is
    convenient to address Ground 1 as it is relevant to the materiality  of
    the Judge's error in not formally  addressing  a  claim  under  Article
    ECHR. There was ample material before the Judge to justify  an  adverse
    credibility finding against the sponsor on the issue of whether she had
    been exercising sole responsibility  for  the  appellant's  upbringing.
    The Judge did not apply too high a standard of  proof.   She  correctly
    directed herself that the standard of  proof  was  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, and there is nothing in her  reasoning  which  indicates
    that she did not follow her self-direction.

20. The only other basis on which the appellant  could  succeed  under  the
    Rules was if she could  bring  herself  within  Rule  297(i)(f),  which
    applies where one parent or a relative is present and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom and there are serious and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable.  I
    consider that the Judge gave adequate reasons for deciding  that  there
    were not serious and compelling family or  other  considerations  which
    made the appellant's exclusion from the UK undesirable.  The Judge  did
    not specifically address the question of whether  family  life  between
    the appellant and her mother could reasonably be expected to be enjoyed
    in the Philippines.  However, I do not consider that this was  the  key
    question.  Moreover,  insofar  as  it   was   one   of   the   relevant
    considerations arising  under  Rule  297(i)(f),  the  Judge's  implicit
    finding was that family life between mother and daughter could continue
    to be enjoyed as  before,  which  was  through  occasional  visits  and
    through contacting each other on social media.

21. Since the Judge made a sustainable finding that the appellant  did  not
    qualify for entry clearance under inter alia Rule 297(i)(f), there  was
    no evidential basis for a viable claim in the alternative  outside  the
    Rules under Article 8 ECHR.  The negative answer  to  the  question  of
    whether Rule 297(i)(f) applied effectively foreclosed  the  possibility
    of the appellant contending  that,  notwithstanding  her  inability  to
    bring herself within this rule or another gateway  provision  contained
    in Rule 297, the decision to exclude her was disproportionate.  For  if
    it was disproportionate, the appellant  ought  to  succeed  under  Rule
    297(i)(f).  Equally, the reverse is  true.  There  was  nothing  to  be
    weighed in the scales in a proportionality assessment at stage five  of
    the Razgar test which had  not  already,  explicitly  or  by  necessary
    implication, been weighed in the scales in an assessment as to  whether
    Rule 297(i)(f) applied. Hence the Judge's error is not material  as  no
    Tribunal, properly directed, could have found against the appellant  on
    the application of Rule 297(i)(f) but nonetheless have  gone  to  allow
    her appeal on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date 31 July 2017

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

