
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05516/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Sent to parties on:                  |
|On 21 April 2017                     |On 23 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                   Mr Abdelsalam Naeim Abdelsalam Elsayed
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Shaikh (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.  This is the appellant's appeal, to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
   permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a decision of  the
   First-tier Tribunal (Judge Fisher hereinafter "the judge") dismissing his
   appeal against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department of 3 September 2015, refusing to grant him leave to remain  on
   human rights grounds.

2. The appellant is a national of Egypt. He was  born  on  8  May  1980.  He
   entered the UK in March of 2009 and claimed asylum. His claim was refused
   and a subsequent appeal failed. It is now accepted by the appellant  that
   his asylum claim was a false one, not least because he had claimed to  be
   from Palestine.  He now accepts that, in fact, he had come to the UK  for
   a better life rather than in fear of persecution.

3. Having failed in his asylum claim he applied for an EEA  Residence  Card,
   an application which was again unsuccessful,  and  whilst  there  was  an
   allegation that he had acted dishonestly in pursuing that application the
   judge found that dishonesty had not been made out.

4. In making the human rights application which led  to  the  refusal  which
   has, in turn, led to this appeal, the appellant  failed  to  mention,  in
   response to specific questions, that he had previously claimed asylum  in
   the United Kingdom. Nor  did  he  disclose  a  previous  use  of  various
   aliases. He relied upon Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
   Rights (ECHR) and, specifically, upon his  relationship  with  a  British
   citizen, one [GH]. It was not disputed before the judge that [GH] suffers
   from muscular dystrophy.

5.  The  judge  made  some  favourable   findings   from   the   appellant's
   perspective.  In  particular,  despite  the  history  of  dishonesty,  he
   accepted that the relationship with [GH] was genuine and  subsisting.  He
   also accepted that, as at the date of the hearing  before  him,  she  was
   pregnant and that he was the prospective father. He accepted  that  there
   was family life within the meaning of Article 8.

6. As to more negative findings and conclusions the judge, as  noted,  found
   that he had been guilty of dishonesty as to his past history, when making
   his current application. There  was  also  of  course,  as  part  of  the
   background, the  dishonest  asylum  claim.  The  judge  decided  that  in
   consequence of this, the appellant could not satisfy the requirements  of
   what might be termed the Article 8 related immigration rules and that, in
   particular, his dishonesty when applying had meant  the  requirements  of
   paragraph S-STR.2.2. of Appendix FM had not been met. It does not  appear
   that, in fact, it was argued before the judge that  the  requirements  of
   the Immigration Rules were met and no  criticism  has  subsequently  been
   made of the judge's consideration of matters within the Rules.

7. Having decided that the requirements of  the  Rules  were  not  met,  the
   judge turned to the arguments concerned  with  Article  8  outside  those
   Rules. He concluded that the appellant had been working illegally and had
   sought to lie about the extent  to  which  he  had  been  doing  so  (see
   paragraph 23 of the Judge's decision). He relied, for that finding,  upon
   some notes which had been taken in a notebook by an  Immigration  Officer
   of information which had been given by the proprietor of a  business  for
   whom the appellant had been so working. The judge noted  the  appellant's
   partner's significant health  difficulties  (I  say  significant  because
   muscular dystrophy is obviously a serious and difficult   condition)  but
   in the context of her care needs and whether these could be  catered  for
   in the absence of the appellant, he noted what he described as;

            "A paucity  of  satisfactory  medical  evidence  concerning  the
sponsor and her precise           medical and care needs as well as  details
of  the  options  available  to  her  in  the              absence  of   the
appellant".

8.    In that context he rejected a submission made by Ms Shaikh (  who  had
   also  represented  the  appellant  before  him)  that  general   material
   concerning muscular dystrophy coupled with [GH]'s evidence  ought  to  be
   sufficient. So, there were some positive considerations and some negative
   ones with respect to Article 8 outside the Rules.

9.    The judge, having made his  findings,  reminded  himself  that,  as  a
   consequence of Section 117B  (1)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002, the maintenance of effective immigration control was  in
   the public interest. He added that he was  satisfied  substantial  weight
   should be attached to that consideration given that it  is  expressed  in
   primary legislation. He also took the view that there was a "very  strong
   public interest" that those applying to remain in the UK should be candid
   with the relevant authorities  about  their  past.  He  noted  that  both
   parties had been aware of the appellant's precarious  immigration  status
   when the relationship had commenced. As to whether the sponsor  would  be
   able to cope with a child in the appellant's absence  he  took  the  view
   that there would be "ample time" for the appellant to return to Egypt  to
   make an entry clearance application disclosing all  relevant  facts,  and
   then for him to be able to return to the UK prior to the  projected  date
   of birth in January 2017. As to the possible application of  Chikwamba  v
   SSHD [2008] UKHL 40, he took the view that that case was now  of  limited
   relevance given that it had been decided prior to the coming  into  force
   of Section 117B.

10.   Ms Shaikh advanced  four  separate  written  grounds  of  appeal  when
   challenging the judge's decision.  In summary, it  was  argued  that  the
   judge had erred in failing to take proper account of the  evidence  which
   had been before him regarding [GH]'s health  and,  in  that  regard,  had
   arrived at conclusions unsupported by the evidence. It was argued that he
   had erred in placing significant weight on the  pocket  notebook  entries
   referred to above and had not properly resolved the conflict between what
   was contained in the notebook and what the  appellant  himself  had  said
   about his previous working. It was argued that the judge  had  failed  to
   properly consider the relevance of Chikwamba. Finally, it was argued that
   the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  what   was   said   to   be   "the
   disproportionate interference with the appellant's evolving family life".

11.   Permission to appeal was granted on 7 November  2006.  The  grant  was
   not limited and it was observed, therein, that  there  was  a  degree  of
   overlap between the grounds. Permission having been granted there  was  a
   hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  (before  me)  so  that  it  could  be
   considered whether the judge had or had not erred in law and, if he  had,
   what should flow from that. Representation at that hearing was as  stated
   above and I am grateful to both representatives.

12.   Ms Shaikh, essentially, relied upon the points  made  in  her  written
   grounds.  Mr  Duffy  argued  that  the  first  two  grounds  amounted  to
   perversity challenges in circumstances where  the  judges  reasoning  and
   conclusions had not been  perverse.  Chikwamba  was  only  applicable  in
   circumstances where  if  a  person  were  to  go  abroad  to  seek  entry
   clearance, such an application would inevitably succeed. That was not the
   case here. So it did not assist. What was said in ground 4 was really the
   same as what had been said in ground 1.

13.   As I indicated to the parties, I have concluded  that  the  judge  did
   not err in law and that, accordingly, his decision should stand.

14.   As to the first ground, the judge was clearly aware of  [GH]'s  health
   difficulties. What was important, though, was the nature  and  extent  to
   which those difficulties led to care needs, what those  care  needs  were
   and whether they might be met  in  other  ways  in  the  absence  of  the
   appellant. Although the judge did not expressly say  so  it  seems  clear
   that he had in mind, as to the latter consideration, the sort of  support
   which may be provided by Social Services Departments and  the  extent  to
   which needs might be met by funds payable in the  form  of  benefits  for
   those who have disabilities.

15.   The judge was entitled, in the context  of  there  being  a  need  for
   specific information as to these matters, to have regard to the  lack  of
   what he  perceived  to  be  sufficiently  clear,  detailed  and  specific
   evidence. After all, the burden was upon the appellant to demonstrate the
   decision under appeal had interfered with his Article 8 rights in  a  way
   which was impermissible. The judge did not, as a matter of law,  have  to
   wholly accept, in the face of a lack of such evidence,  everything  which
   had been said about care needs by [GH] or the appellant and  he  was  not
   obliged to reach conclusions favourable to the appellant simply upon  the
   basis of what he described  as  "background  material"  relating  to  the
   relevant medical condition. I have concluded that this ground is really a
   disagreement with the view taken by  the  judge  and  that  it  does  not
   identify an error of law.

16.   As to  the  second  ground,  the  appellant  had  acknowledge  working
   illegally but had simply said he had  not  done  so  to  the  extent  his
   employer had  indicated  to  an  Immigration  Officer  according  to  the
   notebook entries). I do not think it can be said that the judge failed to
   adequately resolve the conflict in the evidence. He clearly  resolved  it
   against the appellant. Given that there was conflicting evidence it  was,
   essentially, a matter for the judge as the fact-finder  to  decide  which
   version he preferred. Of course, although he did not expressly make  this
   point, it is worth noting that he had found other examples of  dishonesty
   in the appellant's history and that the appellant's own position amounted
   to an acceptance that he had worked illegally in any event. Against  that
   background it does not seem to me  it  can  be  viably  argued  that  the
   judge's approach was perverse or  irrational  and  I  can  find  no  real
   suggestion of any misdirection in the way  he  approached  matters  which
   were properly for him to decide. I have concluded, therefore,  that  this
   ground does not demonstrate an error of law on the part of the judge.

17.   As to the third ground, there may be arguments as to  whether  or  not
   Chikwamba remains as relevant as it once was since the coming into  force
   of Section 117 B. Be that as it may though, the real point being made  in
   Chikwamba concerned the futility of requiring a person to  go  abroad  to
   seek  entry  clearance  in  circumstances  where  the  outcome  would  be
   inevitable success. The judge, here, did not think that  the  appellant's
   case was  such  a  case  because  he  would  need,  said  the  judge,  to
   demonstrate that he had sufficient English language skills. So, the entry
   clearance application would not be, if I can put it this way "a shoo-in".
   But in any event it seems to me it was entirely  open  to  the  judge  to
   conclude that Chikwamba did have a limited relevance. I do not find  this
   ground to be made out.

18.   As to ground 4, I do not see any basis for concluding that the  judge,
   as the ground argues he did, failed to consider  the  appellant's  family
   life as an evolving entity. He was  simply  taking  an  overall  view  of
   matters on the basis of the  material  before  him.  As  to  the  related
   complaint that he had erred in thinking there would be ample time for the
   appellant to make an entry  clearance  application  and,  if  successful,
   return prior to  the  birth  of  the  child,  the  burden  was  upon  the
   appellant. On the face of it one would think the judge's view as to  that
   was not incorrect but the real point is  that  the  judge  had  not  been
   provided with any evidence emanating from the appellant  which  addressed
   the question of timescales. On the limited material  before  him  it  was
   open to the judge to decide as he did. Once again, therefore, the  ground
   is not made out.

19.   Matters have, in fact, now moved on. I understand that [GH] has  given
   birth to a child who is, of course, a British citizen. It may be that the
   appellant will, in due course, be advised (if he has not had such  advice
   already) to make a fresh application on human rights grounds in light  of
   the birth of that child. That, though, is entirely a matter for  him  and
   his advisors. I have concluded that the judge did not make  an  error  of
   law and it must follow that, therefore, his decision shall stand.

20.   Finally I have not made any anonymity order.  None  was  made  by  the
   First-tier Tribunal and none was sought either before  that  tribunal  or
   me.

Decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
   an error of law and shall stand.

      No anonymity order is made.


   Signed


   M R Hemingway: Judge of the Upper Tribunal


   Dated:  18 May 2017

        No fee award is made.


   Signed

                                                                           M
   R Hemingway: Judge of the Upper Tribunal


   Dated:  18 May 2017
