
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05251/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th August 2018                            |On 17th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                           mr ISAAC OKYERE BIMPEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Waheed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision promulgated on 9th January 2018, the  appellant's  appeal
    against a decision to refuse his human rights claim, following  refusal
    of entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a partner, was dismissed by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg ("the judge").  Following an  application
    for permission to appeal, in which it  was  contended  that  the  judge
    erred in proceeding on the basis that  the  appellant  was  liable  for
    deportation, permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

2.   In a Rule 24 response from the Secretary  of  State,  dated  29th  June
    2018, the appeal was conceded.  It  was  clear  that  the  decision  to
    refuse entry clearance contained an inapplicable "suitability"  section
    which ought to have been deleted before the decision  was  served.   As
    the appeal was decided on the papers, there was no  Presenting  Officer
    to correct the mistake.  The Secretary of State also accepted that  the
    judge's consideration of the family relationships  and  the  Article  8
    assessment were tainted by her mistaken belief that the  appellant  was
    liable to deportation.  In all  the  circumstances,  the  Secretary  of
    State accepted that the decision should be set aside and remade  before
    a different judge.

3.   In the light of the Rule 24 response, and without needing to hear  from
    Mr Waheed or Mr  Clarke,  I  conclude  that  the  decision  contains  a
    material error of law and must be set aside.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside; it will be  remade  at
the Taylor House hearing centre, not before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Beg.
No findings of fact are preserved and the hearing will proceed on a de  novo
basis.


Signed                                  Date 17 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity order or direction  and  none  has
been sought.  I make no order  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
