
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05347/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing at Bradford IAC |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On the 26 February 2021                   |On the 09 September 2021         |
|                                          |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                          MRS SHAILA VENKATESH PAI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Sharma, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
         "FtTJ") promulgated on the 14 April 2021, in which the  appellant's
         appeal against the decision to refuse her human rights  application
         dated 18 February 2020 was dismissed.


      2. The FtTJ did not make an anonymity order  and  no  application  was
         made for such an order before the Upper Tribunal.

      3. The hearing took place on 1 September 2021, by means  of  Microsoft
         teams which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face- to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the appellant's daughter who was able to see and  hear
         the proceedings being conducted. There  were  no  issues  regarding
         sound, and  no  technical  problems  were  encountered  during  the
         hearing, and I am satisfied both advocates were able to make  their
         respective cases by the chosen means.

      4. I am grateful to Mr Sharma and  Mr  Bates   for  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

Background:

      5. The appellant is a national of India. Prior to coming to the UK,
         she lived with her husband until his death on 12 March 2018. As
         regards her family circumstances, the appellant has 5 daughters and
         one son. Three of her daughters live in India and one daughter in
         the USA. She has one daughter present in the UK who has indefinite
         leave to remain but is an Indian citizen (referred to by the judge
         as "SB") and a son also present in the UK (referred to by the judge
         as "PP").


      6. She entered the United Kingdom on 15 May 2019 using a 6 month visit
         visa. She was accompanied by her daughter Sharmila and her
         grandson. The purpose of the visit, according to the Visa
         application, was to spend time with her son, PP and her daughter SB
         and to undertake sightseeing in London. It is said that she had
         visited her children in the UK previously and had abided by the
         terms of previous visas granted. However, when her current visa
         expired on 6 November 2019, the appellant remained in the UK. It
         was claimed that during her visit, her son and daughter became
         concerned about how her health had deteriorated. On that basis an
         application was made by the appellant for leave to remain outside
         of the Immigration Rules on 18 February 2020.

The decision letter:


      7. The application was refused in a decision made on the 31 March
         2020. The decision letter states that the appellant had made a
         human rights claim for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of
         her private life in the UK and in addition she had applied for
         leave to remain outside of the immigration rules on the basis of
         her health.


      8. Her application was considered under the private life rules under
         Paragraph 276 ADE, where it was noted that the appellant was a
         national of India who had entered the UK on 15 May 2019 and thus
         had lived in the UK for 9 months  and it was not accepted that he
         lived in the UK continuously for 20 years;  she was not between the
         ages of 18 and under 25 having lived in the UK for more than half
         her life and was over the age of 18 and therefore could not meet
         the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1 (iii)(iv) and (v).

      9. As to paragraph 276 ADE(1) (vi) the respondent did not accept that
         there would be very significant obstacles to her integration into
         India if required to leave the UK because she resided in India all
         of her life, including her childhood, formative years and a
         significant portion of her adult life up to the age of 70. It was
         considered that she retained social, cultural, and linguistic
         connections to India and that she would be able to reintegrate into
         the culture and way of life in India. Consequently, she failed to
         meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


     10. The respondent did not consider that there were any "exceptional
         circumstances" to warrant a grant of leave to remain and considered
         the issues that had been raised. As to the application made on the
         basis of her private life in the UK it was noted that she only
         entered the UK on 15 May 2019, and it was not accepted that she met
         the minimum residency requirements for a grant of leave under the
         private life route. Additionally she had not provided any evidence
         to show that she would not be able to re-establish a private life
         in India. The appellant had stated that she had family members in
         India and therefore it was accepted that they would be able to
         provide the necessary support required for her to re-adapt to life
         there.

     11. Within the application the appellant had stated that she was
         previously a carer for her husband, but he died in 2018. She
         additionally stated that she had no one to care for her in India
         and that she would be vulnerable due to her age. The respondent
         considered that whilst it was understandable and accepted that the
         death of a relative was a significant change and loss to the
         family, it of itself was not a unique or sufficiently compelling
         circumstance to warrant a grant of leave outside the rules.
         Furthermore within the application the appellant had failed to
         provide any evidence to show that she would be vulnerable upon her
         return to India and that she would be unable to seek the necessary
         support she required.

     12. As to the claim that her family were financially supporting her in
         the UK, the respondent considered there was nothing preventing them
         from continuing to do this from the UK and that whilst the current
         economic situation India may be poor, the appellant would not
         suffer any greater hardship than other people of that country.

     13. Reference is made to the medical evidence provided with the
         application to show that she had been diagnosed with high
         cholesterol, high blood pressure, arthritis, diabetes and
         depression. However it was considered that apart from diabetes, the
         appellant had those medical conditions prior to her entry in the UK
         and that she failed to provide sufficient evidence to demonstrate
         that her physical health had deteriorated since her arrival in the
         UK in a significant manner. Reference was made to a report from Dr
         Burhan which stated that she had been diagnosed with moderate
         depressive order however it was not accepted that her medical
         conditions were life-threatening or that she would be unable to
         seek medical treatment in India. The appellant had not provided any
         evidence that she would be denied medical treatment nor that she
         would be unable to travel to obtain such treatment. Whilst it was
         accepted that the healthcare system in the UK and India are
         unlikely to being equivalent, it did not entitle her to remain in
         the UK.

     14. Reference is made in the decision letter to the country materials
         relating to healthcare and support available in India and it was
         noted the treatment of anxiety and depression was available at the
         hospitals set out in the decision letter at page 5.

     15. Further consideration was given to the claim that she had limited
         mobility and that her adult children provided her with both
         physical and emotional care. The respondent considered that her
         care needs could be met upon her return to India and that her adult
         children in the UK could continue to provide emotional support.

     16. Reference was made in the decision letter to her claim to enjoy
         family life with her adult children in the UK who cared for her and
         who are present and settled. However, the respondent noted that the
         appellant had not made an application as an adult dependent
         relative and that the relationships of her settled family were not
         solely reliant on her presence in the UK and could be maintained
         from India.

     17. Therefore the respondent did not find that there was any evidence
         to demonstrate that there were any" exceptional circumstances"
         established in her case. The application was therefore refused.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

     18. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         leave came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Povey)  on  the  7
         April 2021.

     19. In a determination promulgated on  the  14  April  2021,  the  FtTJ
         dismissed the appeal on human  rights  grounds,  having  considered
         that issue in the light of  the  appellant's  compliance  with  the
         Immigration Rules in question and on Article 8 grounds.  The  judge
         heard evidence from the appellant and also heard evidence from  her
         and her daughter.

     20. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant  could
         not meet the requirements for a grant of leave to remain under  the
         Immigration Rules under  Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE (at  [48])
         and  that  there  were  no  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
         appellant's integration to India in light of the support reasonably
         available to her to manage her health needs, that she had lived her
         whole life in India, she retained her own  home  and  was  familiar
         with the local area and culture of the country.

     21. When considering Article 8 outside of the  rules,  the  FtTJ  found
         that the appellant required  long-term  personal  care  to  perform
         everyday tasks and that her mental health would deteriorate without
         appropriate treatment and support (at [24]). The judge  found  that
         the appellant had provided no evidence to support  her  claim  that
         appropriate medical treatment would be unavailable to her and noted
         at paragraph [30] that any  shortcomings  with  the  Indian  health
         service had not been pursued during the hearing. The focus  was  on
         whether  there  was  a  lack  of  family  support  in  India.  When
         undertaking an assessment of the evidence relating to  the  support
         and assistance that she would have in India,  the  judge  concluded
         that the appellant's daughters, between them or individually, could
         adequately support their mother  in  India  to  meet  daily  living
         needs, meet her emotional needs and ensure that  she  could  access
         the available medical services she required. At paragraph [54]  the
         FtTJ undertook the  balancing  exercise  taking  into  account  the
         public interest considerations under section 117B and  reached  the
         overall conclusion having weighed the  competing  factors  that  on
         balance any interference in the appellant's family  life  with  her
         adult children or any private life she  may  have  in  the  UK  was
         proportionate when considered against  the  weight  of  the  public
         interest in immigration control. The FtTJ therefore  dismissed  the
         appeal.


     22. Permission to appeal was issued on the 24 April 2021 and on 6 May
         2021, permission to appeal was granted by FtTJ Adio.


The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     23. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 1 June 2021, inter alia, indicating that  it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined  without  a  face-  to-  face  hearing.  Following   the
         directions the parties indicated that they  were  content  for  the
         hearing to proceed by this method. Therefore, the  Tribunal  listed
         the hearing to enable oral submissions to be given by each  of  the
         parties with the assistance of their advocates.

     24. Mr Sharma on behalf  of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the  written
         grounds of appeal.   He  also  made  reference  to  a  Rule  15(2A)
         application made by email and  received  by  this  Tribunal  on  28
         August 2021.

     25. There was a written response filed  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
         dated 11 June 2021. Mr Sharma was provided with a copy of the  Rule
         24 response and was given time to consider its contents.

     26. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear and helpful oral submissions.

The grounds and submissions:

The appellant's submissions:  ground 1

     27. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that firstly,  the  FtTJ
         erred in law in relation to the support available to the  appellant
         if she returned to India and secondly there was an further error in
         relation  to  the  reasonableness  of  the   appellant's   daughter
         relocating to India to provide care for her mother.

     28. Mr Sharma referred to the preliminary facts found by the judge  set
         out in his grounds at paragraph 7.

     29. He submitted that the "headline findings" set out at paragraph [24]
         were that the appellant required long-term personal care to perform
         everyday tasks. He submitted the finding was made by the judge  and
         was not challenged during the  hearing  and  it  follows  from  the
         unchallenged medical evidence set out at F5. The judge  found  that
         the appellant required a level of care and that her  mental  health
         and deterioration should be the lens that the tribunal should  look
         through as to her care requirements.

     30. The other factual findings relate to her family  circumstances  and
         that she was a widow, that she had 2 adult children in the UK a son
         and a daughter both had residence in the  UK  for  lengthy  periods
         namely 1996 and 2003 respectively at that her daughter was a  nurse
         in the UK and that she had 3 daughters in India, 1 of whom she  had
         no contact with and 2  remaining  daughters.  In  relation  to  her
         daughter Sharmila she had a son who needed  supervision  and  full-
         time attendance look after him (see [34]). This  was  supported  by
         the evidence in the bundle at M3 and M1. In her  witness  statement
         she said that her son had autism and that he required 24/7 care. In
         that witness statement she also said that the living space was such
         that she could not care for a mother and therefore she specifically
         said she could not take care of her mother.

     31. As to her other daughter, Shikha, she was married to a man  working
         in Thailand and her plan was to  go  to  Thailand  long  term.  She
         provided a witness statement at N1 (undated) stating  that  she  is
         planning to move to Thailand.  The  plan  was  to  leave  India  in
         September 2021 and that her mother could not be  accommodated  with
         her in Thailand and that the onus of care lied upon  the  relatives
         in the UK to take care of her.

     32. Against those factual background is the judge distilled the factors
         down to 2 particular points -whether Sharmila's son  required  care
         and the planned move to Thailand.

     33. Mr Sharma submitted that the first  error  of  law  in  the  FtTJ's
         decision was that he adopted a "blinkered" approach and  failed  to
         look at the position as to whether the appellant  could  be  looked
         after at all. Mr Sharma referred the tribunal to paragraph [37] and
         that despite the evidence of the need for full-time care the  judge
         found that it was not unreasonable for either daughter to care  for
         their mother. However he submitted this was in direct  conflict  to
         the unchallenged evidence and failed to take account  of  the  fact
         that her daughter's son required 24/7 care and  secondly  she  said
         she could not provide  the  care  that  the  appellant  needed  and
         therefore the judge had not considered that relevant evidence.

     34. He further submitted that the same could be said in relation to the
         evidence relating to Shikha. The criticism mounted by the  FtTJ  at
         [40] was that there was a lack of  corroborative  evidence  of  her
         planning to move to Thailand and that the appellant  did  not  make
         reference to it in her witness statement. However that is incorrect
         as it is set out in her daughter's letter, and it can be taken that
         as this  is  evidence  in  the  appellant's  bundle  she  therefore
         volunteered  this  information  before  the  tribunal.   Also   the
         appellant did make reference to her daughter going to  Thailand  to
         the medical expert  (see  F4  home  circumstances  4.1  "the  other
         daughter is moving to Thailand").  Mr  Sharma  submitted  that  the
         judge failed to take this evidence into account and  that  she  was
         medically examined on 24 October 2020 which predated the hearing in
         April 2021 therefore it was not right to say that it  was  evidence
         that had not been previously referred to.

     35. Therefore Mr Sharma submitted that the error of law in the decision
         of the FtTJ related to whether or not the 2 daughters were able  to
         care for her mother and the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account
         relevant considerations and relevant evidence on that issue.

     36. Mr Sharma made the additional points that the FtTJ did not consider
         whether the  care,  if  available,  would  be  sufficient  for  the
         appellant's needs. The judge accepted that the  appellant  required
         24 care but did not  address  whether  the  care  that  they  could
         provide would be sufficient. SB  is  a  registered  nurse  and  can
         provide the care the appellant requires  therefore  without  making
         reference to the supporting evidence  it  can  be  shown  that  the
         findings were inconsistent and insufficiently reasoned.

    Rule 15 (2A) application:

     37. At this stage Mr Sharma sought to formally make the application  to
         admit further evidence which had been  sent  in  an  email  to  the
         tribunal on 20 August 2021. Mr Bates confirmed that he had received
         a copy.

     38. Mr Sharma submitted that the FtTJ made findings in relation to  the
         appellant's  daughter.  However  they  were  not  raised   by   the
         respondent  and  if  the  judge  had  raised  concerns   with   the
         representatives as to lack of evidence then a response  could  have
         been provided and therefore  the  issue  was  decided  without  any
         notice to the appellant. He further submits that the  evidence  now
         submitted were not new matters but were addressed in  the  original
         evidence therefore the appellant is not raising  anything  new  but
         was simply "filling the gaps" to assist the tribunal as to  whether
         the findings made by the judge were inconsistent and therefore  the
         evidence should be admitted. He submitted  that  it  was  open  for
         those matters to be admitted and there  was  no  prejudice  to  the
         respondent.

     39. As  to  ground  2,  Mr  Sharma  submitted  that  the  judge  having
         recognised that the appellant is cared for by her daughter  in  the
         UK as a registered nurse, the judge found that it was reasonable to
         expect her daughter to return to India to look after the appellant.
         As the appellant was a woman who required 24 hour care it would not
         be a short visit but would be a return full-time. He submitted that
         the consideration of reasonableness was made without any  reference
         to        SB's        private        or        family         life.









     40. He further submitted as set out at paragraph 20 of the grounds, the
         judge failed to consider whether the proposed action was the  least
         intrusive way to achieve the objective sought ("Bank  Mellat")  and
         this was relevant to proportionality.

     41. Mr Sharma further submitted that the  appellant's  daughter  was  a
         registered nurse and the judge failed to  take  into  account  that
         such course of action (requiring SB to  travel  to  India  to  look
         after her mother) would be depriving  the  United  Kingdom  of  the
         benefit of SB's work as a  nurse.  The  written  grounds  cite  the
         decision in UE (Nigeria) and others v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 975.

    The respondent's submissions:

     42. Mr Bates on behalf of  the  respondent  relied  upon  the  rule  24
         response dated 11 June 2021.

     43. He submitted that the key finding made by the FtTJ was at [45]  and
         that  "the  appellant's  daughters,   whether   between   them   or
         individually, could adequately support their  mother  in  India  to
         meet her daily living needs, meet her emotional  needs  and  ensure
         that she can access the available medical services  she  requires."
         He submitted that whilst it  had  been  argued  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant that each of the daughters in India had difficulties that
         argument failed to undermine the finding at [45] that even on their
         own each of the daughters concerned could provide adequate care for
         the appellant. Insofar as it was argued that the  appellant  relied
         upon SB because she was a registered nurse, there  was  nothing  in
         the  medical  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  required
         specific care from a registered nurse. Although  that  would  be  a
         "bonus" the medical evidence before the tribunal  did  not  suggest
         such a level of support was necessary and therefore any  of  the  3
         daughters whether an registered nurse  or  not  would  be  able  to
         provide adequate care to their mother.

     44. Mr Bates further submitted that the  FtTJ  did  not  disregard  the
         evidence that the appellant had provided  to  the  doctor  and  the
         judge acknowledged this at paragraphs [31] and [32].  At  paragraph
         [31] the judge accepted the circumstances relating to  one  of  the
         daughter's and that both the appellant and SB confirmed it in their
         oral evidence and that the medical expert  had  recorded  the  same
         being told to them. At [32] the judge again referred to aspects  of
         the daughters' circumstances having been mentioned to  the  medical
         representatives. Thus Mr Bates submitted the "key  point"  made  by
         the judge was that the appellant in her own witness  statement  did
         not make any reference to this information. The appellant's witness
         statement could be seen as the best source of information as to the
         core considerations that feature in her case. The judge noted  that
         the issues were not raised in her  witness  statement  at  all  (at
         [35]). In cross-examination and set out at paragraph  [36]  it  was
         put to the appellant that given the size of her home  Sharmila  and
         her family could live with the appellant. The judge  recorded  that
         "the objection raised was not based upon the adequacy of care which
         could be provided by Sharmila rather the  appellant  was  concerned
         that autistic grandson would wake up when she was sleeping (because
         of what she described as his eccentric behaviour)." Looking at that
         paragraph, the evidence given by the appellant was not based on any
         inadequacy of care from her  daughter  but  the  concern  that  her
         grandson may wake her when sleeping. The point  drawn  out  by  the
         judge at [35] and thereafter is that the appellant had  not  raised
         it herself and even when given the opportunity in cross-examination
         to elaborate her reasoning, she did not raise the  point  and  that
         whilst her daughter had an autistic son the appellant did  not  say
         that her daughter would not be able to either live with or care for
         her.

     45. He submitted that at paragraph [37] the judge identified  that  the
         detail in the evidence was lacking and that  the  daughter's  son's
         care needs did not prevent Sharmila from caring for the  appellant.
         He submitted that the judge was entitled find  that  there  were  2
         individuals who could  potentially  meet  the  care  needs  of  the
         appellant but was not satisfied that the care for her son precluded
         the appellant's daughter from giving care to her mother.

     46. As regards the medical evidence in relation  to  the  child's  care
         needs  whilst  it  referred  to  24/7  it  did  not  refer  to  any
         difficulties or provide any detail. The care of the child  required
         did not mean that the mother would have to be in one room with  the
         child for 24 hours and therefore the burden was on the appellant to
         demonstrate why her daughter would not be able to care for her, but
         the appellant had not gone far enough in the evidence to  discharge
         the burden of proof. There was nothing irrational  or  perverse  in
         the factual findings made and that was  entitled  to  consider  and
         have regard to the evidence  and  accepted  whilst  the  child  had
         medical difficulties it was not to the extent evidenced  that  care
         could not be provided by the appellant's daughter.

     47. Mr Bates submitted that when looking at  the  accommodation,  there
         was no challenge to the factual finding made that  the  appellant's
         daughter could live at the appellant's  address  or  accommodation.
         This was set out at [36] and the appellant did not raise any  issue
         in cross-examination of the suggestion of the  accommodation  being
         unsuitable in any way.

     48. As to the evidence relating to the other daughter,  the  judge  was
         aware of the witness statement however the judge was correct to say
         that it had not  been  raised  by  the  appellant  in  her  witness
         statement as a concern or as an issue as to why care could  not  be
         provided by her daughter. At [32] the judge was aware that this had
         been related to the medical Dr however  the  witness  statement  of
         both daughters could properly be  seen  as  direct  evidence  which
         could not be tested in cross-examination and  therefore  the  judge
         was entitled to consider the evidence in terms of  weight  that  he
         gave it. There was no evidence in the appellant's witness statement
         on this point.

     49. Mr Bates  referred  to  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant where it was argued that there had been no  reference  to
         that evidence is not however the judge did not say that, but it was
         a matter of weight given to the evidence.  The  appellant  was  not
         raising it as an issue of real concern and therefore the judge  had
         regard to that point as the appellant was not raising  it  herself.
         The appellant's daughter did not give evidence directly  and  there
         was a lack of direct corroborative evidence concerning the move  to
         Thailand as identified by the judge. Mr Bates  submitted  that  the
         judge had pointed out that there  was  no  corroboration  from  the
         appellant's husband to even confirm that he is in Thailand or  that
         there was any genuine intention to move. In terms of  the  findings
         made they were open to the judge in the context of the burden being
         on the appellant but  that  the  evidence  was  not  sufficient  to
         discharge that burden.

     50. As to the rule 15 (2A) application, Mr Bates submitted that it  was
         an inappropriate application and the  evidence  had  not  been  put
         before the FTT.

     51. He submitted that the submission made  that  there  was  procedural
         unfairness, on the basis that there had been no issue raised by the
         respondent about the appellant's daughter, was not a submission  or
         ground that had been raised in the grounds of  challenge.  If  that
         was to be relied upon it should have been part of the  grounds  but
         was not.

     52. He further submitted the burden of proof was on the  appellant  and
         the  appellant  provided  evidence  late  and  was  inadequate.  He
         submitted that it was significant that the evidence  now  is  being
         sought to reduce was not adduced before the  judge  and  it  was  a
         tacit acknowledgement that the  evidence  was  in  fact  inadequate
         before the judge. This was also evidenced by  the  submission  made
         that the present evidence now sought to  be  admitted  "filled  the
         gaps".  He  submitted  that  the  admission  of   evidence   cannot
         retrospectively establish an error in this way.  By  attempting  to
         perfect the evidence by introducing new evidence as a result of the
         inadequacy of the other evidence demonstrates that the new material
         should not be admitted. It cannot be said that there was a  failure
         to address the  evidence  given  before  the  judge.  It  might  be
         relevant to remaking but it cannot establish an error of law.

     53. He submitted that the appellant knew what their case was  based  on
         the 2 daughters not being able to provide care and therefore it was
         reasonable to assume that that evidence would be required  to  have
         some support  to  it  rather  than  a  mere  assertion.  The  judge
         therefore could not be criticised by taking the evidence as it was,
         and the judge was not satisfied that the evidence was  sufficiently
         reliable to attach weight to it as the appellant would wish. Weight
         was a  matter  for  the  judge  and  the  reasons  given  were  not
         irrational or perverse.

     54. Dealing with ground 2, it was submitted that the judge did not make
         a finding that SB was required to go to India  (at  [44])  and  the
         judge made the point that  it  was  a  matter  of  choice  for  the
         appellant's daughter noting that she had transferable skills.

     55. Whilst it had been argued that SB was a qualified nurse, and the UK
         would therefore  lose  her  expertise  the  judge  considered  that
         argument at paragraph [54.6] and  sets  out  the  precise  argument
         raised by the representative. However the judge stated there was no
         compulsion or requirement on SB to leave the UK and it  was  firmly
         her choice (also see paragraph 54.7).

     56. Consequently the judge weighed  all  matters  in  the  balance  and
         reached the conclusion overall that it was not disproportionate  to
         expect the appellant to return to India. The judge had to weigh  up
         the appellant's reliance on the NHS treatment which  was  a  factor
         and a countervailing factor in assessing  removal.  The  judge  had
         referred to the sum total of the evidence  including  that  of  the
         medical professionals whose reports were prepared to assist in  the
         application and was mindful that there was some  corroboration  but
         ultimately when weighing up the factors the judge was not satisfied
         that there was any direct corroborative evidence  of  the  move  to
         Thailand and the evidence relating to the other daughter's son  and
         his care needs had not been  sufficiently  detailed  and  therefore
         found that both daughters in conjunction with SB would be  able  to
         care for their mother. Nothing in the  evidence  demonstrated  that
         the appellant's needs were for a registered nurse and therefore the
         decision could not be criticised.

     57. By way of reply, Mr Sharma submitted that the submissions made  did
         not relate to the points he had set out  in  his  submissions.  The
         appellant did not say that she required a particular type of  care,
         but the type of care was 24/7 and the help with everyday things and
         this had not been challenged. Therefore when considering Sharmila's
         circumstances an individual could  not  provide  24/7  care  for  2
         people and  the  feasibility  of  providing  such  care  of  the  2
         individuals at the same time was not considered. There was no  lack
         of evidence as the evidence referred to 24/7 care.

     58. He further submitted that in relation to the other sister  and  the
         move to Thailand, was raised before  the  appeal  hearing  (to  the
         medical representative) and there had been evidence in her  letter.
         Whilst the  respondent  had  referred  to  there  being  no  cross-
         examination as she did not give evidence that could have  been  put
         to the appellant.

     59. Lastly Mr  Sharma  submitted  that  he  did  not  raise  procedural
         unfairness as a ground but as a ground to support the admission  of
         evidence and to show that the judge's findings  were  inconsistent.
         The appellant sought to provide the evidence to help  the  tribunal
         to see if the judge had made an error in the evidence did this.

     60. He therefore invited the tribunal to find that the decision of  the
         FtTJ involved the making of an error in a point of law  and  should
         be set aside.

     61. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.

Discussion:




     62. I have given careful  consideration  to  the  submissions  made  on
         behalf of the parties and have done so in the light of the decision
         of the FtTJ and the evidence that was before him. Having done so, I
         have reached the conclusion that the grounds advanced on behalf the
         appellant do not demonstrate that the  judge  fell  into  error  in
         reaching his overall conclusions and  relevant  to  his  Article  8
         assessment. I shall set out my reasons for reaching that view.




     63. The first ground advanced  on  behalf  the  appellant  relates  the
         factual assessment  made  by  the  FtTJ  relating  to  the  support
         available to the appellant in India.


     64. I do not accept the submission made by Mr  Sharma  that  the  judge
         erred in his consideration  of  the  issues  by  adopting  what  he
         described as a "blinkered" approach and that the judge was wrong to
         focus upon the evidence relating to the question of lack of support
         available from  the  appellant's  daughters  in  India.  Mr  Sharma
         submits the judge only considered the care needs of Sharmila's  son
         between paragraphs 33 - 37  and  the  circumstances  of  her  other
         daughter in India and her move to Thailand between paragraphs 38  -
         41 and this was an error. As Mr Bates submitted, those 2 issues had
         been advanced as the main reasons in  support  of  the  appellant's
         case as to why the appellant could  not  live  in  India  and  thus
         should remain in the UK with her adult children. I see no error  in
         the way the judge approached the issues and in the light  of  these
         considerations they plainly formed  the  core  of  the  appellant's
         claim before the FtTJ.


     65. Nor do I accept the submission made that the FtTJ's  assessment  on
         those core issues was in any way flawed.


     66. The FtTJ set out his  analysis  of  the  medical  evidence  between
         paragraphs [17 - 24].  Dr Burhan had set out that the appellant had
         a number of health conditions, many of which she had for  a  number
         of years and for  which  she  had  received  treatment  for  whilst
         resident in India.  They  included  high  cholesterol,  history  of
         raised blood pressure, her arthritis and reduced mobility and  that
         she has suffered from depression from 2018 and that  her  diagnosis
         as a diabetic had been made 6 or 7 months  ago.  He  described  the
         appellant at  [D6]  as  suffering  from  "ongoing  chronic  medical
         illnesses, raised blood pressure,  diabetes,  arthritis  which  are
         stable on medication." On a functional assessment of the  appellant
         it was concluded that she  required  assistance  and  prompting  to
         undertake a range of daily activities and when assessing her mental
         health found symptoms suggestive of moderate anxiety disorder, mild
         - moderate depression  and  mild  memory  impairment.  Dr  Burhan's
         opinion and prognosis was that the appellant's physical health  was
         stable  on  her  prescribed  medication.   She   needed   "constant
         monitoring and support from loved ones to be  able  to  detect  any
         changes in memory.". He concluded that "it is  highly  likely  that
         the combination of severe anxiety, moderate depressive illness  and
         memory decline without lack of personal support in her home country
         will have negative and detrimental implication on her physical  and
         mental health."




     67. As recorded in the decision of the FtTJ, Dr Burhan recommended that
         a psychiatrist should prepare a report and as a  result  Dr  Bobdey
         prepared a report following an examination on 29 October 2019. This
         report concluded that  she  met  the  "criteria  for  diagnosis  of
         moderate  depressive  disorder  with   anxiety   symptoms   without
         psychotic symptoms as classified in ICD classification at F322 with
         a clear deficit in a cognitive functioning".  The  report  stressed
         the importance of both medical  treatment  and  social  support  to
         mitigate  against  the  deterioration  in  the  appellant's  mental
         health.



     68. At paragraph [23] the FtTJ set out the prescribed  medication  that
         she was taking.


     69. It is not suggested by Mr Sharma that the FtTJ's assessment of  the
         medical evidence is in error and as noted at  [24]  the  respondent
         did  not  seek  to  challenge  the  medical  evidence  as  to   the
         appellant's health needs. The FtTJ therefore found that "by reasons
         of age, illness and disability, the  appellant  requires  long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks." The judge also found "her
         mental health will deteriorate without  appropriate  treatment  and
         support."


     70. In the context of medical treatment (both for  depression  and  for
         her other medical illnesses), the FtTJ took into account that  when
         living in India previously her medical conditions had been  treated
         by her doctor and that she had  been  prescribed  medication  (  at
         [28]) and that whilst  the  appellant  had  sought  to  argue  that
         appropriate medical treatment would not  be  available  to  her  in
         India the judge  recorded  at  [29]  that  the  appellant  had  not
         provided any evidence to support the claim that appropriate medical
         treatment would be unavailable to in India. Furthermore, the  judge
         recorded that any shortcomings in the Indian health service was not
         an argument that was pursued by counsel during  the  hearing.  Thus
         the focus of the appeal was directed to the lack of family  support
         in India.


     71. Whilst Mr Sharma made the submission that the judge found that  the
         appellant "needed 24-hour care" that is not what the FtTJ found nor
         is it the phrase expressly used in the  medical  reports.  Even  if
         that was, the  report  did  not  set  out  that  she  required  any
         particular type of support, and this is relevant in  light  of  the
         submission made that the judge did not consider what type  of  care
         would be sufficient for her needs and in the context also that  the
         appellant's daughter was a registered nurse and would  be  able  to
         provide the care in the United Kingdom. As Mr Bates submitted,  the
         report did not state specifically what type  of  support  would  be
         required.


     72. Therefore against that evidential backdrop, the FtTJ undertook  the
         assessment of support and assistance that would be available to the
         appellant and addressed this comprehensively at  paragraphs  [28  -
         45]. Having considered that assessment and  in  the  light  of  the
         submissions made I am not satisfied that the judge  erred  in  that
         assessment by either  failing  to  consider  relevant  evidence  or
         reaching findings that were in conflict with the other evidence.


     73. Mr Sharma submits that the FtTJ's overall finding that it would not
         be unreasonable for either daughter to care for their mother failed
         to take account of the evidence and in particular the  evidence  of
         one daughter who had the 24/7 care of her son, and that  the  other
         daughter was moving to Thailand. In his submissions  he  sought  to
         challenge the assessment of the evidence.


     74. The judge identified at [32] that it was the appellant's case  that
         for different reasons her daughters were unable to provide her with
         the support she required or to manage her mental health. At  [33  -
         37]  the  FtTJ  addressed  the  evidence  relating  to   Sharmila's
         circumstances and contrary to the grounds expressly referred to the
         content of the letter from her and that her son  was  autistic  and
         required continual, round-the-clock supervision that would  prevent
         her from attending the appellant's care needs and that her home was
         too small to accommodate the appellant. At [34] the judge  referred
         to  the  medical  letter  in  respect  of  her  son  dated  23/3/21
         confirming the diagnosis (although in different terms) and that  he
         needed the supervision and attendance of his mother (at M3).


     75. The FtTJ made the following findings:


         1) The appellant, in her witness statement  referred  to  the  fact
            that her 3 daughters were unable  to  care  for  her  in  India.
            However, no mention was made of the difficulties Sharmila  faced
            in caring for her  son  or  why  that  would  prevent  her  from
            providing the required support and assistance  for  the  mother.
            Rather, the appellant claimed that her daughters "have their own
            elderly parents in law who need their care round-the-clock. This
            practically means they cannot follow my  medical  treatment  and
            look after me on day-to-day basis" (A2). The  judge  found  that
            the  statement   was   prepared   by   the   appellant's   legal
            representatives and that she had adopted it as evidence in chief
            without amendment or clarification ( at [35]).

         2) The judge recorded the appellant's evidence at the  hearing  and
            that when it was put to the appellant in cross examination that,
            given the size of her home it would be feasible for Sharmila and
            her family to live with the appellant, the objection raised  was
            not based on the inadequacy of care which could be  provided  by
            Sharmila. Rather, the appellant was concerned that her  autistic
            grandson would wake her up when she  was  sleeping  (because  of
            what she described as eccentric behaviour) (at [36]).

         3) The judge accepted that Sharmila's son had autism  and  required
            supervision and care but found that the "evidence adduced lacked
            detail and, importantly, did not sufficiently  explain  or  show
            why the son's care needs would prevent Sharmila from providing a
            reasonable and acceptable level of support and assistance to the
            appellant (at [37]).

         4) The judge therefore concluded that those reasons he  was  unable
            to find  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  or  implausible  for
            Sharmila and her family to assist the appellant  with  her  care
            needs in India."

     76. Whilst Mr Sharma seeks to challenge paragraph  [35]  on  the  basis
         that the medical report referred to the circumstances  of  Sharmila
         son, that submission in my view  does  not  undermine  the  factual
         assessment made by the FtTJ.  Firstly,  the  FtTJ  was  correct  in
         stating that in her witness statement the appellant referred to the
         fact that her 3 daughters were unable to care for her but  made  no
         mention of the difficulties Sharmila faced in caring for her son or
         why it would prevent her from providing  the  required  support  or
         assistance. I observe also that that was the position in the letter
         written  by  the  appellant  solicitors   which   accompanied   her
         application to the respondent in February 2020.

     77. The judge was also similarly correct to  make  the  same  point  in
         relation to the evidence relating to her other daughter Shikha  (at
         [39]).

     78. The point made by the FtTJ was that despite the centrality of these
         issues to her claim and as it was  advanced  before  the  tribunal,
         there had been no reference to those difficulties  in  her  witness
         statement. In my view it is reasonable  to  assume  that  the  best
         source of information concerning the circumstances of her own  case
         would be set out in her written evidence. The judge properly  noted
         the omission of this at [35].

     79.  Mr  Sharma  submits  the  medical  report  filed  earlier  in  the
         proceedings referred to those circumstances,  and  thus  the  judge
         failed to take  that  evidence  into  account  when  reaching  that
         finding. However, at [33] the judge expressly set out that "aspects
         of their circumstances (referring to  her  2  daughters)  had  been
         mentioned to Drs Burhan and Bobdey" and therefore the judge did not
         ignore that evidence. The references in the medical report  however
         did not give any details  of  the  claimed  difficulties  faced  by
         either daughter and what was stated under "home circumstances"  was
         that "one of the daughters has a son with  special  needs  and  the
         other daughter is moving to Thailand with her husband." At [37] the
         FtTJ stated that whilst he accepted that Sharmila's son had  autism
         and required supervision and  care,  the  evidence  adduced  lacked
         detail and did not sufficiently explain or show why her son's  care
         needs would prevent her from providing a reasonable and  acceptable
         level of support and assistance to the appellant. In  my  judgement
         that was finding entirely open to the judge to make  and  supported
         by the earlier finding  at  [36]  that  when  it  was  put  to  the
         appellant in cross examination that given the size of her home that
         Sharmila and her family could live with her, the objection that she
         raised was not based on the inadequacy of the care  that  could  be
         provided by Sharmila but rather that the  appellant  was  concerned
         that her autistic grandson would wake up.

     80. The medical evidence provided in  respect  of  Sharmila's  son  was
         brief in its contents  with  no  real  detail  or  any  explanatory
         evidence as to the type of  care  required.  The  letter  from  his
         mother (at M1) stated "he is diagnosed  with  autism  and  requires
         24/7 supervision. He requires help with day-to-day tasks  including
         personal care and hygiene." Whilst there was a  reference  to  24/7
         care the letter did not provide any  further  elucidation  of  what
         part her spouse played in any care arrangements or any reference to
         other care and assistance available to her.

     81. In my judgement given the lack of detail in support of the  claimed
         circumstances, the weight to be given to that evidence was a matter
         entirely for the judge. It was therefore open to him to  reach  the
         conclusion at [37]  that  when  viewed  cumulatively  the  evidence
         adduced lacked the requisite  detail  and  failed  to  sufficiently
         explain or show  why  her  son's  care  needs  prevented  her  from
         providing any level of care to her mother.

     82. Similarly, I find no  error  in  the  assessment  of  the  evidence
         relating to the support that could be provided by  the  appellant's
         other daughter in India. The same submission  was  made  the  judge
         failed take into account the evidence in his assessment as set  out
         at [38 - 41].

     83. As set out in the preceding paragraphs, the judge was plainly aware
         that  the  medical  report  made  a  passing   reference   to   the
         circumstances of Shikha in the light of his reference to  the  same
         at [32]. As also set out, the mention in the medical report was  in
         the briefest of terms and gave no details whatsoever. The  FtTJ  at
         [39] made the point that the appellant's  witness  statement  again
         made no reference to the  specific  factor  of  the  relocation  to
         Thailand, but that Shikha had elderly  in-laws  to  care  for.  The
         appellant's daughter in the  UK  also  made  no  reference  in  her
         statement to her sister's plans to  move  to  Thailand.  The  judge
         observed "this was all the more surprising as the  statements  were
         written in the knowledge that, in  refusing  her  application,  the
         respondent reached the following various conclusions regarding  her
         family in India.".

     84. At [40] the FtTJ addressed the  evidence  that  had  been  provided
         consisting of a letter (N1). The  letter  stated  "I  am  currently
         residing in Mumbai and am planning to move  to  Thailand  where  my
         husband works. I plan to leave India in  September  2021."  In  the
         light of that evidence, and against the evidential  background  the
         judge made a finding at [40] which was open to  him  to  make.  The
         judge found  that  "it  was  reasonable  to  expect  more  detailed
         evidence regarding Shikha's travel plans and there was  nothing  to
         suggest that such evidence would not have been readily  available."
         In my view the judge was entitled to place little weight  upon  the
         evidence which he described  as  the  only  "direct  evidence"  and
         evidence that had not been the subject of any cross examination.  I
         accept the submission made on behalf of the respondent that it  was
         not the case of  the  judge  failing  to  take  into  account  that
         evidence but that the judge had reached the view that little weight
         could be attached that evidence in the view of its contents. In  my
         view that was further supported by the assessment that there was no
         corroborative  evidence  from  either  the  appellant's  daughter's
         husband, or his employer and that no explanation had been given for
         the lack of any such evidence being presented.

     85. At [41] the judge concluded that  in  the  light  of  the  lack  of
         evidence which the  judge  found  was  "reasonable  to  obtain  and
         adduce", the lack of  any  explanation  for  its  absence  and  the
         "inconsistency and omissions in the witness  statements",  that  he
         was unable to find that Shikha  was  planning  to  leave  India  as
         claimed or at all and thus it was reasonable to conclude  that  the
         support and assistance she had provided prior to May 2019 would  be
         available to the appellant on return. The  burden  of  establishing
         the factual circumstances lay upon the appellant and it was for her
         to provide evidence to establish those  facts  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities. The FtTJ plainly and for good reason was entitled to
         reach the  conclusion  that  the  burden  of  proof  had  not  been
         discharged on the basis of the evidence that had been presented  to
         the tribunal.

     86. Therefore I conclude that  the  FTJ's  overall  assessment  of  the
         evidence relating to Shikha's circumstances was sustainable on  the
         evidence and open to him to make.

     87. It is in this context that Mr Sharma seeks to admit fresh evidence.
         It  consists  of  a  bundle  entitled  "supplementary  index".  Its
         contents include the following documents:

         1) a letter from  Dr  Garne  relating  to  the  child  stating  "is
            suffering from autistic disorder with severe mental  retardation
            and sensory disorder.  Due  to  the  condition  he  cannot  live
            independently and requires 24/7  care  which  includes  personal
            hygiene, feeding, toileting and sensory needs. His mother is his
            full-time carer, she is not capable to look after anyone else in
            this current situation." I note that the doctor who  wrote  this
            report is not the doctor who provided the previous report at M3.

         2) There is a letter from the husband of Shikha setting out that he
            will be applying for his  wife  to  join  him  in  Thailand  and
            enclosing a work permit issued  in  February  2020  expiring  in
            March 2022 and a copy of his passport which appears to  show  it
            was issued in Bangkok in 2008.

     88. The evidence was sent by email on 24 August 2021 accompanied  by  a
         letter stating the following "the appellant submits fresh  evidence
         to support her appeal under Rule 15 (2A). All the enclosed evidence
         was not before the FTT because it is post -dated and not  available
         at the FTT  hearing.  The  appellant  believes  that  the  enclosed
         evidence is important evidence which will help the UT in  re-making
         the decision."

     89. I have set out earlier this submissions made in support and against
         the  admission  of   this   evidence.   Having   considered   those
         submissions, I refuse to admit  that  evidence  for  the  following
         reasons.

     90.  I reject the submission that the judge had acted in  a  way  which
         was procedurally unfair when assessing the evidence before him. The
         claim that the appellant's daughter could  not  provide  assistance
         had not been made in any detail before the respondent as  evidenced
         in the decision letter and recorded by the FtTJ at  paragraph  [39]
         of his decision. It is  therefore  unsurprising  that  it  was  not
         raised by the respondent in the decision letter in  detail.  As  to
         the hearing itself, the ROP records the submission made  on  behalf
         of the respondent and that "concerns regarding quality of care  and
         care home, nothing beyond oral evidence." Therefore the  submission
         made that the issue was decided without notice to the appellant  is
         simply incorrect. In any event, in my view the judge  was  entitled
         to consider the circumstances of the appellant's daughters  on  the
         evidence that was submitted. The burden was  on  the  appellant  to
         demonstrate the factual circumstances relied upon.  The  judge  was
         therefore not required to raise any concerns about  the  inadequacy
         of the evidence to the parties.

     91. Mr Sharma submits that the evidence should be admitted  because  it
         is not new evidence but "fills the gaps" to assist the Tribunal  in
         assessing the error of law. Again in my view that is  misconceived.
         The fact that it has been  deemed  necessary  to  "fill  the  gaps"
         demonstrates the judge was correct to identify the lack  of  cogent
         and detailed evidence put before the tribunal  in  support  of  the
         appellant's case. As submitted on behalf  of  the  respondent  this
         submission was a "tacit acknowledgement" of the inadequacy  of  the
         evidence before the judge.

     92. Furthermore I accept  the  submission  made  that  the  attempt  to
         perfect the evidence by introducing new evidence as a result of the
         inadequacies of the earlier evidence is not a reason for  admitting
         that evidence at this stage in the proceedings.

     93. Finally I am also satisfied that the fresh evidence does  not  meet
         the test in Ladd v Marshall [1954] EWCA Civ 1 as it is has not been
         demonstrated that the  evidence  could  not  have  reasonably  been
         obtained before the FtTJ. In  my  judgement  it  was  open  to  the
         appellant  to  provide  evidence  in  relation  to  her  daughters'
         circumstances at the time, particularly as she was represented.  In
         my view the judge accurately reflected the nature of  the  evidence
         before him, and it  is  the  legality  of  the  decision  which  is
         relevant. For those reasons I refuse to admit that evidence.

     94. I now turn to ground 2. It is argued that the judge erred in law in
         relation  to  the  reasonableness  of  expecting  the   appellant's
         daughter in the UK to relocate to India to  provide  care  for  her
         mother.

     95. The submission made in the written grounds is that the judge failed
         to take account that such a course would  deprive  the  UK  of  the
         benefit of her work as a nurse citing the decision in UE  (Nigeria)
         (as earlier cited). I reject that  submission.  It  is  clear  when
         reading the decision at paragraph 54.6 that the judge engaged  with
         the submission made by counsel  that  it  was  not  in  the  public
         interest for a qualified and experienced nurse to relocate to India
         and took  into  account  the  current  immigration  rules  and  the
         recognition of the shortage of nurses. Therefore it is incorrect to
         argue that the judge failed  to  take  that  into  account  in  his
         assessment of proportionality.

     96. Mr Sharma further submitted that  the  consideration  was  made  in
         absence of any reference to her private and family life.

     97. When addressing ground 2 it is important to look at what the  judge
         actually stated in his decision. At [42] the  judge  set  out  SB's
         circumstances and that she had remained an Indian citizen  although
         she had been in the UK since 1996. The judge  expressly  took  into
         account her evidence that it would  not  be  feasible  for  her  to
         return to India due to her lack of experience  of  working  in  the
         Indian health service as a nurse and that she was not accustomed to
         living in India. At [43] the judge accepted  that  there  would  be
         "undoubtedly some challenges" for her in  returning  to  India  but
         that she would have the support of her mother and sisters and  that
         prior to the pandemic she had been a regular visitor  to  India  to
         see the appellant. The judge took into account that  there  was  no
         evidence that she would experience the difficulties she had claimed
         regarding employment and that if anything, given her experience and
         qualifications as a nurse her employment prospects were better than
         "many in India". The judge did take into account that  there  would
         be a period of adjustment to a new working environment but that  it
         was difficult to see how  that  would  render  a  return  to  India
         unreasonable or implausible. At [44] the judge considered and  took
         into account the evidence of her family  and  private  life  noting
         that she had no other relatives or family settled in  the  UK  save
         for her brother; she did not own any property  and  her  job  as  a
         nurse was "eminently transferable" between the UK and  India.  Thus
         he concluded that in his judgement it would not be unreasonable for
         her to return to India to help care for the appellant.

     98. When viewing  those  paragraphs  cumulatively,  the  judge  plainly
         considered the relevant aspects  of  the  appellant's  private  and
         family life in the UK. However what the grounds fail to consider is
         that notwithstanding that assessment, the  judge  expressly  stated
         that this was a choice and that she would be entitled  to  exercise
         that choice by remaining in the UK. The judge  expressed  the  same
         point at paragraph [54.6] and that there was no compulsion  on  her
         to leave the UK but that this would be  a  choice  that  she  could
         exercise should she wish to do so.

     99. In any event, the judge concluded that even in the absence  of  the
         appellant's daughter relocating to  India,  the  appellant's  needs
         could be reasonably met in  India  (at  [54.6]).  This  is  further
         supported by the overall factual assessment at [45] were the  judge
         found as a fact that the appellant's  daughters,  between  them  or
         individually, could adequately support their mother in India and to
         meet her daily living needs and to meet  her  emotional  needs  and
         ensure that she could access the medical services she required. The
         judge therefore made the point that all 3 dependents  between  them
         (whether they were in the UK or in India) would be able to  provide
         the adequate care or arrange that support to ensure her needs  were
         met.

    100. Drawing those matters together I am satisfied that the  grounds  of
         challenge are not made out and it has not been established that the
         judge erred in law by either failing to take into account  evidence
         or by reaching inconsistent findings upon the evidence  was  before
         the  tribunal.  In  my  judgement  the  FtTJ's   decision   was   a
         comprehensive and sound decision in which  the  judge  undertook  a
         careful assessment of  the  evidence  and  made  clear  and  cogent
         findings which  were  open  to  him  to  make.  The  assessment  of
         proportionality was conducted in accordance with  the  law  and  as
         provided by section 117A (1), Part 5A  applies  where  a  Court  or
         Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under the
         Immigration Acts breaches Article  8  and  as  a  result  would  be
         unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. Section 117A
         (2) requires the Court  or  Tribunal,  in  considering  whether  an
         interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
         family life is justified under article 8(2), to have regard in  all
         cases to the considerations listed in section 117B.


    101. The FtTJ undertook that assessment at paragraph [54.1]-[54.8] and
         was entitled to attach considerable weight to the public interest
         as identified under section 117B (1) that the appellant could not
         meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and that she had
         also failed to comply with the terms of a visit Visa having been in
         overstayer since November 2019. A court must accord "considerable
         weight" to the policy of the Secretary of State at a "general
         level": Agyarko paragraph [47] and paragraphs [56] - [57]; and see
         also Ali paragraphs [44] - [46], [50] and [53]. However,  the FtTJ
         directed himself in accordance with the law and the decision in
         Agyarko, that even when the requirements are not met, an applicant
         may still be granted leave if the consequences of removal are
         "unjustifiably harsh" (at [54 - 55] of that decision).

    102. The FtTJ addressed section 117B(3) at paragraph [54.2] and that the
         appellant had accessed the NHS and that whilst the other  financial
         and accommodation needs could be met by her UK family members,  any
         ongoing care by the NHS would be a burden on the UK taxpayer.  That
         is consistent with the public policy to protect public  funds  from
         bearing the  cost  of  medical  treatment.  This  goes  beyond  the
         question of whether a person can be maintained or accommodated.

    103. The FtTJ took into account in the balance that  little  weight  was
         afforded to any private life developed by the appellant in  the  UK
         (S117B(5) in the light of her precarious status and the purpose  of
         coming to the  UK was to visit her children and not settle  in  the
         UK. The judge also took into account in the balancing exercise that
         her health and care needs could be  adequately  met  in  India.  He
         considered the impact upon  the  Article  8  rights  of  her  adult
         children in the UK but was entitled to reach  the  conclusion  that
         both of them had lived away from the appellant for many  years  and
         that until May 2019 had conducted their relationship  remotely  and
         that there was nothing to suggest they could not continue to  enjoy
         their relationship in the same way. Contrary to  the  grounds,  the
         judge expressly considered the argument raised that it was  not  in
         the public interest for SB as a  qualified  nurse  to  relocate  to
         India but as stated at 54.6, there was  no  compulsion  on  her  to
         leave the UK and that would be a choice  that  she  could  exercise
         should she wish to do so.

    104. In cases involving human rights issues under Article 8,  the  heart
         of the assessment is whether the decision strikes  a  fair  balance
         between the due weight to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in
         maintaining an effective system  of  immigration  control  and  the
         impact of the decision on the individual's private or family  life.
         At [55] the judge plainly  weighed  all  the  relevant  factors  in
         reaching his decision it was therefore open to the judge  to  reach
         the conclusion as he did that there  were  no  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences identified that  outweighed  the  public  interest  in
         effective immigration control

    105. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the decision of
         the FtTJ did not make an error on a point of law and the decision
         of the FtTJ to dismiss the appeal shall stand.

Notice of Decision.

    106. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ stands.




Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated 3/9/ 2021.


NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.



