
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/05107/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20 June 2017                            |On 12 December 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS

                                   Between

                          mrs Jamila kamal al azawi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This case has an unfortunate history.  The  appellant's  husband  is  a
    British citizen who has lived here he tells me for 55 years.  His  wife
    came to this country in 2006 and they are married.  He is not well  and
    she is looking after him.  Equally he has a sister who is  very  unwell
    and she helps to look after her as well.  She was  here  as  a  Tier  4
    student.  Unfortunately the college which she was  attending  lost  its
    licence and so she was given the  usual  60  day  opportunity  to  find
    somewhere else.  She did not succeed and as a result her leave  expired
    whereupon  the  decision  was  taken  that  she   should   be   removed
    notwithstanding that her husband is a British citizen.   I  should  add
    that it is the appellant's case that she was never actually notified of
    the withdrawal of the licence and so the need to find another  college.
    As Mr Azawi says if they had known that  then  steps  would  have  been
    taken but as I say the result was that she lost her leave.

2.   There was then a letter written to the Member  of  Parliament  who  had
    been contacted by Mr Azawi and in  the  course  of  that  the  Director
    General of Immigration Enforcement in a letter of 1 July 2015 indicated
    that Capita, outsourced to deal  with  these  matters,  was  acting  on
    behalf of the Home Office.  That creates its own  problems  in  certain
    cases and it has created a problem in this one but the final  paragraph
    of the letter reads as follows, "if  Mr  and  Mrs  Azawi  do  not  make
    immediate plans to leave the UK  voluntarily,  their  removal  will  be
    enforced."  That  should  never  have  been  written.   It  is  utterly
    disgraceful  that  we  find  the  Director   General   of   Immigration
    Enforcement writing a letter that indicates that a British  citizen  be
    removed.  I use the word 'disgraceful' advisedly.   It  of  course  has
    created much ill-feeling on the part of Mr Azawi who has been concerned
    at this threat, as he regards it and understandably regards it  and  as
    he tells me he has not thought it sensible to travel abroad in case  he
    would not be able to be allowed back into the country.  That is a  very
    bad start by the immigration people in relation to this case.

3.   There was then an Article  8  appeal  launched  before  the  First-tier
    Judge.  It is in issue that certain material which Ms  Azawi  says  was
    served in the mainly medical evidence did not find its way  before  the
    First-tier Judge.  Whether that be so or not the fact is that  he  took
    the view that on the  material  before  him  there  was  no  sufficient
    evidence first on the medical side and  secondly  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's evidence that she had been born in Dubai (indeed her  birth
    certificate makes clear that that is the fact) and she had  effectively
    lived her life there until she came to this country in 2006.  She  thus
    has no roots in Pakistan and she has no family left in  Pakistan.   Her
    parents and her brother are now dead and unfortunately  the  First-tier
    Judge took the view that there was not sufficient evidence  to  support
    that aspect of her case.  It is submitted on behalf of  the  respondent
    that on the material before him the First-tier Judge  was  entitled  to
    reach the decision that he did.

4.   I am bound to say that it strikes me that it  was  a  singularly  harsh
    decision based upon even the material that was  available  then.   Here
    was a marriage to  a  British  citizen  who  was  unwell,  who  had  no
    connection whatever with Pakistan, to  a  wife  who  equally  had  very
    little connection to Pakistan and the Home Office  view  apparently  is
    that they can go back to Pakistan.   I  suppose  I  have  in  my  years
    dealing  with  immigration  having  been  appointed  President  of  the
    Immigration  Appeals  Tribunal  as  it  then  was  in  1999  and   done
    immigration work since, come across a large number of poor decisions by
    the Home Office.  This I am bound to say is one  of  the  poorest.   It
    seems to me that on the material that I now have and on  the  basis  of
    the evidence that has been produced I should allow this appeal  because
    I have to consider the human rights  of  both  the  appellant  and  her
    husband as at today.  I am bound by Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
    because I am a public body and even if the First-tier Judge's  decision
    was not wrong in law, as I say, it was a decision  that  lacked  in  my
    judgment compassion.  Accordingly what I propose to do is to allow this
    appeal and to remit the case for reconsideration.  I have advised Mr Al
    Azawi that he should, even if  it  means  duplication  produce  bundles
    which contain all the up-to-date medical material and further  evidence
    to make clear what the position is so far as the appellant is concerned
    and where she has spent her life and that she has no  one  in  Pakistan
    and of course so far as her husband is concerned, I am not sure  if  he
    has ever been there but he certainly has no connections  whatever  with
    that country.  I would  urge  as  I  say  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    reconsider this matter in the light of what I  have  said  but  if  she
    remains adamant then the matter will  come  before  another  First-tier
    Judge.  It will not be the judge who dealt with the matter  before.   I
    think Mr Al Azawi that I can simply conclude by saying I  hope  it  all
    turns out well in the end.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 20th June 2017


Mr Justice Collins

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

If a fee has been paid, a fee award will follow.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 20th June 2017

Mr Justice Collins
