
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05119/2015
                                                               HU/05120/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th February 2018                 |On 13th February 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                              KAMAL SING GURUNG
                             KESHAB SING GURUNG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


        Rule 43 Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 Notice

      1. The appellants sought entry clearance as adult dependants of  their
         father, a former Ghurkha present  and  settled  in  the  UK.  Their
         applications were refused on 1st November  2007  and  their  appeal
         heard by First-tier Tribunal judge Sullivan who,  for  reasons  set
         out in his decision promulgated on 25th January 2017, allowed their
         appeals.

      2. Permission to appeal that decision was granted to the respondent on
         9th August 2017 and their appeal came before Deputy Upper  Tribunal
         Judge G Black 5th October 2017. For reasons set out in her decision
         promulgated on 10th October 2017, she found errors of  law  in  the
         decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  and  set  aside  the
         decision to be remade. In [8] of her decision given orally  on  the
         day of the hearing, she concluded:

             "... The decision and reasons is set aside. The  [appellants']
             appeals are dismissed. I rely on the findings made by the  FTT
             and the absence of findings showing something  more  than  the
             normal family ties."

      3. It does not appear from the decision that Judge Black retained  any
         findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, or that  she  heard
         any oral evidence after having set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         decision.

      4. The appellants have sought permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
         Appeal on two bases: firstly,  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
         finding an error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  and
         secondly that if there were an error of law the proper course would
         have been to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
         reheard given the extensive fact finding that had to be made.

      5. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not make  clear  findings  as  to
         dependency. Although the  decision  can,  as  pointed  out  by  the
         appellants, be read to include findings that there is family  life,
         Judge Black is not wrong in law  in  stating  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge's findings  were  contradictory;  the  finding  that
         there is family life that engages Article 8 does not, without more,
         amount to  dependency  for  the  purposes  of  the  proportionality
         assessment.

      6. Nevertheless, there has  been  a  procedural  irregularity  in  the
         manner in which Judge Black then went on to deal with  the  appeal.
         She appears to  have  relied  upon  what  she  has  categorised  as
         contradictory  findings  without  identifying  which  part  of  the
         findings are retained or why. There does not appear  to  have  been
         any oral evidence called to enable findings of fact to be  made  on
         the issues that remained at large and where findings had either not
         been made or where they had been concluded to be contradictory.

      7. Although the appellants have sought permission  to  appeal  to  the
         court of appeal I am satisfied that  it  is  in  the  interests  of
         justice for the decision of Judge Black to be set aside in  so  far
         as it relates to the remaking of the appeal and to remit the appeal
         to  be  reheard  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  no   findings
         preserved; there having  been  a  procedural  irregularity  in  the
         proceedings.

      8. Accordingly I set aside the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
         Black to dismiss the appellants' appeal and remit the appeal to the
         First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.


     Date 9th February 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
