
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/05037/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 April 2021                   |On 04 May 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     QK

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr I Ali, instructed by M&K Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I indicated my decision but reserved my full reasons, which I now give.  The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


1. The appellant, who is a national of Pakistan with date of birth given  as
   20.3.83, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 16.11.20,  dismissing  on
   all grounds his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,
   dated 5.3.19, to refuse his claim for international protection.


2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 11.12.20. However, when the application was  renewed  to  the
   Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission on  18.2.21
   on ground 1 only, considering it arguable that it was unfair not to grant
   the appellant's adjournment application to afford him the opportunity "to
   produce the recent evidence concerning a violent assault by SH (whom  the
   appellant claimed to fear). One of the reasons given, namely  that  there
   had been a 19-month delay since the (respondent's) decision, was arguably
   not relevant as the delay was not due to the  appellant."  Permission  to
   appeal on the other grounds was specifically refused. I declined Mr Ali's
   application to reopen grounds on which permission was refused for  cogent
   reasons.


3. Shortly  before  the  hearing,  the  Tribunal  received  the  appellant's
   skeleton  argument,  dated  26.4.21.  I  have  carefully  considered  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the light of all  the  submissions
   and the grounds of application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal.


4. The appellant first came to the UK in 2011  with  entry  clearance  as  a
   spouse. In due course, he was granted Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain.  The
   background to the appellant's factual claim  was  that  he  met  SH,  who
   involved the appellant in his  drug  dealing  business  in  the  UK.  The
   appellant claims SH accused him informing the UK Police about  SH's  drug
   dealing involvement,  leading  to  SH  sending  people  to  threaten  the
   appellant's parents in Pakistan. The appellant was remanded in prison and
   in December 2015 convicted of being concerned in the importation of Class
   A controlled drugs, namely heroin, for which he was sentenced to 7 years'
   imprisonment. This conviction led to the decision to deport the appellant
   from the UK. Part of the appellant's factual  claim  was  that  genuinely
   feared that he would be at risk of death or serious harm from  SH  if  he
   were to be returned to Pakistan.


5. The appellant sought an adjournment to adduce further  evidence  of  SH's
   alleged violent character and his ability to  evade  punishment  for  his
   actions. At [11] of the impugned  decision,  the  judge  noted  that  the
   adjournment application  was  made,  "in  part  on  the  basis  that  the
   appellant had evidence that SH had committed a very  serious  assault  in
   Pakistan,  and  the  appellant  wanted  further  time  to   verify   this
   information. This evidence was important because it showed  SH's  violent
   nature, and was also relevant to the  Pakistan  authorities'  ability  to
   provide sufficiency of protection (of the  appellant  against  SH)".  The
   skeleton  argument  asserts  that  the  evidence  was  material   as   it
   demonstrated that SH  continued  to  engage  in  a  pattern  of  criminal
   behaviour with impunity, that in consequences the level of  risk  to  the
   appellant was was greater, and that the Pakistani  authorities  would  be
   unable to protect the appellant if he returned. It is also submitted that
   the ability of SH to evade justice over a prolonged period was indicative
   of his ability to act with impunity.


6. The Rule 24 reply, dated 3.2.21, points out that  the  documentation  the
   appellant sought to rely on was produced and the appellant wished only to
   'verify'  the  FIR.  There  was  no  indication  as  to  how  long   such
   verification process  might  take,  or  even  if  such  verification  was
   possible. As the judge pointed out, the FIR related to an alleged  victim
   with no connection to the appellant.  The  respondent  submits  that  the
   relevance of the verification of the  FIR  and  medical  information  was
   "extremely limited". It is also pointed out that at [39(iii)]  the  judge
   considered the evidential extent of the 2020 FIR as  suggesting  that  SH
   was not in prison in August  2020.  More  significantly,  the  respondent
   points to [39(v)] where the judge found  that  even  if  the  assault  in
   August 2020 took place as alleged, this did not demonstrate that  SH  was
   well-connected or able to act with impunity.  In  any  event,  the  judge
   proceeded on the basis that the events  in  August  2020  took  place  as
   alleged. In the premises, it is submitted that verification  of  the  FIR
   could not have made any material difference to the outcome of the appeal.




7. In refusing the adjournment application, at [12]  the  judge  noted  that
   she already had evidence  of  alleged  death  threats  made  against  the
   appellant and considered that further evidence of possible  violence  was
   unlikely to have a material impact on the appeal decision.  Further,  the
   judge noted that there were  also  four  FIRs  against  SH  including  in
   relation to a 2018 drug importation, all of which was relied  on  by  the
   appellant as allegedly demonstrating SH's ability to  evade  justice.  In
   the light of that evidence, the judge considered it unlikely that further
   evidence of ability to evade justice would have any  material  impact  on
   the appeal decision.


8. It is correct that in concluding at [12] that the appellant would not  be
   deprived of a fair hearing if the adjournment request were to be refused,
   at [12(ii)] the judge also relied on the 19 months that had elapsed since
   the respondent's refusal decision and considered  that  "dealing  with  a
   case fairly and justly includes avoiding delay so far as compatible  with
   the proper consideration of the issues." Whilst the  19-month  delay  was
   not attributable to any fault on  the  part  of  the  appellant,  it  was
   relevant to the overall consideration  of  the  adjournment  application.
   However, it was not the sole or major reason for refusing the adjournment
   application. I am satisfied that even without that consideration  refusal
   of the application was justified.


9. Notwithstanding the refusal of the adjournment a primary information  the
   appellant relied on was emailed to the Tribunal and to  the  respondent's
   representative during the hearing. This comprised a FIR dated 22.8.20, in
   which SH and others are accused of beating a Utilities  employee  with  a
   pistol, severely injuring him.  A report of 1.9.20 with a CT scan of  the
   victim's head and neck showed multiple fractures. Although  the  skeleton
   argument submits that judge failed to make any explicit  findings  as  to
   the reliability of the FIRs, it is clear from [28] of the  decision  that
   this material was considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,  at
   [39(v)] of the decision the judge concluded that even if SH committed the
   alleged assault in August 2020, this did not indicate that  he  is  well-
   connected or has impunity.


10. At [59] the judge found that the Horvath standard was met  so  that  the
   appellant  could  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the  Pakistani
   authorities if attacked. Whilst the  material  the  appellant  sought  to
   adduce may arguably have been relevant to the  issue  of  sufficiency  of
   protection, at [60] the judge made the alternative finding that  even  if
   she  was  wrong  in  relation  to  sufficiency  of  protection,  internal
   relocation was a viable option, for the cogent reasons  set  out  in  the
   decision.  It  follows  that  the  ostensible  purpose  for   which   the
   adjournment was sought, according  to  [11]  of  the  decision,  was  not
   material to the outcome of the appeal. The  internal  relocation  finding
   means that any potential error in relation to sufficiency  of  protection
   could have made no difference to the outcome of the appeal. I  appreciate
   that at [8] of the grounds, the appellant sought to link both  issues  of
   sufficiency of protection and internal relocation to  the  need  for  the
   adjournment, however it is difficult to see  how  the  argument  for  the
   adjournment is relevant to internal  relocation  away  from  SH  and  the
   threat he allegedly posed for the appellant's safety. At  [39]  and  [60]
   the judge was not satisfied that SH would be able to access the  National
   Database or that the Police would tell him of the appellant's whereabouts
   away from his home area. It follows that verification of the FIR or other
   similar evidence (as Mr Ali sought in his submissions to widen the  scope
   of further evidence to be obtained), would not have demonstrated that  he
   was so well-connected that he would have been able to track and trace the
   appellant wherever he relocated to within Pakistan.


11. I am not satisfied that it has been  demonstrated  in  argument  to  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  or  to  me  that  verification  of  the  FIR  would
   demonstrate that SH is able  to  act  with  impunity,  as  claimed.  That
   another crime has allegedly been committed does not show that SH is  able
   to act with impunity or that he was not pursued by  the  authorities  for
   criminal actions. The submission also begs the question whether there was
   sufficient  evidence  to  prosecute  rather  than  a  mere  assertion  of
   culpability, or that proceedings were not in train, or had completed.


12. It was not even made clear how the FIR could be independently  verified,
   or how or when that would be possible.  Mr  Ali  suggested  that  it  was
   intended to instruct solicitors but even that  step  would  be  far  from
   satisfactory as independent or objective evidence. The benefit of seeking
   to verify the 2020 FIR in the overall context of the evidence,  when  the
   judge already had and had taken into account the documentation which  had
   been emailed at the beginning of the hearing, is unclear. In  any  event,
   as Mr McVeety  submitted,  there  was  no  challenge  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal to the proposition that SH was a "nasty piece  of  work"  as  Mr
   McVeety put it. That  he  allegedly  committed  an  offence  of  violence
   against  someone  entirely  unconnected  to  the   appellant   fails   to
   demonstrate that the authorities would be unable to provide a sufficiency
   of protection to this appellant. That FIRs were  issued  rather  suggests
   that complaints against SH were accepted by the  Police.  The  First-tier
   Tribunal proceeded on the basis that the character of SH was as  alleged.
   No one doubted or challenged the validity of the documents. The judge did
   not make a finding that the FIRs were not genuine  or  not  reliable.  In
   those circumstances, as Mr McVeety submitted,  there  appears  to  be  no
   valid purpose in seeking an adjournment for FIR verification.


13. In the premises, I am satisfied that the judge was  entitled  to  refuse
   the  adjournment  application  and  that  no  unfairness  ensued  to  the
   appellant. Complaint is made that no explicit findings were  made  as  to
   the 2018 and 2020 FIRs. However, it appears that the judge  proceeded  on
   the basis that they were genuine.


14. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.


Decision


      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.


      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       26 April 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       26 April 2021

