
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/05397/2017
     hu/15054/2017
     hu/15055/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2018                            |On 11 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     SS
                                     mss
                                     ss
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PAKISTAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Gazzain, Counsel instructed by Loxford
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellants are siblings and citizens of Pakistan.  They are all the
    minor children of the sponsor Mr MSA.  The appellants appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the decision of an Entry Clearance  Officer
    dated 18 February 2017 to refuse the  appellants'  entry  clearance  to
    join the sponsor.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  27  June
    2018, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Beg  dismissed  the  appellants'
    human rights appeal.

Permission to Appeal

 2. The appellants appeal with permission on the grounds that:

    Ground 1:     the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misdirected  herself  in
                relation to the guardianship order from the  guardian  judge
                in Pakistan, which gave the  sponsor  full  custody  of  the
                appellants; and

    Ground 2:     the judge's reasoning on whether the  appellants'  mother
                had responsibility for their upbringing was speculative  and
                the conclusions at [26]-[27] were contrary to the evidence;

    Ground 3:      the evidence clearly demonstrated that  the  appellant's
                sponsor has had sole responsibility for their upbringing.

Error of Law Discussion

Ground 1

 3. Ground  1.   In  a  comprehensive  discussion  of  the  evidence,  from
    paragraphs [8] to [27]  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made
    sustainable findings having considered all of the evidence.  The  judge
    specifically records in the recitation of the grounds of appeal at  [2]
    and at [12] that there was a certificate of guardianship/a guardianship
    order.  At [8] the judge records that he took into consideration all of
    the documents.

 4. The issues before the judge were whether the appellants were related to
    the sponsor as claimed, which the respondent had contested and  whether
    the sponsor had had  sole  responsibility.   The  judge  found  on  the
    balance of probabilities at [9] that the appellants are the children of
    the sponsor.  The only remaining issue therefore was the  one  of  sole
    responsibility.

 5. Although this was an appeal only under human rights grounds it was  not
    contested that the judge's decision as to whether the appellants  could
    meet the requirements of the Rules was a material  factor.   The  judge
    correctly directed himself in relation to  the  leading  case  on  sole
    responsibility of TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049 and reminded himself that sole responsibility  is  a
    matter of fact to be decided upon all the evidence.  This included that
    where both parents are involved in a  child's  upbringing  it  will  be
    exceptional that one of them will have sole responsibility.

 6. The essence of the judge's decision in this case was that  he  did  not
    accept the claims of the sponsor, and indeed of  the  appellants,  that
    the appellants' mother had no contact or involvement  with  them.   The
    judge's findings were essentially that she did not accept the  evidence
    before her as credible.

 7. Although the judge did not explicitly state why the guardianship  order
    in itself was rejected the judge did  make  specific  references  to  a
    number of documents including an affidavit from the appellants'  mother
    which he did not find credible.  He did not find it credible  that  the
    appellants' mother had refused to look after her own  children  because
    she considered it "a big responsibility"  and  noted  that  there  were
    contradictions in the evidence.  This included that  in  her  affidavit
    dated 17 March 2017 the appellants' mother stated  that  she  had  been
    meeting the children, whereas this directly contradicted  the  evidence
    of the sponsor who  had  said  that  the  mother  stopped  meeting  the
    children  about  three  years  ago.   It  was  in  this   context,   of
    contradictory  evidence,  that  the  judge  reached   the   sustainable
    conclusion that it was not credible on the evidence before her that the
    children did not want to meet their own mother.

 8. The judge also considered a number of  the  other  documents  including
    noting that there were letters from schools in Pakistan.   However  the
    judge took into consideration that the letters were written in the same
    style as other letters relating to the other two  appellants  and  took
    into consideration that there were no school reports attached.   Having
    considered all the information, including in the letters, the judge did
    not find it credible that the  sponsor  was  instrumental  in  choosing
    subjects for any of his children or that he had chosen their school.

 9. The judge took into consideration and accepted  that  the  sponsor  had
    been  in  contact  with  the  appellants.   The  judge  considered  the
    photographs.  The Tribunal considered that there was an allegation that
    the appellant's son was beaten up and took into consideration the First
    Information Report.  Although Mr Gazzain submitted that it was not open
    to the judge to find that it was  relatively  easy  to  lodge  a  First
    Information Report I note that this was not in the grounds  before  me.
    In any event, that finding did not stand on its own but was made in the
    context of the judge's findings that there was no evidence  before  the
    Tribunal that the  police  had  interviewed  anyone  or  were  actively
    pursuing the complaint.  The judge went  on  to  consider  the  medical
    evidence.  Although  it  was  claimed  that  the  appellant's  son  was
    kidnapped and severely beaten up Mr Gazzain  took  me  to  the  medical
    report which referred to "H/O fight" which the judge mentions  at  [24]
    of her decision and reasons.

10. The judge also took into account that it is not credible that the First
    Information Report stated that the male appellant was attacked by  five
    people on two motorbikes armed with weapons yet he had his left arm and
    wrist X-rayed and there was no other mention of any injuries serious or
    otherwise which the judge was entitled to find might have been expected
    if the child had been attacked by five people on two  motorbikes  armed
    with weapons.

11. Having considered all the documentary and oral  evidence  cumulatively,
    this led the judge to reach the conclusion she did, at  [25]  that  she
    did not find the sponsor to be a truthful  witness.   The  judge  noted
    that the sponsor had come to the UK in December 2009  and  had  married
    and divorced a European national and subsequently obtained a  permanent
    residence card.  She accepted that he had been sending  funds  home  to
    his family since about 2014 to support the entire family, that  is  his
    brother, his children and his parents.

12. It was open to the judge to find that she did not accept that a  mother
    who was living so geographically close to her children, would  have  no
    interest in them and the judge gave adequate reasons for not  accepting
    that evidence including  in  finding  contradictions  in  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal.  It was the  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings,  in
    essence, that the sponsor was trying to mislead the respondent and  the
    court as to the nature of the relationship between the mother  and  the
    children and the judge gave detailed reasons for those findings.  There
    can be no material error in not directly  addressing  the  guardianship
    order when the judge was aware of that evidence but was  not  satisfied
    that the Tribunal was being told the truth about the relationship.

13. I have reminded myself what was said in MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1958 that adequacy means no more nor less than that. It  is  not  a
    counsel of perfection. Still less should it provide an  opportunity  to
    undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to see  if  they  are
    wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits. The purpose  of  the
    duty to give reasons, is in part, to enable the losing  party  to  know
    why he has lost.

Ground 2

14. Although it was submitted that the judge's findings  at  [12]  to  [14]
    were speculative, again the judge was entitled to  find  the  sponsor's
    evidence implausible as to why the children's mother  refused  to  look
    after them.  In  reaching  that  finding  the  judge  made  sustainable
    evidence-based findings, including that the  sponsor  contradicted  his
    own evidence, stating that the mother left the children  in  2009  when
    the first appellant was 9 years old, whereas  in  cross-examination  he
    said that she had stopped caring for the children about  four  or  five
    years ago.  Given that four or five years ago would have been 2013 this
    is a significant discrepancy which the judge  was  entitled  to  attach
    adverse inference to.

15. The judge went on to find that the sponsor's claimed  explanation  that
    the children's mother did not like her own children nor  did  she  like
    his parents was not a credible explanation for why a mother would leave
    three young children and move away.  The judge noted that  the  sponsor
    went on to state that his wife is from a rich family and that he has on
    the other hand lived with his parents in two rooms and that they had  a
    number of misunderstandings and therefore he divorced her following  an
    arranged marriage.  The judge was found,  at  [13],  that  it  was  not
    credible that in an arranged marriage the family of someone from a very
    wealthy background would arrange to marry someone from  a  very  modest
    background and that it was not credible that this was  the  reason  why
    they divorced.  What the judge was saying,  in  effect,  was  that  the
    sponsor's wife would have been well aware prior to  the  marriage  that
    she was marrying someone from a modest background and in  this  context
    it was simply not credible that  they  would  have  divorced  for  that
    reason.  In the context of a sponsor that  the  judge  gave  more  than
    adequate reasons for not finding credible that finding was available to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

16. The judge went on to find further inconsistencies which led  the  judge
    to not find it credible that the mother did not see  the  children  yet
    only lives half an hour away from  them.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    sponsor initially stated in  cross-examination  that  the  mother  only
    telephoned them last Eid, about a year ago.  He then went on to say  in
    fact she used to go and see the children at school  for  several  years
    and that she stopped meeting them at  school  about  three  years  ago.
    Contrary to the grounds complaining  that  the  judge's  findings  were
    speculative, it is evident that the  judge's  findings  were  based  on
    multiple inconsistencies in the sponsor's evidence.  No material  error
    is disclosed in ground 2.

Ground 3

17. This is no more than a disagreement with the  findings  of  the  judge;
    although it is argued that TD Yemen confirmed that sole  responsibility
    is a factual matter to be decided on all the evidence that is precisely
    what the judge did.  Although the grounds cite  photographs,  financial
    remittances, letters from school, order from court, permission from the
    court, and an affidavit from the mother included in the evidence, it is
    clear from the judge's reasoned findings, as discussed above, that  the
    Tribunal took all of this into consideration in the round, and  reached
    findings available to the Tribunal.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

As the appellants are minors I make the  following  direction:   unless  and
until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of their family.  This direction applies both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
