
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05175/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12 May 2017                        |On 27 July 2017                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                 QADIR NAWAZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan, of Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                 & Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lodge, promulgated on 14  October  2016.  Permission  to
    appeal  was  initially  refused  by   the   First-tier   Tribunal   but
    subsequently granted by the Upper Tribunal.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.

Background

 3. In July 2006, the appellant entered the United Kingdom as a work permit
    holder valid for a period of 12  months.  He  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully and was served with a removal notice as  an  illegal
    entrant on 11 December 2013. By this stage the  appellant  had  entered
    into a religious marriage with a  British  citizen;  the  marriage  was
    subsequently registered on 24 July 2014. On  7  August  2015,  he  made
    representations to remain on human rights grounds and it is the refusal
    of that claim, on 26 August 2015, which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The refusal informed the appellant that the respondent considered there
    to be no insurmountable obstacles to family life with  his  wife  being
    enjoyed  in  Pakistan,  there  were  no  dependent  children,  no  very
    significant obstacles to him integrating in Pakistan and an absence  of
    exceptional circumstances. The appellant was afforded a right of appeal
    against the decision to refuse his human rights claim,  solely  on  the
    ground the decision in question breaches his rights under section 6  of
    the Human Rights Act 1998.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, both the  appellant  and
    his wife gave evidence. The judge concluded that  the  appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules relating  to  family
    and private life and there were no insurmountable obstacles  preventing
    the couple from continuing family life outside of  the  United  Kingdom
    or, that there were exceptional circumstances to  warrant  a  grant  of
    leave outside of the Immigration Rules. The appeal was dismissed  under
    and outside the Immigration Rules.

The Grounds of Appeal

 6. The grounds seeking permission to appeal refer to the  authority  of  R
    (on the application of SA v  SSHD  (Human  Rights  challenges:  correct
    approach) IJR [2015] UKUT 00536 (IAC) and the judge's reliance on R (on
    the application of Agyarko and Others) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  440  and
    argue that there was no attempt to consider the appeal in  a  "sensible
    and practical" way, an over reliance on the word  "insurmountable"  and
    that too high a hurdle was imposed.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker  in  the
    following terms: "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has
    used the  phrase  "insurmountable  obstacles"  in  the  literal  sense.
    Although if that is the case the error may not, on the facts presented,
    be material".

 8. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 1 March 2017 opposed the
    appeal, arguing that the judge's approach was proper and that  he  took
    all factors into account and provided adequate reasons.

The hearing

 9.  Miss  Khan  submitted  the  judge  had  not  properly  considered  the
    circumstances affecting the appellant's wife  ability  to  relocate  to
    Pakistan. The judge had no regard to the  fact  that  the  wife  had  a
    miscarriage and required family support. The wife was now pregnant  and
    was due to give birth in June.

10. In reply, Mrs Pettersen argued the judge had  considered  the  relevant
    factors. The judge was fully aware of the  wife's  situation  and  that
    this was adequately dealt with at [19]. She argued the  judge  did  not
    accept the appellant was without family support in Pakistan  and  noted
    that there was no evidence that fertility treatment was  not  available
    there. Finally, she submitted that if there was an  error  it  was  not
    material.

11. In closing, Miss Khan submitted the judge had not taken a holistic view
    of the evidence. The judge had not factored into  his  assessment  that
    the wife had a miscarriage. The case was not about the availability  of
    IVF treatment in Pakistan, but the judge failed to engage with the fact
    that the wife was half-way through fertility treatment and was  finding
    it difficult.

12. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision which I now give with
    reasons.

Decision on Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  not
    vitiated by a material error of law.

14. The judge was concerned with an appellant who married a British citizen
    who was, in turn, fully  aware  that  he  was  here  unlawfully  before
    marriage. The evidence before the judge was that the wife was  half-way
    through a cycle of IVF and a day  before  the  hearing  eggs  had  been
    collected which were to be frozen and later  fertilised.  In  evidence,
    the appellant's wife said that she could not go  to  Pakistan  at  this
    stage of her treatment as well as for other reasons (at [9]- [10]).

15. While the decision is brief, the judge was clear that the focus of  the
    appellant's case centred around the difficulties he  claimed  his  wife
    would experience in Pakistan [14]. The judge noted the appellant's wife
    did not enjoy her last experience of a closeted village life  when  she
    visited Pakistan, but noted this could be overcome by living in a large
    city [16]. He did not accept the appellant had  no  family  support  in
    Pakistan and noted the wife's family could provide them with  financial
    support. He found the wife had established an independent  family  life
    and while she was  close  to  her  extended  family  contact  could  be
    maintained. The judge accepted  the  wife  would  find  the  transition
    difficult and noted her reluctance to continue family life in Pakistan,
    but found that none of these factors could constitute an insurmountable
    obstacle [18].

16. The judge noted that an important consideration was the  treatment  the
    wife was undergoing. It was unclear from the medical  evidence  whether
    she was half-way through treatment, however the judge proceeded on  the
    basis that she was. Nevertheless, the judge found the wife could remain
    in the United Kingdom and  complete  the  course  of  treatment  before
    joining the appellant in Pakistan where there was no evidence that such
    treatment was not available [19].

17. In  applying  Agyarko  (supra)  the  judge  observed  that  the  phrase
    "insurmountable obstacles" imposed a high hurdle under  the  Rules  and
    that the test was "significantly more demanding than  a  mere  test  of
    whether it would be reasonable to expect a  couple  to  continue  their
    family life outside the UK".  The  judge  accordingly  found  that  the
    requirements of EX.1.(b). of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  was
    not met and proceeded, in the alternative, to address Article 8 outside
    of the Rules. The judge noted the appellant's immigration history;  his
    wife's nationality and concluded that it was  not  disproportionate  to
    require him to leave for the purposes of making an application  to  re-
    join his wife from abroad at [21]-]22].

18. The judge's understanding of the "insurmountable  obstacles"  criterion
    enshrined in the Rules is the focus of the appellant's challenge in the
    grounds.  What is argued is that the judge's application  of  the  test
    was literal and he is criticised  by  Miss  Khan  for  his  failure  to
    consider the wife's vulnerability and ongoing fertility treatment.

19. Before the judge the most recent analysis of the test of insurmountable
    obstacles, was contained in the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Agyarko, which made clear the phrase while imposing a  stringent  test,
    was to be interpreted "in a sensible and practical rather than a purely
    literal way": see  [23].  That  interpretation  of  the  criterion  was
    endorsed on appeal by the Supreme Court: see Agyarko and Ikuga,  R  (on
    the applications of) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11.

20. Whilst there is some force in the submission that the judge applied the
    test literally by adopting a tick-box analysis of the relevant  factors
    against the imposed criterion,  an  error  compounded  further  by  his
    failure to direct himself that the  phrase  was  to  be  applied  in  a
    sensible and practical way, I find the error, is not material,  and  is
    thus no basis for interfering with the judge's decision.  The  relevant
    factors referred to by the judge even if assessed in  a  practical  and
    realistic sense could not, either individually  or  cumulatively,  meet
    the criterion for the reasons the judge gave which were  entirely  open
    to him on the evidence.

21. The arguments advanced by Miss Khan as to the judge's treatment of  the
    circumstances of the  appellant's  wife  amount  to  little  more  than
    disagreement with his findings. While the judge did not expressly refer
    to the wife's miscarriage he was clearly  aware  of  her  circumstances
    medical and otherwise and referred to them in detail at  [8]-[10],  and
    comprehensively  analysed  the   wife's   evidence   of   her   claimed
    difficulties at [16]-[19]. That analysis took into  account  issues  of
    family support and medical treatment. Those  findings  were  more  than
    adequate.

22. Overall, the burden was  on  the  appellant  to  demonstrate  that  the
    insurmountable obstacles test was satisfied and the  judge  gave  sound
    reasons for concluding that the criterion was not met.

23. Miss Khan indicated that a child was due to be born to  the  couple  in
    mid-June. That is not a relevant  factor  for  the  purposes  of  these
    proceedings. Any child born to the couple should however be the subject
    of a new application.

Decision


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.




Signed                                             Date: 08 September 2017




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

