
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05857/2018
                                                               HU/05861/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 February 2019                 |On 25 February 2019                 |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                              amandeep [K] (1)
                                  [S K] (2)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Escott a Home Office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction and background

 1. In the present appeal the appellant is the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department, but I will both refer to her by her designation in the
    First-tier Tribunal (FTT) as "the respondent". The appellants will also
    continue to be referred to by their designations before the FTT.

 2. The first appellant is an Indian national born on 15 August  1988.  She
    appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse her further  leave
    to remain in the UK under article 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights (ECHR) made on 21 April 2017.

 3. The first appellant appealed to the FTT together with  her  partner  at
    the time, [SK], the second appellant  (the  second  appellant).  It  is
    unnecessary to make further reference to him since he has not attempted
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT).

 4. The first appellant came to the UK as a Tier 4 student  on  4  November
    2009. In November 2014 she was given further leave to remain  based  on
    there being compelling circumstances. On 13 October 2015 she claims  to
    have married the second appellant. However, by the  date  hearing  took
    place before the FTT (on 25 September 2018) her relationship  with  the
    second appellant had come to an end. I was told at  the  hearing,  that
    there was no contact between the first appellant, her child, a girl  by
    the name of [J] who was born  on  26  February  2018,  and  the  second
    appellant. At the date of the hearing  in  the  FTT,  [J]  was  aged  7
    months.

Proceedings before the first-tier Tribunal

 5. The appeal came before Judge of the FTT Macdonald (the judge)  on  25th
    of September 2018. Having considered  and  set  out  the  evidence  and
    submissions by both representatives, the judge concluded that the first
    appellant had satisfied him that her article 8  private  and/or  family
    life in the UK would be unlawfully  interfered  with  by  the  decision
    under appeal (to refuse her leave to remain). There was a real risk  to
    her human rights arising from the fact that as a  lone  female  with  a
    young child, she would not, he found, have a  family  support  network,
    the first appellant would experience difficulty in obtaining a job  and
    looking after a child at the same time. Thus, there  were  "significant
    obstacles to the first appellant's return to India" (paragraph 48)  and
    those obstacles had "increased". In the judge's view the "problems that
    existed in November 2014" (a reference to the grant by  the  respondent
    of exceptional leave to remain at that time) "have increased".  By  the
    date of the hearing the first appellant had a role as a  single  mother
    without family support or friends. The judge described  the  respondent
    as having given only cursory consideration to the welfare of the  child
    and although the first appellant had substantial savings (in excess  of
    � 40,000) this did not "alter the position as to the lack of  support".
    In the  circumstances  article  8  would  be  utilised  to  afford  the
    appellant an opportunity to remain in the UK.

 6. An initial application for permission by  the  respondent  against  the
    FTT's decision was refused but a subsequent appeal to the U T  resulted
    in a grant of permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson on 2nd  January
    2019. The grant of permission is helpful as it sets out  carefully  the
    arguable basis for the current appeal. Judge Hanson  pointed  out  that
    the high  threshold  of  "a  very  significant  obstacles"  had  to  be
    satisfied in order for the requirements of paragraph 276  ADE  (vi)  of
    the Immigration Rules to be met. Although  the  appellant  had  been  a
    victim of domestic violence in 2014, the fear was said  to  be  derived
    from her former husband's  family  on  return  to  India,  having  been
    disowned by her own family in 2014. In 2017 the appellant circumstances
    were completely different in  that  she  had  a  new  husband  and  was
    pregnant with his child, having been working in the UK after concluding
    her education. Judge Hanson also  thought  that  the  savings  she  had
    acquired might be relevant, as they may reduce  the  obstacles  to  her
    safe return to India. By the date of the hearing before the  judge  her
    second relationship with the second  appellant  had  also  failed.  The
    appellant was   found to be credible  and  there  was  no  evidence  to
    support the respondent's submission that the passage of time  had  made
    matters better for the  first  appellant.  However,  the  question  was
    whether the obstacles were worse in 2017 than they were in 2014 and the
    judge's decision appeared inadequately reasoned  in  that  regard.  The
    risk identified to the first appellant was  from  her  first  husband's
    family not from any other source. There was insufficient factual  basis
    for the finding that problems which existed in 2014 would still prevail
    in 2017. It was arguable, at least,  that  the  first  appellant  would
    return to India as a single mother, without family support but with  an
    education and savings. In the circumstances the judge's conclusion  may
    have been incorrect. Judge Hanson quoted from Parveen v  the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 932 where Underhill LJ
    stated that "very significant" connoted  an  "elevated  threshold"  and
    must be more  than  mere  inconvenience  or  upheaval.  There  must  be
    something "of substance". The respondent had to assess the obstacles to
    integration and ask whether they were "very significant"  or  not.  The
    current CPIN dated July 2018, in relation to women subject  to  gender-
    based violence, states at paragraph 4.8.2 that relocation within  India
    for single women or women with children was difficult  because  of  the
    need to provide a husband's  details  or  a  father's  name  to  access
    certain government services. However, the key  issue  is  whether  they
    those difficulties  were  "very  significant".  There  was  no  country
    guidance  referred  to  by  the  judge  which  tended  to  support  his
    conclusions. Therefore, all the grounds advanced by the respondent were
    arguable before the U T.





The hearing before the U T

 7. At the hearing, Mr Kotas briefly outlined the background, stating  that
    the original relationship (with Mr Singh) had broken down and the first
    appellant had begun  a  relationship  with  the  second  appellant.  An
    application for further leave to remain in the UK  on  the  grounds  of
    compelling circumstances was made on 29 April 2014.  This  resulted  in
    the grant of 30 months leave under the private life rule (paragraph 276
    ADE of the Immigration Rules). This must have been on  the  basis  that
    there  were,  at  that  time,  "very  significant  obstacles   to   the
    applicant's integration" into the country to which she  had  to  return
    (India). It was accepted that the first appellant had lived in  the  UK
    since 2009 and was enjoying a private and family life  with  her  young
    child in the UK. In April 2017, when the application which gave rise to
    the current appeal was made, she was still with the  second  appellant.
    It was accepted by the respondent that the appellant had been subjected
    to violent abuse by her former husband, Mr  Singh.  However,  Mr  Kotas
    submitted that there has been no evidence before the judge  to  confirm
    that very significant obstacles still existed to the first  appellant's
    return to India. An elevated threshold had to be  met  to  satisfy  the
    relevant rule. Although she was  a  single  person  without  family  or
    friends this was not sufficient to  render  the  respondent's  decision
    unlawful. The respondent did not invite the tribunal to go  behind  the
    favourable  credibility  finding.  However,  the  appellant  had   work
    experience and had saved money. Therefore, there were good prospects of
    her successful reintegration into her own country.

 8. Mr Chohan,  on  the  other  hand,  submitted  that  the  single  parent
    returning to India was an even worse position than a single female.  He
    said that the judge had fully considered the submissions  made  by  the
    respondent at the hearing  before  the  FTT  to  the  effect  that  the
    "passage of time had made  matters  better  for  the  first  appellant"
    (paragraph 44). However, the judge had gone on to  find  that  although
    the appellant had obtained employment, had a child  and  saved  towards
    her future, as a single mother with a seven-month-old child and without
    family support she would "experience difficulty  obtaining  a  job  and
    looking after a child at the same time".

 9. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was an error of law and if so what steps should be taken in relation to
    it.

Discussion

10. It was acknowledged, in paragraph 9 of the judge's decision,  that  the
    first appellant did not qualify under Appendix FM  because  the  second
    appellant was believed to be in the UK without leave  and  was  neither
    British nor settled in this country (see paragraphs  8  and  9  of  the
    judge's decision). The appeal therefore proceeded on the basis that the
    issue to  be  determined  was  whether  the  first  appellant  met  the
    requirements  for  private   life   within   the   Immigration   Rules.
    Alternatively, the FTT had to consider whether she ought to be entitled
    to leave to remain under article 8 of the ECHR.

11. It is noteworthy that the judge misquotes the requirements of paragraph
    276 ADE (1) (vi). That paragraph contains the  material  provision  for
    establishing leave to remain on the grounds of private life, in that he
    refers repeatedly to "significant obstacles" to the  first  appellant's
    return to India, for example, when he quotes the  respondent's  finding
    at paragraphs 10, considers the respondent's submissions  at  paragraph
    28 and makes his own findings at paragraph 48 of his decision. In fact,
    I cannot find a single reference in the decision to the correct test of
    "very  significant  obstacles".  The  judge  refers  to   "considerable
    difficulties" at paragraph 42 and "difficulty in obtaining  a  job  and
    looking after her child" in paragraph 47. If the judge was referred  to
    the "very significant obstacles" test he did not  refer  to  it,  which
    gives one less confidence that he actually applied it. It was the  duty
    of the advocates representing the parties to refer  the  judge  to  the
    correct test and, preferably, provide him with a copy of  the  relevant
    rule. It is therefore not difficult to see  how  the  judge  fell  into
    error in failing to apply the  "elevated  threshold"  required  by  the
    Immigration Rules as explained in the case of Parveen if, as  may  well
    have been the case, he was not reminded what the rule actually said.

12. Secondly, it seems to me to have been  incumbent  upon  the  judge,  in
    finding at paragraph  50  that  "...  the  first  appellant  meets  the
    provisions of paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi)" to set out what  those  "very
    significant obstacles" were. Simply stating (at paragraph 48) that  she
    had "... all the problems  that  existed  in  November  2014  plus  the
    difficulties that she will now encounter in her role as a single mother
    of her child without family support or the support of friends" were not
    adequate findings that there were in fact "very significant obstacles".
    The "significant obstacles" identified  by  the  judge  may  be  better
    characterised as "hardship, difficulty or disruption" rather  than  the
    "very significant obstacles" required. Therefore, they do not appear to
    cross the threshold required by paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi).

13. The fact that the appellant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph
    276 ADE (1) (vi)  was  a  very  good  pointer  to  the  fact  that  the
    respondent's decision probably did  not  breach  the  UK's  obligations
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998  in  that  there  was  no
    breach of article 8. There appear to have been no features to this case
    which would tend to suggest it  ought  to  be  decided,  exceptionally,
    outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

14. In relation to Mr Chohan's submission that  the  respondent's  decision
    failed adequately to recognise the rights of the child,  [J],  this  is
    unlikely to be material to the outcome of  this  appeal.  He  correctly
    pointed out that there is a commitment on the part of the respondent to
    treat [J]'s welfare  as  a  paramount  consideration  in  reaching  her
    immigration decision in  order  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of
    section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.
    However, having regard to the young age of [J] and the  fact  that  the
    child would be returning with her mother to India as part of one family
    unit, it is difficult to see how the birth  of  [J]  could  lead  to  a
    different outcome to this appeal. In the circumstances, the  fact  that
    in paragraph 49 of his decision the judge only gave the  "interests  of
    the child ... cursory consideration" does not, I find, give rise to  an
    additional ground of appeal. In any event, this did not appear to  form
    part of the appellant's own case before the FTT, although [J] was  only
    7 months old at that point, whereas now she is about to  celebrate  her
    first birthday. The rights of the child did not have any bearing on the
    on the outcome to the appeal, therefore.

Conclusions

15. For the reasons given above, I have found a material error  of  law  in
    the decision of the FTT. In the circumstances it is  necessary  to  set
    aside the decision of the FTT.

16. I have considered whether it is necessary to hold a further hearing. Mr
    Chohan suggested that he may wish to obtain expert evidence as  to  the
    status of his client as a single female returning to India with a young
    child. There was no formal  application  under  rule  15  (2A)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce fresh evidence
    either before or during the hearing. I note  that  the  representatives
    were notified on 14 January 2019 that any application to  adduce  fresh
    evidence, which was not  before  the  FTT,  must  be  supported  by  an
    application indicating the nature of the evidence and explaining why it
    had not been adduced before the lower tribunal. The UT will regard as a
    serious matter any failure to comply with rule 15 (2A). In  any  event,
    there was no indication of the identity of such an expert,  the  length
    of time it would take to obtain such  an  expert's  report  or  whether
    funding was available. Parties are  to  be  taken  as  being  ready  to
    proceed with a hearing before  the  UT.  I  doubt  ultimately  will  be
    helpful in resolving the issues in this appeal, in any  event.  I  have
    also  considered  whether  it  is  necessary  to  obtain  any  updating
    evidence, for example, in relation to the  progress  of  [J].  However,
    since that girl is not yet at school and is less than a year old, there
    is no obvious evidence to be obtained, nor did Mr Chohan identify  such
    evidence. Since there was no identifiable change in circumstances since
    the hearing before the FTT, which only took place in September 2018, it
    appears appropriate to re-make this decision based on the evidence  and
    findings of the FTT. This includes, of course, the  judge's  favourable
    credibility findings.

17. There is no  doubt  based  upon  the  CPIN,  referred  to  above,  that
    relocation within India by single women with children is difficult. The
    respondent has pointed out in her grounds of appeal that the  appellant
    spent the first twenty-one years of her life in India. It seems  to  be
    common ground, based on the grant of further leave to remain  in  2014,
    that the appellant now no longer has family to whom she could  turn  in
    India. However, in response to her current application, the  respondent
    did not accept claims that she will be subject to violence and hardship
    stating that there was "no credible basis"  for  her  claims  (see  the
    respondent's refusal letter dated 15 February 2018, and  in  particular
    the first paragraph of page 4 of that letter).  Given  the  appellant's
    cultural, linguistic ties with India, the appellant could  be  expected
    to relocate internally to an area well away from her  former  husband's
    family. That is undoubtedly going to be challenging  but  more  in  the
    nature of hardship or difficulty than a very significant obstacle in my
    view. Nevertheless, it was open to the appellant's  representatives  to
    file any evidence in opposition to the CPIN report that it saw fit.  In
    the absence of  information  which  contradicts  that  report,  I  have
    concluded that the evidence falls short of  showing  "very  significant
    obstacles" exist to the appellant's integration into India. I  find  it
    impossible to accept the vast populous  country  such  as  India  there
    would be no safe place in the appellant could live well away  from  her
    former  husband's  family.  As  an  educated  lady,  with   significant
    resources, she will be returning to the country of her nationality with
    significant opportunities, albeit she also now has a young  child.  The
    truth is that the source of her fear (her husband's family)  which  was
    said to form the basis of her application to the respondent in 2014, is
    no longer likely to present the same threat to her.  The fact that  the
    appellant and her partner  are  no  longer  together  does  not  appear
    relevant.

18. Given that the first appellant  almost  certainly  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) I  have  considered  whether
    there is any alternative basis under  article  8  which  would  justify
    overturning the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  further  leave  to
    remain. No doubt the appellant has formed a private life in the UK  but
    her family life with her daughter can be continued in India, albeit  in
    less happy circumstances than would  ideally  be  the  case.  There  is
    always a public interest  in  the  proper  enforcement  of  immigration
    controls, indeed, section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum 2002 provides that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls "is  in  the  public  interest".  The  public  interest  must,
    however, be balanced against the appellant's interest in continuing her
    private life in the UK where she is well settled.

19. Having considered whether there are any exceptional  circumstances  for
    allowing  the  first  appellant  to  remain  in  the  UK  outside   the
    Immigration Rules, I consider the respondent correctly concluded  there
    were no unjustifiably harsh consequences for her or  her  child.  I  am
    satisfied that in so far as it was relevant to do  so,  the  respondent
    considered that child's best interests lay with continuing to live with
    her mother in India or in the UK. It was correctly decided  that  there
    were no exceptional circumstances to warrant granted leave to remain in
    the UK outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

20. In all  the  circumstances  I  have  concluded  that  the  respondent's
    interference with the appellant's protected private and family life  is
    justified by the need for effective immigration control and accordingly
    the appeal to the FTT under article 8 ought to have failed.

Notice of Decision

As the decision of the FTT contains a material error  law  the  respondent's
appeal to the UT is allowed and the decision on human rights grounds is  set
aside.

I re-make a decision which is to dismiss the appellant's appeal to the FTT.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                       Date 15 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The FTT made no fee award and I have dismissed the appeal. I therefore  make
no fee award.


Signed                                       Date 15 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
