
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05604/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 October 2019                   |On 29 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   Upper Tribunal Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                                     M A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Shoaib
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The remarks of Sheriff J M Johnston QC, sentencing the appellant to
         6 years imprisonment, dated 4 July 2016.

     ii)  The  respondent's  deportation  decision  dated  28   June   2018,
         deportation order dated 12 March 2019, and  human  rights  decision
         dated 13 March 2019.

    iii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, dated
         27 March 2019.

     iv) The decision of FtT Judge Doyle, promulgated  on  23  August  2019,
         dismissing his appeal.

      v) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the UT, stated  in  detail  in
         the application for permission dated 6 August 2019.

     vi) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 20 September 2019, on the
         view that arguably the FtT did not fully set  out  the  appellant's
         case, and gave inadequate consideration to a psychological  report,
         and to the appellant having resided in the UK for 27 years.

 2. Mr Devlin's submissions were along the line of the grounds.  His  over-
    arching theme was that although the FtT did not misdirect itself on the
    law, it failed to apply the approach  set  out  in  NA,  cited  in  the
    grounds,  and  in  other  cases,  by  not  evaluating  each  and  every
    circumstance set out in sections 117C(4) and (5) of  the  2002  Act  to
    determine if they were of sufficient force,  alone  or  in  conjunction
    with other factors, to meet the test in section 117C(6).

 3. Chief among the matters relied upon was a psychological report by Dr Ul-
    Hassan, dated 5 August 2019, which opined that the appellant's  removal
    would create a risk of serious deterioration in the  mental  health  of
    his wife, which in turn was likely to  have  a  direct  impact  on  the
    mental health and wellbeing  of  their  children.   This  was  said  to
    involve something over and above the  ordinary  effects  of  separation
    inherent in  deportation,  capable  of  amounting  to  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above the statutory exceptions, which the  judge
    failed to consider.

 4. In substance, I do not find the appellant's argument to amount to  more
    than that the judge was bound to specify all the circumstances  of  his
    case in greater detail. It was said, for example, that the reference to
    the psychological report at paragraph  34  missed  the  expert's  point
    about adverse effects on the appellant's wife and  children,  and  that
    the judge, there and elsewhere, paid only lip service to engaging  with
    factors which might be in the appellant's favour; but all  factors  are
    alluded to, and nothing is overlooked which might reasonably have  been
    found to meet the high test of very compelling circumstances.

 5. Mr Devlin emphasised that such circumstances include those  which  have
    been considered in terms of the exceptions, and  that  the  nature  and
    seriousness of the offending has already been factored in  by  statute,
    and is not a balancing factor at the section  117B(6)  stage.   However
    (and although the appellant's offending was  serious,  and  within  the
    extended family, directed against  his  children's  cousins)  there  is
    nothing in the decision which suggest such an approach was taken.

 6. In my view, the appellant has not shown that the making of the decision
    of the FtT involved the making of any error on a point of law.

 7. If the decision were to be set aside and remade, it would  have  turned
    on the same circumstances  as  were  before  the  FtT.   There  was  no
    application  to  tender  further  evidence,  and   the   situation   is
    substantially unchanged.  The appellant  has  completed  his  custodial
    sentence, but since then he has been in immigration detention.   He  is
    in contact with his children regularly, but only  by  telephone,  which
    can be continued from  anywhere.   Although  he  did  not  advance  any
    details it seems that he will have no direct contact with them  in  the
    foreseeable future, wherever he may be.   His  contact  with  his  wife
    appears also to be mainly, if not entirely, by telephone.

 8. In my judgement, the evidence  fails  to  establish  any  exception  to
    deportation specified in the rules and in statute, and  the  cumulative
    circumstances are not compelling, to the extent  required  to  outweigh
    the public interest in the appellant's deportation.

 9. The FtT did not make  an  anonymity  direction,  and  parties  did  not
    suggest that the UT should make one.   However, in view of  the  nature
    of the appellant's offending  and  the  involvement  of  several  child
    relatives, an order is now made.  Unless and until a tribunal or  court
    directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
    member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
    to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
    contempt of court proceedings.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

      [pic]

      25 October 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




