
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05010/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3rd December 2018                  |On 02nd January 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - Jamaica
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    C D R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hans of Henry Hyams & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal against  the  decision  of
    Judge Eames made following a hearing at Bradford on 16th February 2018.



 2. The claimant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 11th  February  2002.   He
    applied to come to the UK to join his father as the child of  a  person
    present and settled in  the  UK.   His  case  is  that  he  had  become
    estranged from his mother in  Jamaica,  with  whom  he  had  previously
    lived, and from that point  his father was solely responsible  for  his
    care.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer did not believe that a truthful account  of
    the appellant's circumstances in Jamaica had been  given,  specifically
    that in 2015 there was an arson attack on his mother's home and in  the
    days which followed he had been abandoned by his mother.

 4. The judge accepted that he had been told  the  truth  by  the  sponsor,
    concluding that he was in effect the person solely responsible for  the
    child's care.

 5. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission to appeal on the  grounds
    that the judge had applied the wrong standard of proof in  relation  to
    disputed factual matters.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  that
    basis.

 6. Mr Tan relied on  his  grounds  submitting  that  at  worst  the  wrong
    standard of proof had been applied throughout the determination and  at
    best there had been a conflation of both the  lower  standard  and  the
    correct civil standard.

 7. Mr Hans submitted that this was a lengthy  and  detailed  determination
    and the judge had in fact made appropriate positive findings.

 8. I have considered this  determination  with  care,  and  have  decided,
    reluctantly, that it cannot stand.  It is  a  thoughtful  and  detailed
    work.  However the  overriding  impression  given  is  that  the  judge
    himself was unclear about  what  standard  of  proof  he  ought  to  be
    applying in human rights appeals.

 9. At paragraph 48 he states:

         "I find, applying  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  I  make  these
         findings because on balance I find the appellant's father's account
         to be reasonably persuasive overall."

10. At paragraph 51 he makes a number of findings  of  fact,  at  paragraph
    51(b) stating that it was likely that the arson attack had taken place,
    but at paragraph 51(e) reverting to the phrase reasonably  likely.   At
    paragraph 53 he said:

         "On balance, I am inclined to give the benefit of the doubt on  the
         knife attack story to the sponsor.  I  find  it  reasonably  likely
         that it happened ... On balance it is  reasonably  likely  that  it
         did."

11. He concludes at paragraph 57:

         "Overall in my view it  is  proven  as  reasonably  likely  to  the
         standard of proof required in a human rights matter."

12. I agree with Mr Tan that  in  all  cases,  but  in  particular  a  case
    involving a child, it is essential that the judge applies  the  correct
    standard of proof when making his findings, namely in  this  case,  the
    civil standard, the balance of  probabilities.   I  am  afraid  that  I
    cannot be at all confident that this is what the judge had in mind when
    he made his findings . Indeed the indications are that he believed that
    he ought to be applying  the  lower  standard  required  in  protection
    cases.

13. Unfortunately this means that there is no alternative but to remit this
    case to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard again.

14. The decision of Judge Eames is set aside.  It will have to be heard  by
    a judge other than him at Bradford at a date to be notified.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 14 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

