
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05114/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                              | On 23 March 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                AYESHA SALEEM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, instructed by Signature Law LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born  on  22  December  1985  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.

Immigration and appeal history

 2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 15  February  2008  and  has  had  a
    complex immigration history, having been  granted  various  periods  of
    leave as student, outside the rules and most recently as a spouse.  Her
    latest period of leave was granted under the five-year partner route of
    appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.  It commenced on 15 July 2013 and
    covered the thirty months to 15 January 2016.  On 11 January  2016  she
    applied for further leave for thirty months as a spouse.   Because  her
    application was made in time, her leave has been  statutorily  extended
    by section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

 3. On 15 February 2016, the respondent  refused  to  grant  the  appellant
    further leave to remain as  a  spouse.   The  respondent  accepted  the
    appellant met the suitability, relationship,  immigration  and  English
    language requirements of appendix FM but that she failed  to  meet  the
    financial requirements.

 4. This  was  because  her  own  income  over  the  12-months  immediately
    preceding the date of application was  less  than  the  minimum  income
    requirement, and her husband had been made redundant in  October  2015,
    meaning his previous income could not be taken into consideration.  Nor
    did the Immigration Rules permit  consideration  of  the  fact  he  had
    secured employment, with an annual salary of �22,500,  which  commenced
    on 8 February 2016.

 5. The respondent also decided that the appellant was not excused from the
    minimum income requirement by application of paragraph EX.1 of appendix
    FM.  The couple did not have children and there were no  insurmountable
    obstacles to their family life continuing overseas.

 6. The respondent's decision is deemed to be a refusal of a  human  rights
    claim by Home Office policy; for this reason, the appellant had a right
    of appeal, which she exercised on 4 March 2016.  The appeal was in time
    because the refusal decision does not appear to have been served  until
    29 February 2016.  The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  A
    M S Green on 1 June 2017.  In his decision and reasons  statement  that
    was issued on 19 June 2017, Judge Green dismissed the appeal because he
    found there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing
    overseas.

 7. The appellant was dissatisfied with this outcome and sought  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was granted by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Landes on 3 January  2018,  primarily  because  although
    Judge Green had considered numerous issues, it was arguable that he had
    failed to  engage  with  the  appellant's  reliance  on  "what  may  be
    described as the Chikwamba point".

 8. This is a reference to paragraph 51 of the Supreme Court's judgment  in
    R (Agyarko) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  UKSC
    11.  It reads:

         "51. Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled
         to remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance  of
         this consideration depends  on  what  the  outcome  of  immigration
         control might otherwise be. For  example,  if  an  applicant  would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal will  generally
         be very considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if
         residing in the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted
         leave to enter, at least if an application were made  from  outside
         the UK, then there might be  no  public  interest  in  his  or  her
         removal. The point is illustrated by the decision  in  Chikwamba  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department. [[2008] UKHL 40]"



Finding there is legal error

 9. Before looking at the grounds of appeal, I remind myself what the House
    of Lords decided in Chikwamba.  At paragraph 6, Lord Scott  of  Foscote
    provide the following analysis.

         "6.  The appellant, in her appeal,  relies  on  article  8  of  the
         Convention and, for my part, I regard the decisions  of  the  lower
         courts as clearly unreasonable  and  disproportionate.  It  is,  or
         ought to be,  accepted  that  the  appellant's  husband  cannot  be
         expected to return  to  Zimbabwe,  that  the  appellant  cannot  be
         expected to leave her child behind if she is returned  to  Zimbabwe
         and that if the appellant were to be returned to Zimbabwe she would
         have every prospect of succeeding in an application made there  for
         permission to re-enter and remain in this country with her husband.
         So what on earth is the point of sending her back? Why  cannot  her
         application simply be made here? The only answer given on behalf of
         the Secretary of State is that government policy requires that  she
         return and make her application from Zimbabwe.  This  is  elevating
         policy to dogma. Kafka would have enjoyed it. I  would  allow  this
         appeal."

10. It summarises the more detailed discussion of the issues given by  Lord
    Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood at paragraphs 35 to 46, which were  agreed
    unanimously by all members of the bench.  The clear reminder is that it
    is for the respondent  to  justify  the  interference  in  family  life
    resulting from the proposal to expel the appellant.

11. Mr Plowright relied on the grounds of appeal.  He reminded me, in  case
    I might overlook what is probably the fundamental issue in this appeal,
    that the Supreme Court had considered in  R  (MM  (Lebanon)  &  Ors)  v
    Secretary of State and another [2017] UKSC 10 how  alternative  sources
    of  funding  to  secure  the  minimum  income  requirement  should   be
    considered.  At paragraph 100, Lady Hale and Lord Carnwath concluded.

         "100.    As already explained, we do not see this as an issue going
         to the legality of the rules as such. What is necessary is that the
         guidance  to  officers  should   make   clear   that,   where   the
         circumstances give rise to a positive article 8 duty in  the  sense
         explained in Jeunesse,  a  broader  approach  may  be  required  in
         drawing the "fair balance" required by the Strasbourg  court.  They
         are entitled to take account of the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
         objectives, but in judging whether  they  are  met,  they  are  not
         precluded from taking account of other reliable sources of earnings
         or finance. It is open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  indicate
         criteria by which reliability of such sources may  be  judged,  but
         not to exclude them altogether."

12. Mr Kotas informed me that he accepted that Judge Green  had  materially
    erred by failing to engage with the Chikwamba point.  The  Home  Office
    records show that Mr Plowright, who represented the  appellant  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, made submissions in relation  to  this  point  and
    they have not been addressed.  Mr Kotas also informed me  that  on  the
    evidence now available, were the appellant to travel  to  Pakistan  and
    make an entry clearance application, it was bound  to  succeed  because
    the  financial  requirements  are  satisfied.   They  were,  in   fact,
    satisfied at the date of decision and the date of hearing  because  the
    appellant's spouse had resumed employment.

13. Mr Kotas informed me that he was unable to  concede  the  whole  appeal
    because the respondent's view is that it  remains  reasonable  for  the
    appellant to go to Pakistan and apply for  entry  clearance.   This  is
    proportionate given that at the date of application she did not satisfy
    the financial requirements of appendix FM-SE.  Although there might  be
    a period of enforced separation, it was  likely  to  be  of  a  limited
    duration because most entry clearance applications are  decided  within
    90 days.  In answer to my question, Mr Kotas clarified  that  the  only
    public  interest  consideration  in  this  appeal  had  been  that  the
    appellant  had  not  satisfied  the  immigration  rules  and  that  was
    sufficient to engage s.117B(1) in that it was in the public interest of
    maintain effective immigration controls.

14. As I announced at the end of the hearing, I accept there is a  material
    error in the  decision  and  reasons  statement  of  Judge  Green  that
    requires me to set aside his decision.

15.  Judge  Green's  decision  and  reasons  statement  is   perhaps   over
    complicated. In paragraphs 83 and 84 of Hesham Ali (Iraq)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60, Lord Thomas suggests a
    simpler structure:

         "83. One way of structuring such a judgment would be to follow what
         has become known as the "balance sheet" approach. After  the  judge
         has found the facts, the judge would set out each of the "pros" and
         "cons" in what has been described as a "balance sheet" and then set
         out reasoned conclusions as to whether the  countervailing  factors
         outweigh the importance attached to  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign offenders.

         84.  The use of a "balance  sheet"  approach  has  its  origins  in
         Family Division cases (see paras 36 and 74 of the decision  of  the
         Court of Appeal In re B-S  (Children)  (Adoption  Order:  Leave  to
         Oppose) [2014] 1 WLR 563). It was applied by the  Divisional  Court
         in Polish Judicial  Authority  v  Celinski  [2016]  1  WLR  551  to
         extradition cases where a similar  balancing  exercise  has  to  be
         undertaken when article 8 is engaged - see paras 15-17.  Experience
         in extradition cases has since shown that the use  of  the  balance
         sheet approach has greatly assisted in the clarity of the decisions
         at first instance and the work of appellate courts."

16. Instead of following this balance sheet approach, Judge  Green  follows
    the immigration rules.  This approach, unfortunately, runs the risk  of
    restricting  the  broad  view  a  judge  must  have  about  a  person's
    fundamental rights.  It is, of  course,  those  rights  which  must  be
    assessed, not whether the person meets the immigration rules.   Whether
    a person meets the immigration rules  is  a  factor  to  consider  when
    assessing the strength of the public interest in  expelling  a  person.
    It can be determinative, but often will remain a factor to balance with
    others.

17. It is in this context that I accept what is conceded on behalf  of  the
    respondent.  I find the failure of  Judge  Green  to  engage  with  the
    Chikwamba point is a material error on a point of  law  and  undermines
    his decision and reasons statement.  By following the provisions of the
    immigration rules, he focused  on  whether  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing  overseas  and  failed  thereby  to
    consider the broader issues relating to the  right  to  respect  family
    life.

18. I add one additional observation.  Judge Green's comment at the end  of
    paragraph 21, that there was "no justification for [him] to go  outside
    the Immigration Rules under Article 8  ECHR"  is  wrong  in  law.   The
    leading judgments from the Supreme Court, particularly paragraphs 39 to
    53 of Hesham Ali, remind judges that their duty is to apply  article  8
    and this cannot be replaced by an application of the immigration rules.
     There was no question of having to go outside the  immigration  rules;
    the law requires a judge to apply article 8 to determine this  type  of
    appeal.

Remaking the decision

19. Having set aside the decision and reasons of Judge Green, I invited the
    representatives to make submissions as to how the  decision  should  be
    remade.  As I have indicated, there is no dispute as to  the  facts  in
    this case.  Judge Green made positive findings regarding  the  evidence
    and those findings are unchallenged.  Neither party wished  to  present
    or call further evidence.  I decided there was no reason to adjourn the
    hearing or to remit the appeal.

20. Mr Kotas relied on the  submissions  he  made  earlier,  which  I  have
    recorded at paragraph 12 above.  He had nothing to add.   Mr  Plowright
    relied on his earlier submissions and  said  this  case  fell  squarely
    within the Chikwamba point.

21. In deciding that the appeal against the refusal decision of 15 February
    2016 should be allowed, I  have  applied  the  balance  sheet  approach
    recommended by the Supreme Court.

22.  The  appellant  enjoys  family  life  with  her  husband.   They  have
    established their family life in the UK, and met  the  requirements  of
    immigration control until the application for further leave leading  to
    this appeal.  In  making  the  application  that  led  to  the  refusal
    decision, the appellant was candid about her spouse's  situation.   She
    acted diligently, providing evidence before a decision  was  made  that
    her husband had secured employment with sufficient income to  meet  the
    minimum income requirement.

23. The evidence indicated, as Judge Green found at  paragraph  17  of  his
    decision, that the appellant and her husband would suffer inconvenience
    and hardship were she required to leave the UK.  This establishes  that
    the level of interference arising from the proposed expulsion is likely
    to significantly affect the couple's enjoyment of family life.

24. Taken together, these two points establish the appellant has discharged
    the burden on her in relation to article 8(1).

25. The burden shifts to the respondent to justify the  decision  to  expel
    the appellant from the UK.  In this regard, as confirmed by  Mr  Kotas,
    the  respondent  relies  solely  on  s.117B(1)  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and within that argues that the failure
    of the appellant to meet the requirements  of  appendix  FM  means  she
    needs to be expelled  to  ensure  effective  immigration  controls  are
    maintained.  In reaching this conclusion, the respondent has considered
    whether there would be an insurmountable obstacle within the meaning of
    paragraph EX.1 and EX.2 of appendix FM to the  couple  enjoying  family
    life overseas and found none.

26. As recorded above, Mr Kotas added a further dimension to this, that  it
    was in any event proportionate to expect the appellant to leave the  UK
    and apply for entry clearance from overseas.

27. I mention that the appellant does not argue  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to her returning to Pakistan to apply  for  entry  clearance,
    but that such a requirement is unreasonable in  all  the  circumstances
    and therefore not proportionate.  Nor does the appellant  allege  there
    are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her  living  with  her  husband  in
    Pakistan.  It would present  significant  difficulties  but  ones  they
    could overcome.  Again, her argument is that the requirement to  do  so
    is unreasonable and therefore not proportionate.

28. Having identified the personal circumstances relied on by the appellant
    and the public interest factors relied on by the respondent, I turn  to
    my task of deciding where a fair balance lies between  these  competing
    interests.  I am satisfied that the nature of  the  appellant's  family
    life in the UK is strongly established.  She and her husband  have  set
    up home together here and that is deserving of respect.  They have done
    so in compliance with the immigration laws.

29. The reason the appellant did not satisfy the immigration rules was that
    her husband was made redundant.  The timing could not have  been  worse
    in terms of immigration  control  because  the  appellant's  leave  was
    coming to an end.  But this was not a situation of their  making.   The
    appellant  and  her  husband  were   candid   about   the   change   of
    circumstances,  and  acted  diligently  in  securing   employment   and
    notifying the respondent of it.  This means at all relevant dates other
    than the  date  of  application,  the  minimum  income  requirement  is
    satisfied.

30. I am satisfied that the policy requirement in appendix FM-SE to provide
    evidence of the financial circumstances were satisfied at the  date  of
    application was a policy decision imposed for  practical  reasons.   As
    identified in MM (Lebanon), a broader approach is needed to ensure  the
    positive obligation of respect in article  8  is  observed.   This  has
    subsequently been written into the  immigration  rules.   Although  the
    appellant cannot benefit from that  change  in  policy,  the  fact  the
    Supreme Court found the immigration  rules  too  narrowly  drawn  is  a
    factor that I must consider when assessing whether the public  interest
    in s.117B(1) is engaged.

31. I find it is not.  The provisions of s.117B(1) are not  congruent  with
    the immigration rules.  The statutory provision refers to the  need  to
    maintain effective immigration controls.  Usually that will mean that a
    person must demonstrate that the immigration rules have been satisfied.
     But given the Chikwamba point, that cannot be the  only  consideration
    under s.117B(1).

32. In this appeal, I  find  that  the  appellant's  failure  to  meet  the
    immigration rules is a technicality and occurred merely because of  the
    timing of the redundancy of her husband.  As indicated by Lord Scott in
    Chikwamba, raising technicalities to the level of dogma will  undermine
    respect for the right to family life.  I find that to be the case here.
     I do not find the respondent has provided adequate  justification  for
    the decision to expel the  appellant.   Such  a  decision  in  all  the
    circumstances is disproportionate.

33. I remake the decision and allow the  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal decision of 15 February 2016.

Observation

34. I add the following observation.  Although I find the decision to expel
    the appellant is disproportionate in all the circumstances,  that  does
    not mean I find she should be granted the leave to which she would have
    been entitled  had  she  been  able  to  show  she  met  the  financial
    requirement of appendix FM-SE.  It is accepted by  the  appellant  that
    she did not satisfy the rules at the date of  application  because  her
    own income did not meet the minimum income requirement and her  husband
    was at that time unemployed.

35. As a result, there is no duty on the respondent to grant the  appellant
    further leave to remain under the five-year route to settlement because
    the eligibility criteria were not  met  because  of  the  technicality.
    What leave is granted is a matter for the respondent,  but  bearing  in
    mind the current provisions of paragraph GEN.3.1, it may be  reasonable
    to treat the findings I have  made  as  exceptional  circumstances.   I
    mention  that  the  consequences   of   expulsion   would   amount   to
    "unjustifiable harshness" because the expulsion decision itself is  not
    justified in law.  I understand that means the  respondent  will  grant
    the appellant leave as a partner under the ten-year route.  But, at the
    risk of repeating myself, this is merely an observation and what  leave
    is granted is a matter for the respondent.  I make this observation  to
    ensure that neither party thinks my decision restores the appellant  to
    her previous position under the five-year route.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and  reasons  statement  is  set  aside
because it contains legal error.

I remake  the  decision  and  allow  the  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision of 15 February 2016.


Signed                              Date     21 March 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



