
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/05358/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Oral decision given following hearing   |                                    |
|On 10 October 2019                      |  On 26 November 2019               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                          JIGNESH MADHUBHAI PARMAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal instructed by Connaught Law
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of  India  who  is  appealing  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Row who in a decision and reasons
    promulgated on 5 July 2019 following a  hearing  at  Birmingham  Priory
    Courts two days earlier on 3  July  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent refusing to grant him  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules under Article 8.

 2. The appellant had come to the United Kingdom as a student in  September
    2007 but had left the United Kingdom at some time between 5 April  2010
    and 6 April 2011 when he returned to India.  He apparently subsequently
    returned again as a student but his last  valid  leave  expired  on  28
    January 2015.  He subsequently applied on more than  one  occasion  for
    leave to remain but those applications were  unsuccessful  and  he  was
    appeal rights exhausted on 8 July 2016.  He applied again on  4  August
    2016 on the basis of ten years' lawful residence (which it is  accepted
    he did not have) and that application was refused  on  8  August  2018.
    There is no appeal against the refusal under the Rules and  it  is  not
    now submitted that he had been here lawfully for ten years.  His appeal
    is on the basis that he should have been allowed to remain outside  the
    Rules under Article 8.

 3.  In  the  course  of  his  determination,  Judge  Row  considered   the
    submissions which had been made.  The appellant is married to an Indian
    national who has also made an application for leave to remain; she also
    is attempting to  appeal  decisions  made  against  her  although  this
    Tribunal has not been given details of this.  Both  the  appellant  and
    his wife are Indian nationals and they have a daughter who was born  in
    the UK and is now  about  2  years  old.   The  application  which  the
    appellant made relied very strongly on his daughter's position, because
    at paragraphs 6 and 10 of his witness statement (which is at page 2  of
    his bundle before the First-tier Tribunal) he refers  to  his  daughter
    who was born on 5 September 2017 (she is now 2 years old but was  1  at
    the time of the application) and maintains that  "she  is  a  stateless
    child".  Under "family and private life" at paragraph 10 of his witness
    statement, he states that "I can confirm that my daughter's application
    for stateless child (FLR(S)) has been submitted on 19 June 2019 to  the
    Home Office and is under process".  The application itself is contained
    within his bundle at paragraphs 39 to 41.

 4. Other than with regard to the position of the child there is  no  basis
    upon which an Article 8 claim could arguably be  allowed.   It  is  not
    suggested that there would be very significant obstacles to either  the
    appellant or his wife returning to India which is the country they both
    grew up in, where they know the language and all the  customs,  and  no
    doubt still have family and connections, and nor is it  suggested  that
    any of the other requirements set out within  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)
    to (vi) of the Immigration Rules are satisfied.  Accordingly, the  only
    basis on which an application under Article 8  could  possibly  succeed
    would be if the appellant could show that there  are  factors  in  this
    case so compelling that exceptionally the appellant (and presumably the
    rest of his family as well) ought to  be  given  permission  to  remain
    outside the Rules under Article 8.

 5. A decision maker would of course have to have regard to Section 117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  added  with  effect
    from July 2014 by Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 which sets out
    the public interest considerations applicable in  all  cases  where  an
    Article 8 claim has been made.  In particular, at subparagraph  (1)  it
    is stated that "the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
    the public interest".  In other words, the  default  position  will  be
    that there is a public interest in removing people who  have  no  right
    under the Rules to remain in this country.

 6. This is an obvious point but it needs to be  emphasised  in  this  case
    because one of the grounds surprisingly as set out at  paragraph  5  of
    the grounds (which in fairness to Mr Iqbal I emphasise were not settled
    by him) states as follows:

         "... The proposition [set out in OA and Others (human  rights;  new
         matter;  s.120)  Nigeria  [2019]  UKUT  00065]  is  clear,  if  the
         applicant meets the requirements of the Rules then  the  respondent
         will not be able to  rely  on  the  importance  of  maintain  [sic]
         immigration  controls  as  a  factor  weighing  in  favour  of  the
         respondent in the proportionality balance.  This does not mean that
         failure to meet the requirements of the Rules, which is essentially
         why the appeal was argued outside the  Rules,  would  automatically
         result in this factor being weighed against the  applicant.   There
         is no support for such a position, and such  a  position  would  in
         fact cause an irrational conclusion if  every  appeal  outside  the
         Rules would not succeed (or would face an initial uphill  struggle)
         as there would be negative weight attributed against the  applicant
         at the outset".

    The position is, of course, that there  is  indeed  an  initial  uphill
    struggle in cases where an applicant does not satisfy the  requirements
    under the Rules because it is precisely  in  those  cases  that  unless
    compelling reasons can be shown why exceptionally that applicant should
    be allowed to remain outside the Rules he or she would not  be  allowed
    to be.  Section 117B(1) is clear on this.

 7. The second ground relied upon  is  that  the  judge  erred  "in  giving
    negative weight to the fact that the applicant's baby daughter required
    medical treatment".  This was taken into account  because  one  of  the
    factors to which a decision  maker  will  have  to  have  regard  under
    Section 117B(3) is that it is in the public  interest  that  those  who
    seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
    independent, and in this case the appellant's daughter needs  treatment
    for which payment has not been made, albeit that the appellant and  his
    child, as people with no lawful right  to  remain,  have  no  right  to
    receive that treatment without payment.

 8. Although in the grounds it is said  at  paragraph  9  that  "whereas  a
    reading of Section 117B(3) would entail that  the  IJ  was  correct  to
    attribute negative weight to this aspect, whether doing  so  is  humane
    and reasonable, the applicant would submit that it is not the case", it
    is not clear what legal basis there is for making this submission.

 9. When opening his case, Mr Iqbal, on behalf of the appellant, reasonably
    stated as follows:

         "Being bound by my instructions, I do not abandon  [these  grounds]
         but I am not going to address you on them".

10. The reason why he sensibly chose not to address the Tribunal  on  these
    grounds is because clearly they are completely unarguable.

11. The basis upon which Mr Iqbal based his submissions was a  very  narrow
    one which is put slightly differently in ground 3 from the way in which
    it is now argued.  At ground 3 of the written grounds it  is  suggested
    that Judge Row's conclusion at paragraph 15 is an irrational one.  What
    the judge found was as follows:

         "I find that the appellant's  daughter  S  is  entitled  to  Indian
         citizenship.  The birth could be registered with  the  Indian  High
         Commission.  She could obtain an Indian passport.  I find that  the
         appellant has not made any attempt to register her birth.   He  has
         failed to do so because he wishes S to remain  unregistered  so  he
         can use this to his advantage".

    In the grounds it is said that "this conclusion was clearly not open to
    the IJ to make, specially the harsh finding that the applicant has  not
    made any attempt to register the birth  and  he  only  wishes  for  his
    daughter to remain unregistered is [sic] so he  can  use  this  to  his
    advantage".

12. So far as this finding is  concerned,  the  judge  had  regard  to  the
    evidence from the Indian High Commission which is merely to the  effect
    that "the birth of the above child has not been registered as a citizen
    of India at the High Commission of India, London".  (See page 64 of the
    appellant's bundle; this letter is dated 17 April 2019).  The judge was
    entitled in my judgment to have regard to the obvious  fact  that  this
    letter does not indicate that any application had even been  made,  and
    furthermore nowhere within the papers is there any  indication  of  why
    the child should in fact be regarded either as being stateless or  more
    importantly should be entitled to be registered as stateless.  What the
    judge actually found at paragraph 15 was that the appellant's  daughter
    "is entitled to Indian citizenship".  He went on to find as follows:

         "The birth could be registered with  the  Indian  High  Commission.
         She could obtain an Indian passport".

13. He then goes on to make his finding "that the appellant  has  not  made
    any attempt to register her birth.  He has failed to do so  because  he
    wishes S to remain unregistered so he can use this to his advantage".

14. The judge then deals with the welfare of  the  child  to  which  he  is
    obliged to have regard (but not as a paramount issue) and at  paragraph
    17 under "the welfare of the child" finds as follows:

         "17. S is 1 year old.  She is not a British citizen.  I  find  that
             she is entitled to obtain Indian nationality and could  obtain
             this.  Her  interests  are  to  remain  looked  after  by  the
             appellant and his wife.  [Her] welfare is served by her  going
             where they go.  She will no doubt  in  due  course  speak  any
             languages that they speak".

15. The judge then goes on to make the obvious points  that  the  appellant
    had left India when he was 27 years old,  has  an  undergraduate  maths
    qualification, and that his wife is also a graduate, and that  both  he
    and his wife could  support  themselves  in  India.   Furthermore,  his
    mother, father and two brothers live in India and there  would  be  "no
    difficulty integrating into that country.  If  the  family  returns  to
    India S will be able to  meet  her  grandparents  and  other  relatives
    there.  This would be to her advantage".

16. Following the decision of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO  very  recently,
    clearly from an Article 8 point of view the child would be expected  to
    go with her parents to the country of their nationality.

17. Accordingly, the only possible basis upon which the  application  could
    be considered favourably is if somehow there is a legitimate reason why
    the appellant's daughter would be allowed to remain  in  this  country.
    If indeed she would be unable  to  obtain  Indian  nationality,  or  of
    rather more relevance would not be allowed to return to India or to  go
    to India with her parents, this would be a factor that the judge  would
    have had to take into account.  For this reason, it was  necessary  for
    the judge to consider whether or not on the  balance  of  probabilities
    (and the judge set out correctly the burden and standard  of  proof  at
    paragraph 5 of his decision) the child might be  unable  to  return  to
    India with her parents.  As already noted, the judge found  as  a  fact
    that the child was entitled to and  could  obtain  Indian  nationality.



18. The way in which Mr Iqbal makes his submission on ground  3  (the  only
    submission he relies upon essentially) is  that  the  decision  or  the
    finding as to whether or not S was in truth stateless was in his  words
    "not one for this judge to take".  His argument is  that  because  this
    was a matter being considered by the respondent, it  was  not  for  the
    judge to second-guess what the decision would be.

19. The first weakness with this argument is that if this  was  indeed  the
    appellant's position, he could have applied for an adjournment  of  the
    hearing pending consideration of this decision.  However, he did not do
    so and Mr Iqbal very fairly accepted that this was a difficulty in  his
    case, although he still maintained in his submissions that there was  a
    jurisdictional point with regard to this decision.

20. More fundamental, however, is that this was a decision which the  judge
    was effectively invited to make, because the appellant's case  was  put
    essentially on the basis that his daughter could not  return  to  India
    with him.  If the judge had failed to make a finding on this point,  it
    would doubtless have been argued that the judge had failed  to  make  a
    finding on a relevant matter.

21. During the course of argument, Mr  Iqbal  refined  his  submissions  to
    stating that the judge could legitimately have simply  made  a  finding
    that he was not satisfied on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    appellant had established that the child could not go  back  to  India,
    without making a specific finding to this effect.  In my judgment, this
    is merely a matter of semantics.  What the judge's finding  that  S  is
    entitled to obtain Indian nationality and could obtain this  means,  in
    the context of a decision made on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  is
    precisely that the appellant has not satisfied him that she is not able
    to return with her family.  The judge had to make  a  finding  on  this
    point whatever the respondent might subsequently have found with regard
    to the application made on behalf of the child to be declared stateless
    and that was part and parcel of the decision.

22. I am told also now that in fact  this  application  has  in  fact  been
    refused by the respondent so even had I decided that there had been  an
    error of law such that I had to re-make the decision there would  still
    have been no basis upon which the decision could be made in  favour  of
    the appellant in this case.  As it is, and subject to what I say below,
    there is no material error of law in Judge Row's decision; on the facts
    of this case there is simply no possible basis upon which an Article  8
    claim could possibly have succeeded.

23. After the  parties  had  made  their  submissions,  I  brought  to  the
    attention of the parties the 2017 decision made by the Vice  President,
    Mr Ockelton in R (on the application of MK) v  SSHD  [2017]  EWHC  1365
    (Admin) in which the Vice President had considered the  effect  of  the
    Indian rules on succession with relevance to cases  where  applications
    had  been  made  for  declarations  of  statelessness.    Mr   Ockelton
    recognised that in cases like MK (and also presumably cases like  this)
    there was scope for abuse within  the  system  in  circumstances  where
    parties deliberately did not make applications that were open  to  them
    to make for registration of a child as an Indian citizen.  I considered
    it appropriate for the parties at least to  consider  what  submissions
    should be made having regard to MK because even though  that  case  was
    not cited to Judge Row, nonetheless it has binding effect on the First-
    tier Tribunal and if he ought to have had regard to matters within  it,
    then these matters would need to be considered by this Tribunal.

24. Having considered the submissions which were made, I am satisfied  that
    this authority does not assist (and in light of the subsequent  refusal
    of the respondent to accept that the appellant's child is stateless  on
    any rehearing, an Article 8 claim would be bound to fail as well).  The
    reason why on the facts of this case MK would  not  assist  is  because
    that case turned upon the provision at paragraph 3 of Schedule 2 to the
    British Nationality Act 1981 which provides at Section 3(1)(c) that one
    of the requirements before  a  person  can  be  registered  under  this
    paragraph  of  the  Schedule  to   registration   as   stateless   (and
    subsequently to be registered as a British citizen) is if  that  person
    has been within the United Kingdom for a period of five years prior  to
    the application for registration.  As the child was 1 year old  at  the
    time of the decision, and is now only 2, she clearly does not  qualify.



25. Further, it is clear from the analysis within MK that unless  there  is
    an absence of documents, which does not appear to be the case here, the
    child would be entitled to be registered and it is in effect  merely  a
    rubber-stamping exercise.  Where, as here, the child is born to  Indian
    nationals who are married and who are outside  India  at  the  date  of
    birth, provided  an  application  is  made  registration  will  follow.
    Accordingly, not only was the judge's decision at paragraph 17  that  S
    "is entitled to obtain Indian nationality  and  could  obtain  this"  a
    finding that the judge was entitled to make but on the evidence  before
    him he could not realistically have come to any other conclusion.

26. It follows that the decision in MK does not assist the appellant in the
    circumstances of this case and the decision which I  had  provisionally
    reached, as set out above, that there is no material error  of  law  in
    Judge Row's decision and that the decision that he made dismissing  the
    appeal  was  the  only  decision  on  this  evidence  that  any   judge
    realistically could make must stand.

27. Accordingly, this appeal must be dismissed and I will so find.

Notice of Decision

There being no material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal,  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the   respondent's
refusal to grant him leave to remain under Article 8 is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date:     20 November 2019

