
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/05058/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1st June 2017                          |  On 16th June 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     DN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Moksud of International Immigration Advisory
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Designated Judge McClure of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated following  a  hearing  on
    17th October 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a female Nigerian citizen born in  August  1986.   She
    has a son born in the United Kingdom  on  6th  August  2008  who  is  a
    dependant in her appeal.

 3. On 17th June 2015 the Appellant applied for further leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom, based upon her family and private life.

 4. The application  was  refused  on  19th  August  2015.   The  Appellant
    appealed to the FtT.

 5. The FtT found that the Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules contained within Appendix FM in  relation  to  family  life,  nor
    paragraph 276ADE in relation to private life.  The  FtT  did  not  find
    that there were any  circumstances  that  would  justify  allowing  the
    appeal with reference to Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) outside the  Immigration  Rules  and
    therefore the appeal was dismissed.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that  the  FtT  had  erred  in  considering
    Article 8, by failing to consider section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).  It was contended  that
    the Appellant's child is a qualifying child and  he  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom in excess of seven years, and therefore the  FtT  should
    have considered whether it was reasonable to expect him  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  It was contended that this had not been considered  by
    the FtT, and the  FtT  had  failed  to  follow  guidance  given  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

 7. Permission to appeal was initially refused, it being noted that a child
    must accrue  a  period  of  seven  years'  residence  at  the  date  of
    application, and in this case the application for leave to  remain  had
    been made before the child had accrued seven years' residence.

 8. The application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    renewed and permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Lindsley, and I set out in part the grant of permission;

         3.   The grounds contend inter alia that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             erred in law  by  failing  to  properly  consider  the  appeal
             outside of the Immigration Rules on Article 8 ECHR grounds and
             to apply section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002 in the light of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ
             705 and Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 13 given  the  applicant's  son
             was born in the UK on 6th October 2008 and had lived in the UK
             for eight years at the time of the decision of  the  Tribunal.
             There was no need for the  seven  year  period  to  have  been
             accrued at the time of application under  section  117B(6)  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  was  said
             by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Manuell to  be  needed  in
             the  refusal  of  permission  to  appeal  by  the   First-tier
             Tribunal, see the decision of Lord Justice Elias in the  Court
             of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) at paragraph 13.

         4.   The grounds are arguable.

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary  it  was  contended  that  the  FtT  directed  itself
    appropriately.  While the FtT may not have directly referred to section
    117B(6), it was clear when the decision was read as a  whole  that  the
    FtT had considered whether or  not  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant's son to leave the United Kingdom.  The  FtT  considered  the
    best interests of the child and found that these  would  be  to  remain
    with his mother.  The FtT found the Appellant to be highly educated and
    able to obtain employment in  Nigeria,  and  would  have  support  from
    family members.  The FtT gave reasons for concluding that the Appellant
    and her child could adjust to life in Nigeria, and the findings made by
    the FtT mirrored the consideration required under section 117B(6).

10. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

Submissions

11. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Harrison was  provided  with  the
    Appellant's written response to the rule 24 response,  which  had  been
    settled by  Counsel.   This  response  pointed  out  that  the  FtT  at
    paragraph 50 had found that the child had not  completed  seven  years'
    residence at the date of application.   The  FtT  had  made  irrelevant
    findings in  relation  to  the  public  interest  and  the  Appellant's
    precarious immigration  status.   More  importantly  "it  appears  that
    conspicuously the judge did not mention the word 'reasonable' a  single
    time in his findings [paras 47 to 63]."

12. Mr Moksud  relied  upon  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal,
    together with the reply to the rule 24 response.  Mr  Moksud  submitted
    that the FtT did not consider the best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
    son, and did not take into account the medical reports at  pages  23-28
    of the Appellant's bundle.

13. Mr Moksud submitted that reasonableness had not been considered by  the
    FtT and the FtT had not  considered  that  the  Appellant's  son  is  a
    qualifying child.

14. Mr Moksud submitted that the FtT was in error in  making  reference  to
    section 117B(4) and (5) on the basis  that  these  provisions  did  not
    apply to family life between the Appellant and her son, and the FtT had
    failed to consider section 117B(6).  Mr Moksud submitted that  the  FtT
    decision should be set aside, and remade by the Upper Tribunal, and the
    Appellant's appeal should be allowed on the basis that it would not  be
    reasonable for her son to leave the United Kingdom.

15. Mr Harrison relied upon the rule 24 response and submitted that the FtT
    had produced a detailed decision, and provided adequate reasons for the
    findings made.  The decision should therefore stand.

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. The challenge to the FtT decision made  by  the  Appellant  relates  to
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act which for ease of reference I  set  out
    below;

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -



             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

18. Section 117D confirms that a qualifying child is a child under the  age
    of 18 who is either a British  citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more.

19. It is said that the FtT did  not  consider  whether  the  child  was  a
    qualifying child, and did not consider whether it would  be  reasonable
    to expect him to leave the United Kingdom.

20. I reject the contention in the reply to the rule 24 response  that  the
    FtT made no mention of the word 'reasonable' in paragraphs 47-63, which
    contain the FtT findings and conclusions.   The  following  finding  is
    contained at paragraph 58;

         In the circumstances I find that it is reasonable for the child  to
         return to Nigeria with his mother.

21. I also reject the submission made by Mr Moksud that  the  FtT  did  not
    consider the best interests of  the  Appellant's  son.   The  following
    finding is contained at paragraph 58;

         I have considered the  best  interests  of  this  child  and  taken
         account of the evidence presented.  Whilst clearly he would benefit
         from the education provided in the United Kingdom I see  no  reason
         why he could not undertake  education  in  Nigeria.   I  also  take
         account of the medical evidence.  Even  taking  that  into  account
         however I am satisfied that the best interests of this child are to
         remain with his mother, the person that has supported and cared for
         him throughout his life.

22. It is correct that the FtT did not specifically  cite  section  117B(6)
    when setting out conclusions.  It is also  correct  that  there  is  no
    reference to Treebhawon or MA (Pakistan).  However this is not an error
    of law if the principles contained within section 117B(6) and the  case
    law are followed.  I am  satisfied  that  those  principles  have  been
    followed in this appeal  for  the  following  reasons.   Treebhawon  at
    paragraphs 20-22 makes it clear that if an individual is not liable  to
    deportation, has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a
    qualifying child, and it would not be reasonable to expect  that  child
    to leave the United Kingdom, the public interest does not  require  the
    removal of the parent from  the  United  Kingdom.   In  that  case  the
    provisions of section 117B(1)-(5) are of  no  application.   I  mention
    this, because of the contention made by the  Appellant,  that  the  FtT
    should not have made reference to section 117B(4) and (5).  That  would
    only be the case if the FtT had already decided that it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom.   In  this  case,
    when the FtT decision is read as a whole, as it should be, I  find  the
    FtT has taken into account all the relevant circumstances, and  decided
    that it would be reasonable to expect the Appellant's son to leave  the
    United Kingdom.

23. I do not find that the FtT has ignored the principles in MA (Pakistan).
     At paragraph 49 of that decision it was stated that the  fact  that  a
    child has been in the United Kingdom for seven years needs to be  given
    significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise  for  two  related
    reasons, firstly because of its relevance to determine the  nature  and
    strength of  the  child's  best  interests,  and  secondly  because  it
    establishes as a starting point that leave  should  be  granted  unless
    there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

24. At paragraph 101 of MA (Pakistan) it  is  stated  that  a  court,  when
    considering the issue of reasonableness, can have regard to  the  wider
    public interests, including the immigration history of  the  child  and
    parents.  All these considerations must  be  taken  into  account  when
    considering whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave
    the United Kingdom.

25. The FtT was aware of the length of residence of  the  Appellant's  son.
    Paragraph 1 refers to him being born  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  6th
    August 2008.

26. At paragraph 13 the FtT recognises the arguments  put  forward  by  the
    Appellant, which includes the fact that her son has been in the  United
    Kingdom for eight years and "therefore it would not  be  reasonable  to
    remove the child."

27. At paragraph 44 the FtT notes the Appellant's claim that  her  son  has
    been a witness to domestic violence, and makes  specific  reference  to
    the reports  within  the  Appellant's  bundle,  evidencing  speech  and
    language therapy requirements, and the child  continence  appointments.
    The FtT notes, that there are no medical reports indicating any ongoing
    medical condition.

28. At paragraph 45 the FtT acknowledges that within the Appellant's bundle
    there are reports in relation to the child's school and education.

29. There is further reference by the FtT at paragraph 46, the  Appellant's
    claim that she and her child would have an uncertain future in  Nigeria
    without family support, and that the child is  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that it would be unreasonable to  expect  him  to  live  in
    Nigeria.

30. The consideration and conclusions of the FtT begin at paragraph 47.  At
    paragraph 50 the FtT correctly finds that  reliance  cannot  be  placed
    upon paragraph 276ADE(iv) in relation to the child, because there is  a
    requirement that the child must have accrued  seven  years'  continuous
    residence at the date of application.  That date was  17th  June  2015,
    and the child had not accrued seven years' continuous residence at that
    date.  The FtT notes that the same applies to EX1(a)  of  Appendix  FM.
    Therefore those provisions of the Immigration Rules do not  assist  the
    Appellant.

31. It is the case that section 117B(6) must be considered, and the date to
    be considered when assessing residence in that case,  is  the  date  of
    hearing.  It is common ground that by the date of  hearing,  the  child
    had resided in this country for approximately eight years, two  months.



32. I do not find that it can be reasonably said that the FtT  was  unaware
    of the child's length of residence.  At paragraph 57 the  FtT  confirms
    that the medical evidence in relation to the child has been considered,
    together with the evidence that he is settled in school.  The FtT finds
    that there is no reason  why  the  child  could  not  enter  school  in
    Nigeria, and that there are medical facilities  available  in  Nigeria,
    and the FtT finds that the Appellant would in fact have the  assistance
    and support of her family.  Those findings have not in  fact  been  the
    subject of any challenge from the Appellant.

33. Paragraph 58 sets out the conclusions of the FtT,  which  have  already
    been summarised, and in which the FtT finds that the best interests  of
    the child  would  be  to  remain  with  his  mother,  and  in  all  the
    circumstances it is reasonable for the child to return to Nigeria  with
    his mother.

34. The FtT has therefore taken into account all the evidence presented  to
    it.  That evidence includes the length of residence of the  child,  the
    fact that he was born in the United Kingdom, that he and his mother are
    Nigerian citizens, that he does not need medical  treatment  currently,
    but in any event both medical treatment and education are available  in
    Nigeria.  The  FtT  also  takes  into  account  that  contrary  to  the
    Appellant's claim, she would not be at risk  if  returned  to  Nigeria,
    that she would have family support, that she  is  highly  educated  and
    there is no apparent reason why she could not find employment, and that
    she has remained in the United Kingdom without leave since 30th January
    2012.  Although it may have been helpful  to  have  specifically  cited
    section 117B(6) the  FtT  took  into  account  all  material  evidence,
    followed the correct legal principles, and gave  adequate  reasons  for
    findings.  The FtT was entitled to take these factors into account when
    finding that leave  should  not  be  granted  based  upon  the  child's
    residence because as mentioned in paragraph 49 of MA (Pakistan)  'there
    are powerful reasons to the contrary.'

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do not  set  aside
the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the  Appellant  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.
This direction is made pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Signed                              Date 5th June 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.

Signed                              Date 5th June 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

