
[pic]
IAC-BFD-MD-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05294/2015 &

                                                   HU/05296/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 July 2017                               |On 11 July 2017               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                            SBT - first appellant
                            NT - second appellant
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Rai, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Appellants  are  nationals  of  Nepal  who  appealed  against  the
    Respondent's refusals of 17 August 2015 and 18  August  2015  of  their
    applications for entry clearance as the adult dependent sons of KBT,  a
    former Gurkha soldier. Their applications were refused.

 2. Consequent upon the private health issues raised in this appeal  it  is
    appropriate that an anonymity order is made.

 3. In the case of the first Appellant the application  was  refused  under
    paragraph 9(4) and 14 of Annex K on the basis that he  was  33  at  the
    date of application and thus outside the 18 to 30 year  old  age  range
    and under paragraph 9(5) on the basis  that  he  had  not  demonstrated
    financial dependence on the Sponsor. The decision went on to find  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances and  that  Article  8  did  not
    require that the application be granted.

 4. The second Appellant's application was refused under paragraph 9(5)  of
    Annex K on the basis that he had not demonstrated financial  dependence
    on the Sponsor and that Article 8 did not require that  application  be
    granted.

 5. The Appellants sought permission to appeal which was initially  refused
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Colyer. His reasons  for  so  doing
    were:-

        "1.  The appellants seek permission to appeal against a decision of
             the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Anstis) who, in a  determination
             promulgated on the 17th October 2016, found that the  appellant
             had no right of appeal in relation to the respondent's  refusal
             to grant their applications for entry clearance to  the  UK  as
             the adult dependent sons of a former Gurkha soldier.

          2. The appellants seek permission to appeal to the upper  tribunal
             on the grounds set out in the 8 page reasons for appealing.  In
             summary:

               a. the judge failed to have regard to historic injustice and
                  the relevance to the circumstances of the family.

               b. The judge failed to have any regard  to  paragraph  9  of
                  annex K chapter 15,  section  2A  (this  is  relevant  to
                  determining  the  lawfulness  of  the  decision  in   the
                  exercise of discretion and any article 8 assessment.)

               c. The judge fails to provide sufficient and/or  any  proper
                  reason for why the applicant's do not engage  article  8.
                  And/or the judge acts irrationally, amounting to an error
                  of law when finding that the  applicants  do  not  engage
                  article 8.

          3. Permission to appeal may be granted  if  I  am  satisfied  that
             there may have been a material error of  law  that  would  have
             made a material difference  to  the  outcome  of  the  original
             appeal. This could be due to adverse or irrational findings  or
             a lack of findings on core issues as established in the case of
             R (Iran etc) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

          4. I have considered the decision and reasons. In a well  reasoned
             determination the Tribunal judge gave adequate reasons for  the
             findings. A clear analysis was made by the  Tribunal  judge  in
             respect of the evidence before the tribunal. It is  clear  from
             that the judge was aware of the appellants'  circumstances  and
             the  appellants  could  not   meet   the   Immigration   Rules'
             requirements.

          5. It is clear that the  judge  gave  full  consideration  to  the
             requirements of the immigration rules and article 8  ECHR  plus
             the appropriate case law including Gurung and Ghising The judge
             has appropriately applied the immigration rules and  considered
             article 8  ECHR.  The  judge  concludes  that  the  appellants'
             circumstances  were  not  exceptional  and   describes   public
             interest in maintaining effective immigration control.

          6. The grounds amount to nothing more than a disagreement with the
             findings of the judge, findings which were properly open to the
             judge on the evidence before the  Tribunal.  They  disclose  no
             arguable error of law.

          7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is refused".

 6. However, following a renewed application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
    applications were granted. Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam's  reasons
    were:-

         "The Appellants seek permission to appeal against the  decision  of
         FtT Judge Anstis to dismiss their appeals against the  decision  of
         the ECO to grant them entry clearance.

         It is arguable that the judge has not properly reasoned why Article
         8 (1), at the date of the decision, was not  engaged.  All  grounds
         are arguable".

 7. Thus the appeals came before me today.

 8. At the outset Mr Rai handed up the authority of Rai v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, New Dheli [2017] EWCA Civ 320. He relied on it and urged me to
    find that Judge Anstis had materially erred in his approach to  Article
    8. In particular he drew my attention to paragraphs 19, 33  and  35  of
    Rai  which state:-

         "19. Ultimately, as Lord Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
         judgment of the court in Gurung (at paragraph  45),  "the  question
         whether an individual enjoys family life is one of fact and depends
         on a careful  consideration  of  all  the  relevant  facts  of  the
         particular case". In some instances "an adult  child  (particularly
         if he does not have a partner or children of his own) may establish
         that he has a family life with his parents".  As  Lord  Dyson  M.R.
         said, "[it] all depends on the facts". The court expressly endorsed
         (at paragraph 46), as  "useful"  and  as  indicating  "the  correct
         approach to  be  adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of  the
         relevant jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its  determination
         in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy),  including  its
         observation (at paragraph 62) that  "[the]  different  outcomes  in
         cases with superficially similar features emphasises to us that the
         issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".

         33. But the real weakness in the Upper Tribunal judge's conclusions
         with regard to article 8(1), as I see it, is one of substance,  not
         merely of form.

         35. The Upper Tribunal  judge  referred  in  paragraph  21  of  his
         determination  to  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's   continuing
         "financial  dependence"  on  his  father  and  mother,  which   was
         undisputed and which he accepted. In paragraph 23  he  acknowledged
         the difficulty in assessing "emotional dependence". But he referred
         to factors which seemed to him to indicate the appellant's parents'
         view  that  the  appellant  was  "able  to   exist   independently,
         emotionally, physically or otherwise so long  as  he  was  provided
         with money  unless  or  until  he  obtained  employment  or  gained
         financial independence through some other means". The single factor
         which seems to have weighed most heavily in that conclusion was the
         appellant's parents' willingness to leave Nepal to  settle  in  the
         United Kingdom when they did."

 9. He submitted that the Judge had materially misdirected himself in  fact
    and fails to have regard to historic injustice and its relevance to the
    circumstances of  this  family.  Further  that  the  Judge  misdirected
    himself in law by failing to have any regard to paragraph 9 of Annex K,
    Chapter 15, Section 2A which is relevant in determining the  lawfulness
    of the decision in the exercise of discretion  and  to  any  Article  8
    assessment. Finally the Judge had failed to provide  sufficient  and/or
    any proper reason for why the Appellants cannot succeed  on  Article  8
    grounds. He asserted that the only reason given for  finding  that  the
    Appellants did not engage with Article 8 is that the family  life  they
    sought to make  is  in  two  separate  countries.  This  ignores  other
    findings including the fact that the family have spent four of the last
    six  years  together,  that   the   second   Appellant   suffers   from
    schizophrenia  and  is  dependent  upon  the  other   Appellant,   both
    Appellants  are  financially  and  emotionally  dependent  upon   their
    Sponsor, that since March 2015 the Sponsor's own illness has  prevented
    any return to Nepal, neither Appellant is married or has  formed  their
    own family unit and at the time of the applicant  the  first  Appellant
    was 30 years of age.

10. Mr Whitwell relied on the Respondent's Rule 24 notice of  6  June  2017
    and submitted that the First-tier Judge's decision is well-reasoned and
    he has clearly had regard to the Appellants'  individual  circumstances
    as well as established case law, that the Judge has given  reasons  for
    his findings  in  relation  to  Article  8  and  that  the  Appellants'
    arguments are no more than a disagreement with the Judge's findings.

11. Mr Rai urged me to find not only that the Judge  materially  erred  for
    the reasons given in the grounds but also that it was now open to me to
    remake this decision by allowing the appeal.

12. I find that there is here a material error of law. During the course of
    the hearing Mr Whitwell accepted were I to find ground 3 made out  then
    grounds 1 and 2 would fall by the wayside. That is the exact  position.
    The Judge has failed to provide sufficient and/or any proper reason for
    why the Appellants cannot succeed under Article 8.  In  fact  only  one
    reason has been given as to why Article 8 is not engaged  and  that  is
    that the family  has  sought  to  make  their  lives  in  two  separate
    countries. Paragraph 39 of Rai states: -

         "39.  The  Upper  Tribunal  judge  referred   repeatedly   to   the
         appellant's parents having chosen to settle in the United  Kingdom,
         leaving the appellant in the family home in Nepal. Each time he did
         so, he stressed the fact that this was a decision they  had  freely
         made: "... not  compulsory  but  ...  voluntarily  undertaken  ..."
         (paragraph 20), "... having made the choice to come to the  [United
         Kingdom]" (paragraph 21), "... the willingness of  the  parents  to
         leave ..." (paragraph 23), and  "...  their  voluntary  leaving  of
         Nepal and leaving the Appellant ..." (paragraph 26). But  that,  in
         my view, was not to confront the real issue under article  8(1)  in
         this case, which was whether, as a matter of  fact,  the  appellant
         had demonstrated that he had a family life with his parents,  which
         had existed at the time of their departure to settle in the  United
         Kingdom and had endured beyond  it,  notwithstanding  their  having
         left Nepal when they did."

13. I am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  has  given  inadequate  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeal under Article 8. The  Judge's  analysis  has  not
    taken into account the totality of his findings. Having  come  to  that
    conclusion, and irrespective of it, I am satisfied that grounds 1 and 2
    are also made out.

14. I have carefully considered whether I can go on to remake the  decision
    in this appeal. I conclude that for all the  reasons  set  out  in  the
    grounds the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of  law
    and has to be set aside in its entirety. In  the  circumstances  it  is
    appropriate for these appeals to be heard again and for the totality of
    the evidence in  relation  to  both  private  and  family  life  to  be
    reconsidered and all matters decided afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any Judge aside from Judge Anstis.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 10 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

