
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05720/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 November 2018                   |On 7 December 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr Valter Pepnika
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tinsley, Counsel instructed by Central Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Iqbal promulgated on 7 June 2017 in  which  she  allowed
    the appeal  of  Valter  Pepnika  against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer refusing him entry clearance to join his  partner  in
    the United Kingdom.  The determination was made and  promulgated  on  6
    March 2018.  For the sake of continuity, Mr Pepnika will continue to be
    referred to as 'the appellant'.

 2. I have earlier made a decision that, in reaching  the  conclusion  that
    she did, the judge materially erred in law such as to  necessitate  the
    determination being set aside.  The basis for that  decision  was  that
    one of the requirements of the Immigration Rules permitting a person to
    enter the United Kingdom was that the applicant had passed  an  English
    language test with a provider approved by the Secretary  of  State  and
    that simply had not been done, as far as the judge knew, because  there
    was no test certificate.  The sponsor's evidence had been that  a  test
    was booked for 27 May 2017 and that they had previously tried to get an
    earlier test date on a number of occasions but had failed.  In  finding
    that there was an error of law, I determined that it was  not  open  to
    the judge to set aside the requirements of the Rules, in effect waiving
    those requirements, when there was no reason why such a test could  not
    have been provided.

 3. I need not repeat what I said in directing that the decision be remade.
     Suffice it to say nothing has been submitted to me during  the  course
    of today to indicate that, as a matter of principle,  I  was  wrong  in
    that.

 4. However, things took a rather  unusual  turn.   When  the  matter  came
    before me on 8 June 2018, when  I  anticipated  remaking  the  decision
    afresh, Mr Tinsley, who appeared on behalf of the  appellant  then,  as
    now, said on instructions that there was a test certificate.  The  test
    had been taken on 27 May 2017 and the test certificate had been  issued
    on 30 May 2017.  It was duly forwarded to the Tribunal on 30 May  2017.
    That was particularly material  in  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Iqbal followed a hearing that took place on 23 May 2017,
    in other words predating the certificate,  but  the  decision  was  not
    promulgated until 7 June 2017 by which time the  certificate  had  been
    issued and,  not  only  that,  forwarded  to  the  Tribunal.   Since  a
    determination speaks from the date that the decision is promulgated the
    fact  that  the  judge  operated  on  the  basis  that  there  was   no
    certificate, when there was a valid certificate, clearly undermined the
    process that she adopted and greatly affects the  approach  adopted  by
    her which sought to circumvent the requirement to meet the  Rules  when
    in fact there was no  such  need  because  that  certificate  had  been
    provided.

 5. The issues that concerned me was whether the appellant was entitled  to
    rely upon evidence which postdated the decision by the Entry  Clearance
    Officer but predated  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  I am satisfied that my  original  reservations  were  based  on
    established case-law involving entry clearance applications and whether
    it was permissible to examine on appeal material that  was  not  before
    the Entry Clearance Officer.  Reliance could have been placed upon such
    cases as SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  and  AS  (Somalia)  v
    Secretary  of  State  [2009]  UKHL   32   in   which   very   different
    considerations applied because of the way that the legislation was then
    couched.  In such circumstances, and in particular  upon  consideration
    of s.85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as it  then
    was, there was a statutory ban upon a subsequent Tribunal  taking  into
    account material which post-dated the decision under appeal.

 6. That situation now appears to be changed by what are the new provisions
    of s.85 introduced by amendment contained in s.15  of  the  Immigration
    Act 2014.  The right of appeal to the Tribunal is now  permitted  where
    the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a human rights claim.  The
    grounds of appeal must be brought on the ground that  the  decision  is
    unlawful under s. 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.   That  places  a
    requirement necessitating a new look  on  the  old  s.  85.   That  now
    provides at (4)

         On an appeal under section 82(1)  ...  against  the  decision  [the
         Tribunal] may consider...any matter which [it] thinks  relevant  to
         the substance of the decision including...a  matter  arising  after
         the date of the decision.

 7. Accordingly, there does not seem to be any limitation as there formerly
    was on dealing with evidence which postdates  the  decision.   That  is
    probably understandable in the context of an Article 8 claim.   Article
    8  is  always  concerned  about  whether  removal  would   violate   an
    individual's human rights and therefore always speaks not from the date
    of the decision but from the date of  the  hearing.   It  is  therefore
    logical to see that s. 85(4), as it is now drafted,  does  not  contain
    the same limitation on the  admission  of  evidence  that  it  formerly
    contained.

 8. In the course of the hearing  this  morning  I  was  invited  to  grant
    permission to admit the evidence of the certificate that was  submitted
    to the Tribunal on 31 May 2017.  It seems to me that it would have been
    wholly illogical in the knowledge that there was such a certificate and
    that this certificate complied with the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules to refuse to admit it.  No challenge is made to the  authenticity
    of the certificate by the Secretary of State.  In consequence we have a
    situation where the requirements laid down by the  Secretary  of  State
    were met at the  date  of  decision  insofar  as  the  certificate  was
    concerned.

 9. There then follows a consideration of  whether  there  were  any  other
    matters that might properly have been raised.  This itself hinges  upon
    the general refusal grounds  on  the  basis  of  suitability.   At  the
    material  time  these  were  contained  in  paragraph  320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  They provide grounds on which  entry  clearance  or
    leave to enter the United Kingdom is to be refused.  That is set in ss.
    (11) that includes

         ... where the applicant has previously contrived in any significant
         way to frustrate  the  intentions  of  the  Rules  by  breaching  a
         condition attached to his leave or by being an illegal entrant.

10. However, it is not that requirement, alone, that render  the  applicant
    unsuitable for further leave to remain or entry clearance.   There  has
    to be aggravating circumstances.  Those aggravating  circumstances  are
    set  out  in  the   Rule   as   absconding,   not   meeting   temporary
    admission/reporting restrictions or bail conditions, using  an  assumed
    identity  or  multiple  identities,   switching   nationality,   making
    frivolous  applications  or  not  complying  with  the  redocumentation
    process.

11. In the context of this case it was accepted by the  appellant  that  he
    had entered the United Kingdom illegally.  Consequently, that  he  came
    within the initial  requirement  of  paragraph  320(11).   He  did  not
    however breach a condition attached to his leave because, by  its  very
    nature,  no  leave  had  been  granted.   As  far  as  the  aggravating
    circumstances are concerned, however, there  was  no  evidence  of  him
    meeting any of the specified  examples  of  aggravating  circumstances.
    The evidence that was potentially open to the Secretary  of  State  was
    that the appellant entered the United  Kingdom  and  thereafter  worked
    illegally.   The  British  High  Commission,  according  to  a  witness
    statement made by the appellant's wife Miss Bregu, rang  the  appellant
    in connection with the application asking him about how he entered  the
    country and whether he had worked in the UK.  He told them that he  had
    come into the country illegally and that he had been working 'here  and
    there':

         "Cash in hand.  In fact this was at a carwash.  In a year he  would
         do about two months in total.  Because  his  English  was  poor  he
         misunderstood and told them he had been working a few days.  I  was
         the one who was working and supporting us both."

12. The non-aggravating factors, if I can put it in that way, were that  he
    departed voluntarily and did so some two and a half years  before.   As
    such, he was intending to make his application properly.  In  addition,
    he himself is the one who volunteered to the  British  High  Commission
    that he had been working.   He  was  obviously  being  entirely  frank.
    Clearly these matters go into the balance.   It  was  for  this  reason
    that, at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  no  attempt
    was made to rely upon paragraph 320(11).   In  those  circumstances  it
    seems to me that it would be improper for me  to  rely  upon  paragraph
    320(11) even if I were permitted to do so.  But, on a close examination
    of those requirements, it appears that the appellant does not fit  into
    the specified criteria.  Although it is true he is and was  an  illegal
    entrant, he does not  fall  within  the  category  of  a  person  whose
    circumstances are to be treated as  aggravating  circumstances  to  the
    point of considering that a mandatory refusal of  entry  clearance  was
    permissible under the Rules.

13. For these reasons  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  since  the
    appellant is able to rely upon the certificate which the judge at First-
    tier Tribunal level considered was lacking, he is able to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules  bearing  in  mind  the  amended
    provisions of s. 85 of the 2002 Act.  Once  that  is  established  then
    there  is  no  public  interest  in  requiring  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance, he having met the requirements of the  Rules.   Furthermore,
    although I have given consideration to whether this was  a  case  where
    the fact that he entered  illegally  and  worked  unlawfully  might  in
    certain circumstances amount to a reason  for  refusing  the  appellant
    entry clearance under paragraph 320, in the circumstances of this  case
    they fail to do so because they  cannot  be  construed  as  aggravating
    circumstances.   For  these  reasons,  in  re-making  the  decision,  I
    substitute my own decision allowing the appellant's appeal.

DECISION

Having set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  re-make  the
decision allowing the appeal of Mr Pepnika.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
