
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05262/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 7th December 2018   On 17th December 2018


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                               MR. HRISHIKESH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J. Waithe, Counsel, instructed by Okafor and Co,
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Z. Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal the decision of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer who, in a decision promulgated on
         19th October 2018, dismissed his appeal against the respondent's
         decision to refuse to grant him leave to remain based upon his
         family and private life under Article 8.

      2. The appellant is a national of Mauritius, born on 22 April 1992. He
         came to the United Kingdom as a visitor on 30 April 2005. At that
         stage he was 13 years of age. He was then granted various leaves as
         his mother's dependent, she being admitted as a student nurse. She
         was also joined by the appellant's father and younger brother. His
         last leave expired on 30th of April 2009 at which stage he was 17.

      3. He then made a further application on 14 October 2010. This was
         rejected on 23 December 2010. On 26 September 2011 he made an
         Article 8 application. This was refused with no right of appeal on
         31 January 2012. He then made a further application for leave to
         remain on 26 February 2013 which again was refused was the right of
         appeal on 26 April 2013.

      4. He made the present application on 12 May 2017. At that stage he
         was 25 years of age.

      5. That was refused on the 7th February 2018, this time with a right
         of appeal. It was considered under paragraph 276 ADE and did not
         succeed because he did not meet the 20 year requirement as someone
         aged over 25 years. The respondent did not see very significant
         obstacles to his integration back into life in Mauritius. The
         respondent did not see any circumstances which would justify the
         grant of leave outside the rules.

The First tier Tribunal

      6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer was told that the appellant was
         unmarried and continued to live with his parents and younger
         brother. The judge did not find any credibility issues.

      7. The judge referred to taking judicial notice of life in Mauritius,
         stating amongst other things that English and French are widely
         used and that the country has a strong tourist industry. The judge
         referred to his parents being able to downsize if the appellant
         left. The judge stated this was not a situation akin to that in the
         decision of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

      8. At paragraph 38 the judge refers to the rights which can be
         acquired through marriage to a British national and then refers to
         EU rights and Brexit. The judge alludes to the fact the appellant
         was not allowed to work and concluded that since 2011 he had a lot
         of free time to study and develop skills over the Internet. The
         judge said that the appellant could lawfully study at a university
         in Mauritius and work there in his spare time.

The Upper Tribunal

      9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that
         the judge erred in his assessment of family life and in carrying
         out the proportionality exercise under Article 8. The judge had not
         made any clear findings as to whether or not there was family life
         within the meaning of Article 8 between the appellant and his
         parents. It was arguable that the judge had introduced factors not
         before the tribunal, such as the situation in Mauritius.

     10. Mr Waithe pointed out that the appellant had lived all his life
         with his parents and brother and had never lived an independent
         life. He submitted that the judge failed to properly assess this.

     11. Ms Kiss also expressed concern about the decision. The judge did
         not appear to have considered the matter outside the rules.
         Furthermore, she expressed concern at the judge apparently going
         off on tangents in the decision.

Consideration

     12. There is a considerable amount of case law in relation to adult
         relationships and the existence of family life. Mr. Waithe has
         provided me with a copy of the decision of Kugathas v SSHD (2003)
         INLR 170.In that decision the Court of Appeal said that in order to
         establish family life, the normal emotional ties between a mother
         and an adult son would not, without more, be enough it is necessary
         to show family life. The decision envisaged a fact-sensitive
         approach. The subsequent case law is summarised in Ghising (family
         life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC) and again I
         have been provided with a copy.

     13. There was no legal or factual presumption as to the existence or
         absence of family life for the purposes of Article 8 nor is there
         any requirement of exceptionality. It all depended on the facts.
         The love and affection between an adult and his parents or siblings
         would not of itself justify a finding of a family life. A young
         adult living with his parents or siblings would normally have a
         family life to be respected under Article 8. All of the people in
         the family unit must be considered. Notably, in the present
         decision there is no reference to the appellant's brother.

     14. The refusal letter makes limited reference to the appellant's
         family life. In line with this the judge's decision focuses upon
         his private life and the question of his reintegration into life in
         Mauritius. The decision records that his parents have leave until
         2020. However, it is anticipated they will be making an application
         for indefinite leave to remain.

     15. The bulk of the judge's findings at paragraph 28 to 40 are directed
         towards the appellant's private life. In the subsequent section
         headed `Human Rights' the judge continues to focus upon his private
         life. The judge at paragraph 37 simply stated this was not a
         Kugathas situation. There is no in-depth analysis and the
         assessment that is made consists of generalities. Throughout, the
         focus is upon his integration into his home country rather than the
         relationship with his parents and brother.

     16. The judge has introduced points which the parties do not appear to
         have raised and has expressed opinions. For instance, there is a
         reference to the consequences of marrying a British or European
         national. Comments are made about Mauritius with appear to be of
         the judges own making. The judge refers to considering appendix K
         which is a shortage occupation list. However, there is nothing to
         indicate this was advanced by any party. The judge comments that
         the appellant has had a lot of free time with which he could study.
         Into the assessment the judge has introduced the effect of marrying
         a British or European national. Again, this appears to have
         emanated from the judge. Then, at paragraph 46 there is a reference
         to the possibility the appellant could benefit from section 117 B6
         at some future date. I cannot see how this can possibly be
         relevant.

     17. I find the judge has not focused upon the relevant issues. There
         should be an evaluation as to whether family life exists within the
         meaning of Article 8 between the appellant and his parents and
         siblings. If there is a finding of family life there is then a need
         to assess the proportionality of the decision. There is also a need
         to assess the appellant's private life which can encompass his
         family and then an assessment of the proportionality of the
         decision. In this appeal the judge has not focused upon those key
         issues but has digressed into his own considerations and opinions.
         Consequently, the decision materially errs in law and is unsafe.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer materially errs in law and
is set aside. The matter is remitted for a de novo hearing in the First-
tier Tribunal.


Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


Directions.

    1. Relist for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor
       House excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer.


    2. The hearing is expected to last around an hour.


    3. The appellant's representatives are to prepare an up-to-date bundle
       and should consider whether family life in the circumstance exists
       within the meaning of Article 8. They should also provide information
       about his likely prospects in Mauritius.


    4. The respondent should provide a chronology of the appellant's
       immigration history since 30 April 2009 and confirm whether at any
       stage the appellant overstayed. It will be helpful to know why the
       appellant had no right of appeal in respect of some of the earlier
       applications and the cause for any delay


    5. There is no need for an interpreter unless the appellant's
       representatives advise to the contrary.


    6. The hearing should last around an hour.



Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

