
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05110/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 July 2021                       |On 24 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                Zi Feng WENG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie instructed by Latta & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made on 17 January 2018 that he is a person to whom  Section  32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 applies and to deport him.   The  Secretary  of
    State also refused his human rights application.



Procedural History

 2. The decision that the appellant is a person to whom  Section  32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 applies  is  consequent  upon  the  appellant's
    conviction on 19 September 2017 of  being  knowingly  involved  in  the
    production of drugs for which he was  sentenced  to  a  period  of  one
    year's imprisonment.  The reasons given for the decision to remove  him
    are set out in the letter of 15 February 2018.  His appeal against that
    decision was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox  on  17  August
    2018 and, for the reasons set out in his decision of 1  November  2018,
    the appeal was dismissed.  That decision was in turn set aside  by  the
    Upper Tribunal which remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal.   For  the
    reasons set out in her decision of 20  May  2019,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lea, allowed the appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  successfully
    sought permission to appeal against  that  decision,  the  appeal  then
    coming before Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman on 15 August 2019.  For the
    reasons set out in his decision of 22 August 2019 Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Macleman found that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved
    the making of an error of law and remade the appeal, dismissing it.

 3. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the  Inner  House  of
    the Court of Session.  Although his  application  was  refused  by  the
    Upper Tribunal, it was granted on a renewed application to the Court of
    Session.  In the joint minute it was agreed that:

         "3.  The UT erred in law when remaking the deportation decision  at
             [32] as its reasons failed to demonstrate adequate  engagement
             with the psychological evidence  relating  to  the  impact  of
             deportation on the appellant's children.

         4.   The present appeal should be allowed for this reason."

 4. It was also agreed that the decision should be remitted  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal for reconsideration.

The Appellant's Case

 5. The appellant was born on 10 January 1974  and  as  a  citizen  of  the
    People's Republic of China.  He claims to have arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 1999 but did not regularise his status until encountered  by
    Strathclyde Police in September 2009.  After that  he  made  an  asylum
    claim which was refused.  He was later granted discretionary  leave  to
    remain initially until 20 September 2013 but later  extended  until  12
    March 2018.

 6. The appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife
    whom he met in Glasgow in 2013.  They have two sons, J and  W  who  are
    now respectively 15 and 11 years of age.  Both of them are at school.

 7. The appellant's wife is in full-time employment.

 8. The appellant's case has two limbs: first, that he is at risk  of  ill-
    treatment and further punishment for his conviction for being  involved
    with the supply of drugs in Scotland; and, second,  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh either for his wife and children to be expected to  go  to
    live with him in China or, for  them  to  remain  here  and  he  to  be
    separated from them by being deported.

The Respondent's Case

 9. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter of  15  February
    2018 supplemented by a decision of 20 July 2018.

10. In summary, at that stage the Secretary of State, although accepting he
    had two children who were British citizens, and that it would be unduly
    harsh for them to live in China, did not accept that it would be unduly
    harsh for them to remain in the UK.  The Secretary of  State  did  not,
    however, accept that the appellant was in a relationship with his wife,
    although that is no longer her case.  The Secretary of  State  did  not
    consider either that the appellant met the  requirements  of  paragraph
    399A of the Immigration Rules.

11. In addition, the Secretary of State did not accept that  the  appellant
    was at risk of "double jeopardy".  Although it was  accepted  that  the
    Chinese authorities would be aware of the  appellant's  conviction  she
    did not consider following JC (double jeopardy: Article 10 CL) China CG
    [2008] UKAIT 00036 and YF (double jeopardy -  JC  confirmed)  China  CG
    [2011] UKUT 32 or on the basis of Dr Dillon's report of  9  July  2018,
    the appellant would be at risk of  reprosecution,  given  the  lack  of
    international  publicity  for  the  offending,  lack  of  any  specific
    concerns about him raised by the Chinese authorities and there being no
    evidence that Chinese  nationals  were  the  victims  of  his  client's
    actions.  She noted the lack of double  jeopardy  in  prosecutions  and
    that limited weight could be placed on Dr Dillon's evidence.

The Hearing

12. The hearing took place in a hybrid fashion.  Both representatives  were
    present in court but the appellant and his wife  gave  evidence  via  a
    video link with the assistance of a Mandarin interpreter who  was  also
    present by video link.  No difficulties arose  during  the  proceedings
    and it was not suggested at any point that  there  was  any  difficulty
    with the interpreter or in the evidence being transmitted.

13. In addition to the oral evidence, I had before me a consolidated bundle
    running to 767 pages produced by the appellant and the bundle  produced
    by the respondent.

14. I also heard submissions from both representatives which I  have  taken
    into account in reaching my decision.

The Law

15. Section 117C of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides as follows:

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

              (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

              (b)      C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

              (c)      there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

              ...

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

16. The Immigration Rules provide, so far as is relevant, as follows:

         A398. These rules apply where:


             (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
             deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;


             (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made
             against him to be revoked.


         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and


             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because they have
             been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because they have
             been convicted of an offence for which they have been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or


             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because, in the
             view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
             particular disregard for the law,


             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
             other factors where there are very compelling circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


17. Paragraph 399 and 399A provide:

         This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies if -


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and


             (i) the child is a British Citizen; or


             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
             decision;


         and in either case


             (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported; and


             (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
             without the person who is to be deported; or


         ...


18. With respect to Section 117C and paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules
    the key issue here is undue harshness.  The law on this is summarised
    in TD (Albania) [2021] EWCA Civ 619 at [20]ff:


    20.   In KO (Nigeria), Lord Carnwath, with whom the other members of
    the Supreme Court agreed, explained the nature of the test of undue
    harshness:


         "23 On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),
         that is the public interest in the deportation of foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any child faced with the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my view (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the parent's offence,
         other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by the section
         itself by reference to length of sentence..."


    21.   The appeals in HA (Iraq) arose from decisions of the Upper
    Tribunal giving guidance on the application of KO (Nigeria). The
    decision of this court underlined that what is required in all cases is
    an informed evaluative assessment of whether the effect of deportation
    on a child or partner would be unduly harsh in the context of the
    strong public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. The
    leading judgment of Underhill V-P contains these passages:


         "51 ... The underlying question for tribunals is whether the
         harshness which the deportation will cause for the partner and/or
         child is of a sufficiently elevated degree to outweigh that public
         interest in the deportation of foreign criminals."
         "53 ... It is inherent in the nature of an exercise of the kind
         required by section 117C(5) that Parliament intended that tribunals
         should in each case make an informed evaluative assessment of
         whether the effect of the deportation of the parent or partner on
         their child or partner would be "unduly harsh" in the context of
         the strong public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals;
         and further exposition of that phrase will never be of more than
         limited value."
         "56 ... if tribunals treat the essential question as being "is this
         level of harshness out of the ordinary?" they may be tempted to
         find that Exception 2 does not apply simply on the basis that the
         situation fits into some commonly-encountered pattern. That would
         be dangerous. How a child will be affected by a parent's
         deportation will depend on an almost infinitely variable range of
         circumstances and it is not possible to identify a baseline of
         "ordinariness". Simply by way of example, the degree of harshness
         of the impact may be affected by the child's age; by whether the
         parent lives with them (NB that a divorced or separated father may
         still have a genuine and subsisting relationship with a child who
         lives with the mother); by the degree of the child's emotional
         dependence on the parent; by the financial consequences of his
         deportation; by the availability of emotional and financial support
         from a remaining parent and other family members; by the
         practicability of maintaining a relationship with the deported
         parent; and of course by all the individual characteristics of the
         child.


         57 ... Tribunals considering the parent case under Exception 2
         should not err in law if in each case they carefully evaluate the
         likely effect of the parent's deportation on the particular child
         and then decide whether that effect is not merely harsh but unduly
         harsh applying KO (Nigeria) in accordance with the guidance at
         paras 50-53 above."

22.  The decision in HA (Iraq) does no more than explain that what is
required is a case-specific approach in which the decision-maker addresses
the reality of the child's situation and fairly balances the justification
for deportation and its consequences. It warns of the danger of
substituting for the statutory test a generalised comparison between the
child's situation and a baseline of notional ordinariness. It affirms that
this is not what KO (Nigeria), properly understood, requires.

19. I note further that the issue in this case the best interests of the
    children are in issue but the best interests of the children are simply
    a factor to be weighed when assessing proportionality.

20. I turn first to the issue of double jeopardy.

21. In YF (double jeopardy) the Upper Tribunal said this:
    1. The guidance given by the Tribunal in JC (double  jeopardy:  Art  10
    CL) China CG [2008] UKAIT 00036 is confirmed save for the  addition  of
    the words underlined immediately below:


    "The risk of prosecution or reprosecution will be a question of fact in
    individual cases but  is  more  likely  where  (a)  there  has  been  a
    substantial amount of adverse publicity within China about a case;  (b)
    the  proposed  defendant  has  significantly  embarrassed  the  Chinese
    authorities by their actions overseas; (c)  the  offence  is  unusually
    serious.  Generally, snakehead cases do not have the significance  they
    have in the West and are regarded  as  ordinary  (but  serious)  crimes
    requiring no  special  treatment;  (d)  political  factors  (which  may
    include the importance attached by the Chinese authorities to  cracking
    down on drugs offenders) may increase the likelihood of prosecution  or
    reprosecution; and (e) the  Chinese  Government  is  also  particularly
    concerned about corruption of Chinese officialdom."


    2.  Reprosecution/double  punishment  of   a   returnee   through   the
    administrative disciplinary procedure  system  is  extremely  unlikely,
    since for a person to be considered under this system by virtue  of  an
    overseas offence the Chinese authorities must have decided his case was
    not serious enough to justify reprosecuting him  through  the  criminal
    law system.

22. The Tribunal in that case also noted [7] that in JC there had been a
    number of reports from expert witnesses including Dr Dillon who has
    produced a report in this case.

23. The Upper Tribunal found, having summarised Dr Dillon's evidence:
        61. Unlike the Tribunal in  JC  we  have  not  had  the  benefit  of
        evidence from several experts, which would have given us the ability
        to compare their position. However, since in relative terms not that
        much time has passed since JC, we do not think that has  handicapped
        our task. Like the Tribunal in JC we have found the evidence  of  Dr
        Dillon of considerable assistance but have noted that he is  not  an
        expert in the Chinese criminal law and many of his  observations  on
        the issue of double jeopardy are based  on  his  own  general  views
        about the Chinese political system and state policies.  It  is  very
        understandable that he should wish to re-emphasise the point he made
        in JC that lack of evidence of reprosecutions must  not  be  equated
        with conclusive proof that they do not or will not  happen.  At  the
        same time, we have not found persuasive  his  suggestion  that  they
        could be happening secretly, since  there  are  strong  reasons  for
        considering  that  the  Chinese   authorities   attach   significant
        importance to  the  notion  of  deterrence  of  criminality  through
        publicity and are also concerned to show the international community
        that they are tough on narcotic drugs. In addition, whilst we accept
        that much is still not known  about  the  workings  of  the  Chinese
        criminal  justice  system,  efforts  to  ensure  secrecy  have   not
        prevented international observers such as Amnesty International from
        compiling a very significant body of data about such matters  as  to
        the numbers of persons executed and numbers imprisoned.


        62. We think Dr Dillon must be right in suggesting that the lack  of
        any official monitoring by the UK (and seemingly other countries) of
        what happens to returned Chinese offenders should also be a relevant
        consideration. But we cannot agree with him that we can  infer  from
        that that double jeopardy could be visited upon  returned  nationals
        without international observers knowing about it. In  our  judgement
        it is extremely unlikely that offenders forcibly returned  to  China
        would not be in a position to  alert  international  observers,  via
        their friends or family, in the event  that  they  found  themselves
        facing further legal punishment for the  same  offence(s)  from  the
        Chinese authorities on return. It is common  sense  that  when  they
        knew when they were to be flown back they would notify a  friend  or
        family or a legal representative in the UK beforehand and arrange to
        contact them after return. In most cases it is also likely they will
        be able to inform family or friends back in China when they are  due
        to return and to where. This is the age of the mobile phone and  the
        internet and the Chinese people have  these  technologies  in  large
        number. Even though there is evidence that the  Chinese  authorities
        seek from time to time to control such  forms  of  communication  Dr
        Dillon agreed that normally mobile phone communication to  and  from
        China was straightforward.  The  notion  therefore  that  there  are
        likely to be a significant number of  returning  offenders  who  are
        then secretly removed from  circulation  and  subjected  to  serious
        punishment is in our view not tenable. We consider  there  would  be
        reports finding their way to organisations such as AIJ  noting  that
        such and such a returned offender failed to notify  his  contact  as
        arranged or that friends/family awaiting their return after  airport
        processing were unable to trace them.

24. It also found:
        The administrative justice system


        86. It will be apparent from the above that we have not accepted the
        submission of Mr Selway that even if a national of Chinese convicted
        of crimes overseas would not  face  reprosecution/double  punishment
        through the Chinese  criminal  justice  system  he  could  face  its
        equivalent through the Chinese administrative/disciplinary system.


        87. We are bound to say first of  all  that  we  found  Mr  Selway's
        submission on this matter somewhat surprising given that it was  not
        supported by Dr Dillon and indeed  we  know  from  the  evidence  Dr
        Dillon gave to the Tribunal in JC that he (like  the  other  experts
        save for Dr Sheehan) considered that this system was unlikely to  be
        applied in foreign-related  cases.  Certainly  the  evidence  of  Dr
        Dillon in JC was that the   laojiao  system  applies  to  minor  law
        violations and that serious crimes were more likely to  be  punished
        by the laogai system (see JC, paras  112,120,  254,  273(14-16;  see
        also paras 100, 163, 167(d), 175, 262)).


        88. Secondly, we did not find the evidence submitted  by  Mr  Selway
        concerning the Chinese disciplinary procedure system  very  helpful.
        The article by Professor Jianlin contains a number of passages  that
        are difficult to understand and it does  not  make  clear  the  role
        played in  this  procedure  by  the  laojiao  (re-education  through
        labour)  system.  Whereas  this   article   describes   disciplinary
        punishments as  not  extending  to  restriction  or  deprivation  of
        liberty, we know from the COIS for January  2010  at  para  12.19-20
        that Article 9 of the Law  of  Administrative  Penalty  states  that
        "Different types of administrative penalty may be  created  by  law.
        Administrative penalty involving restriction of  freedom  of  person
        shall only be created by law": we do not know whether there  is  any
        such law that covers laojiao, although paras 12.11-17  of  the  same
        COIS would suggest not.  However, taking this article on its face it
        would appear to confirm  that  (except  when  they  are  used  as  a
        complement) disciplinary procedures are normally applied to types of
        illegal conduct that are less serious than those that are subject to
        criminal prosecution and punishment. The  same  article  appears  to
        suggest that insofar as "double jeopardy" principles are applied  in
        China they are less present in the disciplinary procedure system and
        this  system  even  contains  some  provisions  prohibiting   double
        jeopardy.


        89. We accept of course that this parallel system of justice is very
        important in China and may be particularly relevant when considering
        cases in which the risk on return is related to  likely  punishments
        facing a person in China for violations committed in China.  But  in
        the context of reprosecution/double punishment we do not see use  of
        this system as a real risk, since if an overseas offence is not seen
        as serious enough for the  Chinese  authorities  to  pursue  through
        their criminal justice system with a view to double  punishment,  it
        is even less likely they would pursue an  adverse  interest  through
        the administrative/disciplinary procedure system.

25. The CPIN on double  jeopardy  dates  from  March  2018.   In  terms  of
    material that postdates YF  I  note  that  at  [3.2.2]  the  Australian
    Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade had stated that the authorities
    were less likely  to  pursue  those  who  committed  offences  overseas
    carrying a sentence in China of three years or less but it  is  unclear
    whether that would apply to the offence for which  this  appellant  was
    convicted.  I note that  [3.2.3 to 3.2.4] several Chinese and Taiwanese
    nationals who had been tried for cyber crime in Kenya face  prosecution
    on return there.  That said, it has to be borne in mind the  particular
    political sensitivities of those who come  from  Taiwan  and  that  the
    victims were in China, neither of which applies here.  Beyond that  the
    CPIN adds little.

26. In evaluating Dr Dillon's report, I bear in mind  the  observations  of
    the Tribunal in YF.  His  most  recent  report  from  2021  updates  an
    initial report from 9 July 2018.

27. Dr Dillon states that his opinions are as previously expressed  in  the
    reports in JC and YF although modified and updated in the light of  the
    different circumstances  being  changes  to  the  Chinese  legal  penal
    system.  Principally the decision to  abandon  the  Laojiao  "education
    through labour" system of labour camps.  He notes it has been extremely
    difficult for legal practitioners or anyone else in the West to  follow
    up the case of individuals who have been returned to  China  where  the
    evidence given relating to Gal Zhi Sheng relates to a person who had  a
    high profile as a human rights lawyer.  He  does,  however,  note  that
    since the accession to  power  of  Xi  Jinping  in  2012  authoritarian
    tendencies have intensified and resistance to criticism  by  westerners
    has increased.

28. Dr Dillon states, when considering the likelihood of re-prosecution, as
    follows:

         "I consider that the re-prosecution is  most likely in cases  where
         the accused is deemed to pose a particular threat to  social  order
         in China; where the authorities wish to make a public example of an
         individual or  a  group  of  individuals;  or  where  the  case  is
         considered to tarnish the image of China.  This would apply in  the
         case of Zi Feng Weng because of the nature of  his  offence.   Drug
         related crimes are regarded as a  particular  social  evil  by  the
         government of the PRC and are the  subject  of  regular  and  high-
         profile campaigns which are widely reported in the press and  other
         media."

29. Dr Dillon refers again to the deportation of 37 citizens from  the  PRC
    and Taiwan from Kenya as reported in the CPIN noting that this was  not
    an isolated case, the German broadcaster Deutsche  Welle  reporting  29
    Taiwanese citizens arrested for the involvement in fraud deported  from
    Spain to  China,  were  tried  and  sentenced  up  to  fourteen  years'
    imprisonment.  He concludes:

         "In the light of the points made  above  about  the  Chinese  legal
         system, it is impossible to say with  any  certainty  how  Mr  Weng
         would be treated on his return to China.  However, I  am  expecting
         him to be detained until  Ministry  of  Public  Security  officials
         determine his fate.  As the FCO clearly indicated in  their  letter
         cited above, there are no formal procedures for monitoring this."

30. He also says:

         "In my judgment, however, Ze Feng Weng, if deported, is  likely  to
         be detained at the airport on arrival and questioned.  He would not
         be released directly into the general population, being  questioned
         at length [about] his contacts and would be at significant risk  of
         being sent to a labour camp or to a court for  reprosecution.   The
         fact that he has had leave to remain in the United Kingdom and  his
         wife and children are here would have  a  negative  impact  on  his
         treatment, somebody who is demonstrably not loyal to China."

31. In assessing risk to the appellant I bear in mind that the  authorities
    in China will know that the appellant has been convicted of an offence.
    They have already been informed of that. I accept that they  will  not,
    unless they question him  further,  be  aware  of  the  length  of  the
    sentence or any other details of the offending.

32. But I do not accept that the appellant is nonetheless at risk of double
    jeopardy given that this is not an offence which has the  international
    characteristics of the examples given above.  There is no  evidence  of
    any Chinese nationals being  involved  other  than  the  appellant  nor
    evidence of  widespread  publicity  of  his  offending  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

33. I accept that the appellant's offending does involve drugs which has  a
    particular resonance in China as noted by Dr Dillon but  even  allowing
    for the lack of transparency in China, I am not satisfied on the  basis
    of the factors set out in YF that  the  appellant  is  at  risk.   This
    appellant has no particular high profile, nor does there appear  to  be
    any other reason for making an example of  him.   Dr  Dillon  gives  no
    proper reasoning or sources for his conclusion that this  appellant  is
    at risk because of the nature of his offence.  There appears to  be  no
    good reason why they would want to make a public example of him,  given
    the low level of his offending and the lack of evidence of the  Chinese
    authorities taking a similar approach with others deported  in  similar
    circumstances. Accordingly, I am not satisfied the appellant is at risk
    of double jeopardy.

34. I do, however, accept that he would be at risk  of  being  held  for  a
    short period on return and questioned but there is  insufficient  basis
    to show that that would  result  in  his  ill-treatment  of  sufficient
    severity  to  engage  Article  3  of  the  Human   Rights   Convention.
    Accordingly I am not persuaded by  Mr  Caskie's  submissions  that  the
    appellant faces re-prosecution on return to China.

35. I accept from the evidence before me, which is unchallenged,  that  the
    appellant has two major health problems: he has a heart  condition  and
    he has type 1 diabetes.  I accept that he is under hospital supervision
    in respect of these and that he has regular check-ups.  He is  also  on
    medication, but as he accepted in oral evidence, if he  had  money,  he
    would be able to afford the necessary drugs.

36. Turning to the position of the children, I accept that he has formed  a
    large part of their life. The family had been a single unit, apart from
    when the appellant was in jail, and I  accept  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant and his wife have cohabited since before  the  children  were
    born.

37. I accept also from  the  evidence  in  the  witness  statements,  again
    unchallenged, that the family are a close unit and that  the  appellant
    has taken, except whilst in jail, a very active part  in  their  lives.
    He has taken them to extracurricular activities  and,  when  they  were
    younger, walked them to school.  I accept also now that  the  appellant
    does or did most of the housework as he was not employed and  I  accept
    also that the children are aware that he may be removed to China.

38. I have no doubt that the appellant does fear being  arrested,  detained
    and possibly imprisoned again on return to China but, for  the  reasons
    given above, I do not find that that is objectively justified.  That is
    not to say that it does not affect him and it is not a worry  for  him,
    his wife and his children.

39. It is also the consistent evidence of the appellant and his  wife  that
    they have become more depressed and anxious over the last  year  during
    lockdown and that this has impacted on them and their family.  That  is
    understandable.

40. I accept also that the appellant has a particularly close  relationship
    with his sons who are now teenagers and that he  is  to  a  significant
    extent the peacemaker in the family.

41. Beyond the evidence of the appellant and  his  wife,  as  well  as  the
    letters of support from the children,  I  also  have  before  me  three
    reports from Dr Ul-Hassan, a clinical psychologist who has  significant
    experience with adolescent difficulties.  I am satisfied  that  she  is
    entitled to be treated as an expert and that her evidence is  something
    on which I can rely.

42. Dr Ul-Hassan assessed the family in July 2008 and April 2019 as well as
    in February 2021.  It is of note that Dr Ul-Hassan has used a number of
    specific  tests  on  each  occasion  including  the   Beck   Depression
    Inventory, Beck Anxiety Inventory as well as the Beck Youth Inventories
    with children, resiliency scales on each  occasion.   The  reports  are
    detailed, explain the results of the tests and their relevancy and  the
    conclusions reached are dependent on these.

43. There is no challenge by the respondent to these reports, or materially
    to Dr Ul-Hassan's expertise.  In dealing with the first report from  29
    June 2018 I note [3.5] that  the  appellant  has  been  the  main  care
    provider at home prior to his imprisonment, that the  appellant's  wife
    was in the category of severe depression  [4.10]  and  as  regards  the
    children, J  had  reduced  resilience  and  was  prone  to  being  more
    vulnerable with regard to his mental health  [5.12]  and  scored  below
    average in the range for recovery suggesting difficulties  in  bouncing
    back from some situations or events which caused him emotional distress
     [5.11].

44. In respect of W it is observed that when the  tests  were  administered
    [6.8] he scored highest on withdrawal and wishful thinking indicating a
    lack of  positive  coping  and  that  thus  he  may  be  vulnerable  to
    developing mental health difficulties  if  faced  with  difficult  life
    events.  It is observed also [6.21]  that  in  terms  of  psychological
    importance of family members that he sees his  father  as  occupying  a
    central important position in his life.

45. Dr Ul-Hassan noted also [7.1] that the children  interacted  very  well
    with their father.

46. Asked to give her clinical opinion on the psychological impact  on  the
    children if the appellant were forced to be  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom and they are separated from him, she said:

         "The direct and indirect assessment methods I have used  with  each
         member of the family suggests  that  Mr  Weng  has  a  genuine  and
         meaningful relationship with both of his children.  There seems  to
         be clear evidence of secure attachment relations  between  him  and
         his children.  Although his absence, while he was  in  prison,  was
         challenging for his sons and his  wife,  it  seems  as  though  the
         security of their relationships were able to be maintained  due  to
         regular face to face contact they had during this time.

         ...

         My  direct  assessment  with  J  suggests  that  in  terms  of  the
         psychological importance of  the  different  relationships  in  his
         life, it is clear that he highly values his father and sees him  as
         being key in his upbringing and care.   Reports  suggest  that  his
         emotional wellbeing  deteriorated  when  Mr  Weng  was  in  prison,
         however since his release he has been more settled  in  his  moods.
         He is currently doing well in  all  areas  of  the  curriculum  and
         school, he says he wants to take advantage of a  number  of  social
         leisure activities afforded to him.  It is important to  note  that
         J's various responses and the  psychometric  measures  administered
         suggest that he is vulnerable  to  experience  clinical/significant
         anxiety.  Furthermore, results suggest that he  is  also  prone  to
         reduced resilience. Increased anxiety and reduced  resilience  will
         make J much more vulnerable to developing problems with his  mental
         health particularly if he is faced with significant life stressors.
          His father being removed  from  the  UK  is  a  clear  example  of
         significant life stressor."

         W is a young boy  who  is  currently  doing  well  in  school  both
         academically and socially.  Reports suggest he had  also  struggled
         with his mood and with anxiety when Mr Weng was in prison.   He  is
         also noted to frequently ask for reassurance that he will stay with
         the family.  Responses on the psychometric measures suggests that W
         is also currently experiencing clinical and significant anxiety and
         this is clearly reflected in his  reassure  seeking.   Furthermore,
         responses on the kid questionnaire suggest that he does not possess
         a particular well-developed coping strategy.   This,  coupled  with
         his  tendency  towards  anxiety  suggests  he  is  also  prone   to
         developing problems with his mental health particularly  if  he  is
         forced to undergo significant and  traumatic  separation  from  his
         father.  The various assessment tools which explored his  sense  of
         relationship suggests  that  he  sees  his  father  as  being  very
         important in terms of both his practical and emotional needs.  I do
         not believe that the  children's  secure  attachment  relationships
         with Mr Weng would  always  be  maintained  if  he  is  permanently
         removed from the family and sent back to  China.   I  also  do  not
         believe that any modern means of communication such as telephone or
         Skype would be anywhere near adequate in maintaining relationships.

47.  It is of note also that the report indicates that the appellant's wife
    experienced  anxiety  and  depression  whilst  he  was  in  prison  and
    responses on the psychometric measures completed confirm  that  she  is
    prone to experiencing clinical and significant levels  of  anxiety  and
    depression.  She states:

         "In  my  clinical  opinion,  Ms  Li  is  at  considerable  risk  of
         experiencing a significant deterioration to her  mental  state  and
         wellbeing if her husband is to be removed permanently from the  UK.
         This would place a great strain on her  and  I  am  very  concerned
         about her ability to cope with such extreme levels of stress.  Lone
         parenting can place a significant emotional burden on an individual
         and is indeed more likely to be the case if there was  a  permanent
         separation between Mr Weng and the rest of his family.

         Reduced resilience and coping in Ms Li will undoubtedly  impact  on
         her ability to parent her children effectively.  This is then  very
         likely to have a direct impact on the mental health  and  wellbeing
         of her children. ... Compounding this for Ms Li is  the  fact  that
         aside from  her  husband  she  has  few  other  close  supports  in
         Glasgow."

48. With regard to the second  report,  it  is  observed  [3.10]  that  the
    appellant has seen an increase in his depression symptoms and also with
    anxiety [3.14].  At [4.11] Dr  Ul-Hassan  summarised  J's  position  as
    being "in summary, [J]'s resource index score of 20 in the  low  range,
    while his vulnerability index score of 69 is in the high range."   This
    suggests there are clear areas of vulnerability when it  comes  to  his
    resilience and he is a young boy who may be  vulnerable  to  developing
    problems with his psychological health and wellbeing particularly  when
    faced with any stressful life events.  It is perhaps unsurprising  that
    [4.21] Dr Ul-Hassan observes in terms of the  psychological  importance
    of family members for Junjie this very much  begins  with  his  father,
    mother and young brother.

49. With respect to the younger child, W, it is observed at [5.6] the  same
    problems exist as previously.

50. At [8.10] Dr Ul-Hassan opines she did not believe that the  appellant's
    secure attachment relationship to the appellant would be maintained  if
    he is removed from the  family  and  sent  back  to  China.   She  also
    observed [8.12] that the appellant's wife was at considerable  risk  of
    experiencing significant deterioration in her mental health, making  it
    difficult for her to parent the children.

51. In the most recent report, both the appellant and his wife  were  noted
    to have increased depression symptoms [3.10] to [3.11] and as regards W
    Dr Ul-Hassan noted [4.8] that he continues to score  below  average  in
    adaptability  suggesting  he  struggled  to  be  adaptable.   He  does,
    however, appear to have improved in terms of vulnerability and activity
    "this may be  because  he  perceives  himself  to  have  a   close  and
    supportive relationships with the main people in his life who were able
    to help him when he experiences negative emotions."

52. With regard to W, the reports from the  test  are  "highly  consistent"
    with the previous results [5.4] and again [5.8] that he  has  continued
    weakness in area of resilience.  He has also observed  [5.20]  that  he
    sees his father as occupying a central important position in his  life.
    It is observed also [8.7] that both boys have vulnerabilities in coping
    with unwanted changes in their lives and [8.12] severe concerns  remain
    but the appellant's wife's ability  to  cope  with  extreme  levels  of
    stress as would occur if the appellant is deported.  Again, it is  said
    that this is likely to impact on her ability  to  parent  the  children
    leading to an adverse impact.

53. Drawing  these  observations  together,  in  assessing  the  effect  of
    deportation on the children I have no doubt that it is  in  their  best
    interests for them to remain part of the same  family  unit  with  both
    parents.  They have always formed that part of that unit which I accept
    is a close unit and it is important to  note,  they  do  not  have  any
    extended family in the United Kingdom although I  do  accept  that  the
    older boy is beginning to develop relationships outside  the  immediate
    family and has strong relationships at school and with his peer  group.
    I accept that the family were separated for  a  relatively  short  time
    whilst the appellant was imprisoned and I accept that  there  would  be
    significant and serious impacts on the children were their father to be
    deported.  I consider that it is reasonable  to  infer  also  if  their
    mother's ability to parent them was also diminished as  a  result,  for
    which there is significant  psychological  evidence,  that  this  would
    exacerbate the situation.

54. It would be difficult for the mother to maintain the household as it is
    at present although there  would  be  limited  financial  impact.   The
    children are  now  of  an  age  when  their  needs  for  childcare  are
    decreasing but equally that is supplied to a significant extent by  the
    appellant.

55. I am satisfied that the children live as part of  a  close-knit  family
    group encompassing them and their  parents.   It  is  not  possible  or
    correct to treat them in isolation from their mother as the effects  of
    deportation on her would impact on her ability  to  parent.   I  accept
    also, as a result of the appellant being their main carer in  terms  of
    time spent with them, that they have a very close  bond  with  him  and
    that the effect of his removal  would  have  a  serious  and  traumatic
    effect.  Whilst it is clear that  they  understand  that  he  would  be
    removed for them to maintain any meaningful  contact.   I  accept  that
    there would be emotional support from the mother but, as  noted  above,
    she is likely to be affected also by the removal of the appellant.  The
    removal is in the case likely to be at least very long-lasting and  not
    of finite duration.  That is different from the position when he was in
    imprisonment when there was a clear end date and it is notable that  in
    her oral evidence the appellant's wife drew attention to that  and  she
    was able to count down the days  until  they  would  be  back  together
    again.

56. It is of particular note in this case that the children have particular
    needs in that they  are  vulnerable  to  psychological  harm  from  the
    removal of a parent.  They  do  not  have  the  resilience  that  might
    otherwise be expected.  His scores are consistent and are below average
    and I accept, on the particular facts of this case  of  the  impact  on
    their children given their age and stage in their education  that  they
    have reached and significant dependence on their father  as  a  primary
    carer would be unduly harsh.  I consider  also  on  the  basis  of  the
    reports of Dr Ul-Hassan that this is likely to impact significantly  on
    their ability to develop and mature as adults.

57. I bear in mind also the observations made in the  refusal  letters,  to
    which Mr Diwnycz said he had little to add. I bear in  mind  also  that
    the threshold  to  establish  undue  harshness  is  high,  and  is  the
    exception.

58. Taking all of these factors into account cumulatively, while no  single
    one of them is determinative, I find that the impact of deportation  on
    these children, given their vulnerabilities, and the  impact  on  their
    mother's ability to parent them, given also the very  close  nature  of
    the relationship with the father, would on the particular facts of this
    case, be unduly harsh for them to be separated from him.   Accordingly,
    I am satisfied that Exception 2 is made out.

59. Having found that Exception 2 is made out it is unnecessary for  me  to
    consider whether Exception 1 is made out.

60. Accordingly, for these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant meets
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and Exceptions 2 as  set  out
    in Section 117 of the 2002 Act.  Accordingly, I  am  satisfied  on  the
    particular   facts   of   this   case   that   deportation   would   be
    disproportionate and I therefore allow his appeal.

61. The appellant should, however, be under no  illusions  that  should  he
    offend again there is a real likelihood of him being deported.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I set it aside.  I remake the decision by  allowing  the  appeal  on
human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 3 August 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
