
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu051352016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th June 2017                              |On 23rd June 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                    E L D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a judgment of Judge S J Clarke of the First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
    on 11th November 2016 following a hearing at  Taylor  House.   On  that
    occasion the Appellant was represented by Counsel and the Secretary  of
    State  by  a  Presenting  Officer.   This  morning,  whist  we  have  a
    Presenting Officer in the form or Mr Clarke we have no appearance by or
    on behalf of the Appellant despite  notices  being  sent  both  to  the
    Appellant at the address held on file and to his solicitors.

 2. The Appellant has quite a history in the UK, there is some  dispute  as
    to the time when he first arrived because at some point he had  claimed
    to have been born here but it seems from an earlier application that he
    probably arrived in about 2001.  Then, in 2002 he was arrested  and  he
    served three years for supplying class A drugs.  That conviction was in
    2003.  Ten  years  later,  in  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  started
    deportation proceedings and made a Decision to deport  him,  which  the
    Appellant  did  not  appeal.   However,  the  Appellant  then  made  an
    application, the refusal of which was the subject of the appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.   By
    this time the Appellant had two children from  a  relationship  with  a
    [P], born in August 2013 and January 2015.   The  first  child  was,  I
    notice, born prior to the  deportation  proceedings  starting,  but  of
    course after the commission of the offence and the  second  child  born
    after that.  He relied on his relationship with [P] and the children in
    his appeal.  [P] has a diagnosis of schizophrenia and has in  the  past
    been hospitalised and during that time her children were cared  for  by
    members of her family, notably not the Appellant.  She is  now  in  the
    community  with  her   illness   stabilised   with   depot   medication
    administered on a monthly basis by a community psychiatric nurse.

 3. The judge found on the basis of the  evidence  before  him,  which  was
    contradictory between the Appellant and [P], that the Appellant did not
    live with her and his regular visits to her property were  in  relation
    to assisting with the children rather than  a  relationship  with  her.
    The judge noted the amount of support she had elsewhere in the UK  from
    her own family and also that she had an adult son also living with her.
     He noted that her mental state was stable on depot medication, he took
    into account the conviction for what is a very serious offence and also
    the fact that since then he had had two subsequent cautions,  one  drug
    related in 2008 and one for using  threatening,  abusive  or  insulting
    words and behaviour in 2012.   Additionally,  the  Appellant  has  been
    living in the UK illegally for many years and cannot be said  therefore
    to be a law abiding citizen. The judge dismissed the appeal.

 4. The Appellant's representatives sought  permission  to  appeal  arguing
    that it was an error of  law  for  the  judge  to  find  no  subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and [P] when that had not  been  put
    in issue by the Secretary of State. Then the grounds  took  issue  with
    the various findings about the  ability  of  other  family  members  to
    provide support  and  the  correctness  of  the  finding  that  it  was
    proportionate to remove the Appellant.  The first ground,  which  seems
    to me to have had the most strength is simply  not  borne  out  by  the
    papers.  It is not true to say that the relationship  was  not  put  in
    issue by the Secretary of  State  because  it  quite  clearly  is.   At
    paragraph 29 of the Letter of Refusal, the Secretary  of  State  says:-
    "it is not accepted that you have a genuine and subsisting relationship
    with [P].  You do not cohabit with [P] and there is no evidence  within
    the representations dated July 2015 and December 2015  to  substantiate
    that you are presently in a genuine and subsisting relationship."

 5. Having thereby dealt with the most significant ground I move on to  the
    others and these  amount,  in  reality,  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings by the judge, all of which are reasoned and open to him on the
    evidence.  The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 23rd June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 23rd June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin









