
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Hu/05426/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 September 2020                          |                              |
|                                              |On 21 September 2020          |
|At a remote hearing via Skype                 |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                BABATUNDE [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:      None
For the respondent:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

       1. The appellant has appealed against a decision  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal ('FTT') promulgated on 5  November  2019  dismissing  his
          appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Background

       2. The appellant, a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  relied  upon  his  family
          relationships with A, a British citizen and her son  D.   The  FTT
          found that the relationship between the appellant and D  was  "not
          particular strong", he "acted more  as  a  babysitter  than  as  a
          father" and he had only been cohabiting with A  since  March  2019
          (around seven months at that time).  The FTT concluded that  there
          was family life  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  but  did  not
          consider that the appellant's removal would be a  disproportionate
          breach of Article 8.


       3. FTT Judge JM Holmes granted permission to  appeal  in  a  decision
          dated 27 April 2020.  He observed that  although  the  grounds  of
          appeal disagreed with the FTT's findings it was arguable that  the
          FTT failed to adequately engage s. 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002.

Hearing

       4. The appellant and his solicitors, CW  Solicitors  did  not  attend
          the hearing before me and provided no explanation for this.  I  am
          satisfied that the notice of hearing was validly served  upon  the
          appellant's  solicitors  and  I  could  fairly  proceed  with  the
          hearing in the absence of the appellant or his representatives.


       5. Mr Tan relied upon a rule 24 notice upholding the FTT's  decision.
           I reserved my decision, which I now give with reasons.

Discussion

       6. I entirely agree with Judge Holmes  observations  in  relation  to
          the written grounds of appeal:


                 "They are excessively lengthy, and appear  to  be  no  more
                 than an attempt to reargue the appeal,  amid  a  series  of
                 disagreements with  the  Judge's  findings.   They  make  a
                 variety of assertions about what the  evidence  before  the
                 judge  is  said  to  have  been,  without  identifying  the
                 sources."


       7. The grounds of appeal do no more than reargue the  appeal  and  do
          not identify any material error of law.   The  FTT's  decision  is
          not clearly structured but when the decision is read  as  a  whole
          the findings of fact were entirely open to it.  Having made  those
          findings the appellant's appeal was bound to fail for the  reasons
          outlined in the respondent's rule 24 notice.


       8. Although the FTT made findings of fact regarding  the  appellant's
          relationship with  D  (summarised  above),  it  did  not  make  an
          explicit finding as to whether the appellant  had  a  genuine  and
          subsisting  parental  relationship  with   D,   as   required   by
          paragraphs R-LTRPT 1.1 and EX.1 of the Immigration  Rules  and  s.
          117B(6) of the NIAA 2002.  However, when the decision is  read  as
          a whole I am satisfied that the findings of  fact  are  sufficient
          to indicate that the FTT did not regard the relationship to  be  a
          genuine and subsisting parental one as at the date of hearing.   I
          entirely accept that a person may  have  a  parental  relationship
          that is genuine and subsisting  albeit  not  particularly  strong.
          However, the FTT clearly  regarded  the  relationship  not  to  be
          parental at all, but a short-lived one more akin  to  babysitting.
          I note that the author of the grounds  of  appeal  understood  the
          FTT to have effectively concluded that there was  no  genuine  and
          subsisting parental relationship.  The grounds rather focus  their
          attention on disagreeing with that conclusion.

       9. Whether a person is in a parental relationship with a child  "will
          depend on an assessment by the relevant court or tribunal  of  the
          facts of the particular case before it. The exercise is  a  highly
          fact-sensitive one"- see [98] of AB (Jamaica) v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA
          Civ 661.  The  FTT  has  undertaken  the  relevant  fact-sensitive
          exercise.  This could have been fuller but  in  the  circumstances
          of this case it was adequate.

Decision

      10. The decision of the FTT does not contain an error of  law  and  is
          not set aside.





Signed: UTJ Melanie Plimmer                        Dated: 17 September 2020
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
