
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05505/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 December 2018                            |On 11 December 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:     Ms Faryl, Counsel


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.



Introduction

       1. The respondent ('the SSHD') has appealed against the  decision  of
          the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') allowing MA's  Article  8  appeal,
          the FTT having found that she  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
          marriage with her British citizen spouse ('the sponsor').


       2. I have anonymised  MA's  name  because  this  decision  refers  to
          medical and sensitive evidence relevant to the sponsor.

Background

       3. MA is a citizen of  Pakistan.   She  married  the  sponsor  on  21
          October 2012.  They claim that they  last  met  when  the  sponsor
          visited MA in Pakistan on 29 June 2014.


       4. The sponsor's GP, Dr Morijawala, has confirmed in a  letter  dated
          15 August 2017 that he has  epilepsy.   This  is  supported  by  a
          letter reviewing the sponsor's  condition  dated  17  March  2014,
          prepared by Dr Gosal, a consultant neurologist.

       5. MA's application for entry clearance to join the  sponsor  in  the
          UK was refused in a decision dated 19 January 2016.  The SSHD  did
          not accept that the parties  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
          relationship.  This decision was appealed to  the  FTT.   The  FTT
          was satisfied that the parties were in a  genuine  and  subsisting
          relationship and allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

       6. The SSHD appealed, relying upon two grounds of appeal: (i)  having
          found that the sponsor's failure to give evidence at the  hearing,
          weighed heavily against him, the FTT  failed  to  take  this  into
          account when concluding that  the  relationship  was  genuine  and
          subsisting, and  (ii)  the  FTT  erred  in  law  in  relying  upon
          evidence provided  by  the  sponsor's  sister  ('Ms  H')  "on  his
          behalf".


       7. FTT Judge JM Holmes granted permission to  appeal  in  a  detailed
          decision dated 5 April 2018.

       8. A hearing before the Upper Tribunal ('UT') on 31 August  2018  was
          adjourned due to the illness of MA's Counsel.  At that  hearing  I
          gave directions to MA  to  file  and  serve  a  skeleton  argument
          addressing the basis upon which it is contended that the  FTT  was
          entitled to accept the credibility  of  Ms  H's  evidence  in  the
          light of its finding that the evidence could have  been  given  by
          the sponsor.  MA  filed  and  served  a  skeleton  argument  on  2
          October 2018 and the SSHD filed and served  a  position  statement
          in response on 28 November 2018.



FTT decision

       9. The sponsor attended the FTT hearing but did  not  give  evidence.
          It is recorded that Ms H gave "evidence on his  behalf"  at  [18].
          The FTT did not accept that Ms H held power of  attorney  for  the
          sponsor.  The FTT was also concerned  that  the  medical  evidence
          did not indicate why the sponsor was unable to  give  evidence  at
          the hearing.  As the FTT put it at [19],  the  evidence  available
          "merely confirms what medical conditions  [the  sponsor]  has  and
          does not indicate what functional limitations arise out  of  those
          medical conditions".  The FTT did not accept  Ms  H's  explanation
          that the sponsor provided unreliable evidence attributable to  the
          sponsor's medical conditions.  The FTT was clearly  not  satisfied
          that the sponsor lacked  the  capacity  to  answer  questions  and
          attached "significant weight to his failure to  give  evidence  in
          this appeal" at [19].


      10. The FTT considered that there was sufficient  additional  evidence
          to support the claim that the parties' marriage  was  genuine  and
          subsisting for effectively two reasons, as summarised at  [20]  to
          [22].  First, the  FTT  accepted  that  the  sponsor  visited  the
          appellant  in  June  2014.   Secondly,  there  was   evidence   of
          considerable number of phone calls between MA and the sponsor  for
          the period September 2015 to August 2017.

Hearing

      11. At the beginning of the hearing I made it clear  that  I  did  not
          find the  unsigned  and  undated  skeleton  argument  helpful.   I
          therefore asked Ms Faryl to address me first and  to  address  the
          issue I summarise at [8] above.


      12. Ms Faryl invited me to find that the FTT was entitled to treat  Ms
          H as having given evidence  on  the  sponsor's  behalf  given  his
          history of being upset the last time he gave evidence  before  the
          Tribunal and its clear finding that the sponsor  is  a  vulnerable
          witness.  Ms Faryl was  unable  to  take  me  to  any  such  clear
          finding in the decision, and acknowledged it  is  merely  implicit
          from the evidence that he is unable to travel on his own  and  his
          sister acts  on  his  behalf  for  benefits  purposes.   Ms  Faryl
          submitted that in any  event,  the  evidence  in  support  of  the
          finding that the parties are in a genuine and subsisting  marriage
          did not emanate solely from the sister.  When I pointed  out  that
          it was Ms H who gave evidence that the sponsor met  with  MA  when
          he travelled to Pakistan in 2014 and it was  Ms  H  who  described
          the  phone   conversations   between   the   parties,   Ms   Faryl
          acknowledged that the only significant independent  evidence  were
          the photographs of the wedding.


      13. After hearing from Ms Faryl, I did not need to hear from Mr  Bates
          (having already considered  the  SSHD's  position  statement)  and
          announced that the FTT's decision contains an error  of  law,  for
          reasons I set out in this decision.

Error of law discussion

      14. I am satisfied that the FTT failed to  adequately  reason  why  it
          was prepared to  accept  that  the  parties  have  a  genuine  and
          subsisting relationship on the evidence available to it.


      15. The FTT appears to have accepted that Ms H  was  able  to  provide
          evidence on the sponsor's behalf.  This is to be derived from  the
          FTT's reasons for its  ultimate  conclusion.   These  reasons  are
          twofold and the evidence to support them came directly from Ms  H.
           Ms H gave evidence that the appellant met MA  when  he  travelled
          to Pakistan in 2014, but lost the phone with the  relevant  photos
          -  see  her  statement  dated  18  August  2017  at  [7]  to  [8].
          Similarly, the evidence that the parties  were  in  regular  phone
          contact  also  came  directly  from  Ms  H  explaining  what   the
          telephone logs demonstrated - see her statement at [9]  and  [16].



      16. The FTT has offered no  reasons  for  accepting  evidence  on  the
          sponsor's behalf in this manner.  The FTT did not accept  that  Ms
          H was the sponsor's attorney at - see [18] and [19].  The FTT  was
          well aware that the sponsor has a  number  of  medical  conditions
          including epilepsy and Ms H had authority to  act  for  him  in  a
          limited capacity regarding his benefits  but  expressly  noted  at
          [19] an absence of medical evidence that the sponsor is unable  to
          answer questions.  The FTT noted that the  sponsor  did  not  "put
          forward medical evidence" that he is a  vulnerable  witness.   The
          FTT  squarely  rejected  the  explanation  that  the  sponsor  was
          incapable of giving evidence,  yet  the  FTT  went  on  to  accept
          evidence provided by  another,  which  if  he  was  able  to  give
          evidence, the sponsor was far better placed  to  provide.   In  my
          judgment  the  FTT  irrationally  accepted  evidence  from  Ms  H,
          without addressing an obvious issue: if  as  the  FTT  found,  the
          sponsor did not lack capacity to give evidence and was capable  of
          answering questions, then he was in  a  position  to  provide  the
          very evidence put forward on his behalf.   The  FTT  has  entirely
          failed to explain why it was prepared to  treat  Ms  H's  evidence
          regarding the sponsor's actions as credible,  particular  when  it
          did not accept the reason put forward for the sponsor  not  giving
          evidence himself.

      17. The skeleton argument is a  vague  and  unhelpful  document.  This
          appears to submit  that  the  sponsor's  learning  disability  and
          experience of being upset when he previously  gave  evidence,  was
          such that it was "thought best for evidence to  be  given  by  the
          sister".  This  completely  fails  to  engage  with  the  apparent
          inconsistency in the  FTT  attaching  significant  weight  to  the
          sponsor's failure to give evidence, yet also apparently  attaching
          significant  weight  to  evidence  regarding  the  sponsor's   own
          actions, as provided by Ms H.

      18. The skeleton argument  attaches  evidence  that  was  clearly  not
          available to the FTT: a letter dated 21 January 2018 from  Dr  Al-
          Memar,  a  locum  Consultant  Neurologist  and  a  2018  power  of
          attorney clearly post-date the 2017 FTT  hearing.   In  any  event
          the 21 January 2018 letter merely confirms that  the  sponsor  has
          epilepsy and is having up to 8 attacks  per  month.   It  is  also
          stated that "he has some  learning  difficulties".   This  is  not
          particularised and the basis for this assertion is  unknown.   The
          letter dated  5  January  2009  indicates  that  the  sponsor  was
          suffering with epileptic fits at the time.  As the FTT  noted,  it
          had medical evidence describing the sponsor  as  having  epilepsy.
          Ms Faryl  did  not  refer  to  these  documents  when  making  her
          submissions.   Any  suggestion  that  Ms  H,  as   the   sponsor's
          "attorney" gave evidence  "on  his  behalf"  completely  fails  to
          acknowledge that the FTT did not accept her as his attorney.

      19. For the reasons set out above, the SSHD has made out  his  grounds
          of appeal and it follows that the FTT decision must be  set  aside
          and re-made de  novo.   The  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required are such that the matter shall  be  remitted  de
          novo to the FTT.

Final points

      20. There are many concerning aspects to this case.   MA's  solicitors
          have failed to clarify the nature  and  extent  of  the  sponsor's
          learning disability.  This must be corrected forthwith.  An  early
          identification of issues relevant to vulnerability  is  important.
          The source of the solicitors' instructions  is  also  unclear:  do
          they emanate from the MA, the sponsor or his sister?   It  is  for
          these reasons, inter alia, that it would  be  helpful  to  have  a
          case-management hearing before the FTT.

Decision

   1) The FTT decision contains an error of law and is set aside.


   2) I remit the decision to the FTT to be decided by a  judge  other  than
      Judge Siddiqi.





Signed:                                            Dated: 4 December 2018
Ms Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
