
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU054282015
     HU054902015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 July 2017                          |On 11 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     FK
                                     JN
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr. T. D. H. Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against a  decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge B. A. Morris, promulgated on 27 March 2017, in which she
     dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decisions to
     refuse  entry  clearance  for  settlement  under  the  family   reunion
     provisions.
  2. I make an anonymity direction continuing that made  in  the  First-tier
     Tribunal.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


     "It is arguable that  the  Judge's  decision  discloses  a  failure  to
     appreciate that  there  was  before  the  Tribunal  evidence  from  the
     Appellants' maternal grandmother explaining their circumstances at  the
     date of the decision.  Arguably that rendered the hearing of the appeal
     unfair.


     In any event it is arguable that the Judge's approach to the concept of
     "family unit" was flawed.  Arguably there was a  failure  to  have  due
     regard to the Ministerial statement of 17 March 1995, and the  guidance
     to be found in the Court of Appeal decision in MS (Somalia) [2010] EWCA
     Civ 1236 and BM so that  there  was  a  failure  to  take  a  purposive
     approach to the question of whether  children  remain  members  of  the
     "family unit" of  both  parents  following  their  separation,  in  the
     particular circumstances of this mother."


  4. The Sponsor attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
     representatives following which I stated that I found that the decision
     involved the making of a material error of law.   I  set  the  decision
     aside and retained the appeal to be remade in the United  Kingdom.   My
     full reasons are set out below.


Error of law


  5. The judge sets out in paragraphs 14 and 15 her findings as to what is a
     "family unit" following the decision in BM and AL (352D(iv); meaning of
     "family unit") Colombia [2007] UKAIT 00055.  In paragraph 14 she  sets
     out the chronology.  She states that the Sponsor left the Appellants in
     2007, and sets out where the Appellants  lived  after  that  time.   In
     paragraph 15 she states as follows:


     "By reason of all the matters set out above, I find that the Appellants
     have not shown, on the balance of probabilities, that they were part of
     the Sponsor's family unit at the time she left Uganda on 10 March 2010.
      By that date they had not seen or had contact  with  the  Sponsor  for
     some three years and  during  that  time  they  had  lived  with  their
     paternal grandparents, either with or without their father.   They  had
     never lived with the Appellant and her friend in Lungujja or in Busega,
     nor had they ever spent any time with the Sponsor  and  her  friend  at
     those addresses.  In oral evidence the Sponsor told me  that  in  2009,
     when she knew that her husband was not caring  for  the  children,  she
     made no efforts to get the  children  to  live  with  her  because  the
     Appellants were safe and in school and life was going well.  I find the
     facts show that each Appellant was part  of  the  family  unit  of  the
     parental grandparents when the  Sponsor  left  Uganda  in  March  2010.
     Consequently, I find that each Appellant has not shown, on the  balance
     of probabilities, that they meet the requirements of paragraph 352D  of
     the Immigration Rules."


  6. Paragraph 27 of BM and AL states as follows:


     "Alternatively if  there  has  been  separation  the  reason  for  that
     separation may well be associated with the claim of persecution  and  a
     child might still remain  part  of  the  family  unit  from  which  the
     potential refugee had been temporarily separated."


  7.      It is not in dispute that there was separation between the Sponsor
     and the Appellants from 2007 until the  Sponsor  left  Uganda.   It  is
     clear from paragraph  27  of  BM  and  AL  that  the  reason  for  that
     separation is relevant to consideration of whether they  remained  part
     of the family unit.  The judge has not referred to the reasons why  the
     Appellants and Sponsor were separated.


  8. Paragraph 27 of BM and AL refers to the fact that the  reason  for  the
     separation "may well be associated  with  the  claim  of  persecution".
     This is the case for the Appellants.   The  Sponsor  left  her  husband
     following the abuse she received from the hands of  her  husband.   She
     left the Appellants at the same time.  The basis for her  fear  of  her
     husband has been recognised.  She has been granted asylum.


  9. Further, when considering why the Appellants had  not  lived  with  the
     Sponsor and "her friend" or ever spent any time with them, there is  no
     reference to the fact that  "her  friend"  was  the  Sponsor's  lesbian
     partner, M.  This is clearly  relevant  to  the  separation  given  the
     situation for homosexuals in  Uganda,  and  the  subsequent  claim  for
     asylum on this basis.


 10. The judge refers to the fact that in oral evidence the Sponsor told her
     that she made no efforts to get the children to live with  her  because
     the Appellants "were safe and in  school  and  life  was  going  well".
     However the Sponsor had already  set  out  in  detail  in  her  witness
     statement that she was afraid of returning  to  the  home.   The  judge
     makes no reference to this.  I was referred by Mr Hodson in  particular
     to paragraphs 13 to 15 of the Sponsor's witness statement:


     "I remained in hiding in Lungujja with M  for  6  months  but  then  my
     husband discovered us in August 2007.  While I was in hiding, I was  in
     touch with my mother - she knew where I was.  I also  did  my  best  to
     find out what had happened to my children.  I called neighbours whom  I
     knew and they told me that the children had been taken away - they were
     not at our house in Bunamwaya with my husband.  I eventually found  out
     that they had been taken to  his  parents'  house  in  Kayunga,  Masaka
     district which is over 50 miles from Bunamwaya.  I was too scared to go
     to see them there." [13]


    "I was arrested in August 2007 at M's flat by the  LDU  (Local  Defence
    Unit).  I was taken to Nateete Police Station.  My husband  was  there.
    I was held for two nights.  A guard helped me escape from detention and
    to call M.  She had moved to Busega.  I was taken in  a  car  from  the
    police station to join her." [14]


    "After that I remained in hiding with M in Busega for over  two  and  a
    half years.  In the end I could not endure living like  a  fugitive  in
    Uganda always afraid that my husband would find us again and afraid  of
    being discovered as being a lesbian living with  her  lesbian  partner.
    During those two and a half years  my  children  remained  in  Kayunga,
    Masaka with my husband's parents.  In the end, I asked my mother to  go
    to visit the child.  She did this first sometime in 2009.  She told  me
    that the children were fine and doing well at school at that time.  But
    they were being brought up by their paternal grandparents only -  their
    father was not involved.  I was relieved to hear  this  but  also  felt
    guilty that I could not do more.  However, I felt that I had to  ensure
    my own safety and I could not return to be with them.   My  mother  did
    visit the children more than once again before  I  left  Uganda  on  10
    March 2010 but essentially the situation remained the same."


 11. There was clear evidence before the judge that the Sponsor  was  living
     in hiding from the time that she left the family home in 2007 until she
     left Uganda.  After being in hiding for six months, she was  discovered
     by her husband and arrested.  She could not return to the home  of  her
     paternal grandparents in order to see the Appellants  through  fear  of
     her husband and fear of being reported to the authorities.   The  judge
     has not considered any  of  this  evidence.   While  stating  that  the
     Appellants had never lived with the Sponsor and  her  friend,  she  has
     given no consideration to the fact that the Sponsor and her friend were
     lesbians living in  hiding  in  Uganda.   They  were  in  fear  of  the
     Sponsor's husband and the authorities.  While the Sponsor may not  have
     stated in oral evidence that she was scared, she had set  this  out  in
     her statement, which she had adopted at the hearing.  There was no need
     for her to repeat what she had said in her statement in oral evidence.


 12. It is clear from BM and AL  that  the  reason  for  the  separation  is
     relevant and must be considered, especially when  the  reason  for  the
     separation is connected to the persecution.  In the Appellants' case it
     is directly linked to the persecution of the Sponsor.  The Sponsor only
     left the Appellants because of the treatment she was receiving  at  the
     hands of the Appellants' father.


 13. I find that the judge has erred in failing to apply the case law of  BM
     and AL to the facts as they were in the Appellants' case.  The analysis
     of the family situation in paragraph 15 is not in line with the case of
     BM and AL as there is a failure to consider relevant information.


 14. It was accepted by Mr. Wilding that the judge had erred in  failing  to
     consider the grandmother' statement.   He  argued  that  this  was  not
     material but, in any event, as I have found that there  is  a  material
     error of law in  the  judge's  consideration  of  whether  or  not  the
     Appellants formed a family unit with the Sponsor,  I  do  not  need  to
     consider the materiality of this error.


Remaking


 15. I have carefully considered the Appellants' circumstances in line  with
     the case of BM and AL. Mr. Hodson submitted that the  Appellants'  case
     was in parallel to a mother who was,  for  example,  separated  due  to
     being imprisoned.  If, for that reason, a mother could  not  return  to
     her children, following the  case  of  BM  and  AL,  it  would  not  be
     considered that she did not form part of the family unit given that she
     was unable to return to them by reasons of imprisonment.  He  submitted
     that, in the Appellants' case, the reason for the separation  was  fear
     of the Appellants' father and fear of the authorities on account of the
     Sponsor's sexuality.  This fear was well-founded.   The  Appellant  has
     been granted asylum on the basis of this fear.


 16. I find that the Appellant was separated from her children  because  she
     was afraid of her husband, and afraid of her husband reporting  her  to
     the authorities on account  of  her  sexuality.   This  fear  was  well
     founded given that, after six months in hiding, her husband tracked her
     down and she was arrested by  the  authorities.   The  reason  for  her
     separation from the Appellants is  the  same  reason  as  her  fear  of
     persecution.  It is inseparable from her claim of persecution.  For the
     same reason that the Appellants and Sponsor were separated, the Sponsor
     later fled Uganda and sought asylum in the United  Kingdom.   Following
     paragraph [27] of BM and AM, this must form part of  the  consideration
     of whether the Appellants and Sponsor were part of a family unit.


 17. At paragraph 25 of BM and AL it is clear that the concept of  a  family
     unit is not limited to children who live in the same household  as  the
     refugee.  I find that the fact that the Appellants were not living with
     the Sponsor  at  the  time  she  left  Uganda  in  March  2010  is  not
     determinative of whether or not they were part of the same family unit,
     especially given the reasons why they were not living together.


 18. The Appellants were living with their paternal  grandparents  when  the
     Sponsor left Uganda.  The Sponsor feared the Appellants'  father.   She
     very clearly stated in her witness statement that she was too scared to
     go and see the Appellants.  However, although she was too scared to  go
     and visit them, she did not forget the  Appellants  during  this  time.
     She asked her mother to go and visit them.  Her mother visited them  in
     2009, and visited them more than once again before the  Appellant  left
     Uganda.


 19. The Sponsor was in hiding both in Lungujja and in Busega.   She  states
     very clearly that she could not endure living like a  fugitive,  always
     afraid that her husband would find them [15], which  is  why  she  left
     Uganda and sought asylum.


 20. I find that, were it not for the same reason that the Appellant claimed
     and was granted asylum in the United Kingdom, she would not  have  been
     separated from her children.  They would have remained living  together
     as part of the same family unit.  The separation is as a direct  result
     of her fleeing from her husband due to the abuse she received  and  her
     homosexuality.  It is clear that the separation  was  due  to  a  well-
     founded fear of persecution.


 21. Taking into account the case law of BM and AL I  therefore  find  that,
     although they were not living in the same household, given the  reasons
     for this, the Appellants formed part of the family unit of the  Sponsor
     at the time that she left Uganda in 2010.


 22. This being accepted by Mr. Wilding as the only  issue  under  paragraph
     352D, I therefore find that the Appellants meet  the  requirements  for
     entry to the  United  Kingdom  under  the  family  reunion  provisions,
     paragraph 352D.


 23. I have considered the Appellants' appeals under Article 8.  In doing so
     I have taken into account my findings above.  The Appellants  meet  the
     Respondent's requirements for entry clearance under the family  reunion
     provisions of the immigration rules.  I  attach  particular  weight  to
     this.


 24. I have also taken account section 117B of the 2002 Act insofar as it is
     relevant to the Appellants' appeals.  Section 117B(1) provides that the
     maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest.
      Given that the Appellants meet the  requirements  of  the  immigration
     rules, the maintenance of effective immigration  control  will  not  be
     compromised by a grant  of  entry  clearance.   The  rules  for  family
     reunion do  not  contain  any  requirements  for  English  language  or
     financial independence.  This indicates that the  Respondent  considers
     the reunion of families in the Appellants' and Sponsor's  situation  to
     be more important than the need to speak  English  and  be  financially
     independent (sections 117B(2) and (3)).  Sections  117B(4)  to  117B(6)
     are not relevant.


 25. I have also taken into account the best interests  of  the  Appellants.
     Their best interests must be a primary concern in accordance  with  the
     case of  ZH  Tanzania  [2011]  UKSC  4.   The  decisions  separate  the
     Appellants from their mother which is  not  in  their  best  interests,
     especially given the situation in which they were separated, which I do
     not intend to repeat here given that it is accepted.


 26. Taking all of the above into account, and giving particular  weight  to
     the fact that the Appellants meet the requirements of  the  immigration
     rules expressly designed to facilitate family reunion, I find that  the
     Appellants have shown on balance of probabilities  that  the  decisions
     are a disproportionate interference with their rights, and those of the
     Sponsor, to a family life under Article 8 ECHR.


 27. I note that the Appellants' circumstances have changed since  the  date
     of the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  as  sadly  the  Appellants'
     grandmother died on the day after the hearing.  However,  having  found
     that the Appellants meet the requirements of paragraph  352D,  and  are
     entitled to entry clearance on  the  grounds  of  family  reunion,  and
     therefore that the decisions are a breach of Article  8,  there  is  no
     need for further consideration of Article  8  outside  the  immigration
     rules taking into account the changed circumstances.


Decision


 28. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law and I set the decision aside.


 29. I remake the decision allowing the Appellants' appeals on human  rights
     grounds.  The Appellants meet the requirements of paragraph 352D of the
     immigration rules.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 10 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeals.  In the event that a fee has  been  paid  or  is
payable, I have considered making a fee award.  I have  decided  to  make  a
fee award as the Respondent, having  granted  asylum  to  the  Sponsor,  was
aware that the reason that the Appellants had been separated  from  her  was
directly  connected  with  her  basis  of  claim   for   asylum.    In   the
circumstances I make a fee award for the entire fee paid.

Signed                                  Date 10 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
