
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05711/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 3rd August 2017                  |On 16th August 2017                     |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                               Naeem Muhammad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Plowright of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Munonyedi promulgated on 31 October 2016,  in  which  the  Respondent's
    appeal against the decision to refuse  his  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  partner/parent/on  the  basis  of
    private and family life dated 10 September 2015 was allowed.  For  ease
    I continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, with Mr Muhammad as the Appellant and the Secretary of  State
    as the Respondent.

 2. I found an error of law in Judge Munonyedi's decision promulgated on 31
    October 2016 following the first hearing in this appeal on 25 May 2017.
     The background to this appeal is set out in the error of law  decision
    contained in the annex and will not be repeated here.  The re-making of
    the appeal on article 8 grounds follows.

The appeal

Applicable law

 3. It is accepted in the present case that the Appellant cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave  to  remain,
    such that those provisions are not set out here.  When  considering  an
    individual's right to respect for private and family life in accordance
    with Article 8, then the usual step-by-step approach set on  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27, applies as follows:
      i) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public  authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?
     ii) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity  as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
    iii) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
     iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?
      If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
      ends sought to be achieved?

 4. In making the proportionality assessment  under  Article  8,  the  best
    interests of the child, in accordance with section 55 of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship  and  Immigration   Act   2009,   must   be   the   primary
    consideration, as confirmed in the judgment of Lady Hale to that effect
    in paragraph 33 of ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 4.  She stated that "This means that  they  must
    be considered first.   They  can,  of  course,  be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other considerations" such as the need to maintain
    firm and fair  immigration  control  and  an  individual's  immigration
    history.  The bests interests of the child have been considered further
    in many cases, including, inter alia, by the Supreme Court in Zoumbas v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74  and  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in EA (Article 8 -  best  interests  of  child)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC); MK (Best Interests of the child)  [2011]  UKUT
    00475 and Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 00107 (IAC).

 5. The best interests of the child were considered by the Court of  Appeal
    in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874, wherein Lord Justice Clarke set out the factors  relevant
    to an assessment of the best interests of children in paragraph  35  as
    follows:
      i) age;
     ii) the length of time that they have been here;
    iii) how long they have been in education;
     iv) what stage the education has reached;
      v) to what extent they have become distanced from country to which  it
         is proposed that they return;
     vi) how renewable their connection with it may be;
    vii) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,  medical  or  other
         difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and
   viii) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere  with  their
         family life or their rights (if they have any) as British Citizens.

 6. Lord Justice Clarke went on in paragraphs 36 and 37 to state:


       "[36] In a sense the tribunal is  concerned  with  how  emphatic  an
       answer falls to be  given  to  the  question:  is  it  in  the  best
       interests of the child to remain?  The longer  the  child  has  been
       here, the more advanced (or critical) the stage  of  his  education,
       the looser his ties with the  country  in  question,  and  the  more
       deleterious the consequences of his return, the greater  the  weight
       that falls into one side of the scales.  If it is overwhelmingly  in
       the child's best interest that he should not  return,  the  need  to
       maintain immigration control may  well  not  tip  the  balance.   By
       contrast if it is in the child's best interest to remain,  but  only
       on balance (with some factors pointing the other  way),  the  result
       may be the opposite.


       [37] In the balance on the other side  there  falls  to  taken  into
       account the strong weight to  be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
       immigration control in pursuit of the  economic  well-being  of  the
       country and the fact that,  ex-hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
       entitlement to remain.  The immigration history of the  parents  may
       also be relevant  e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
       deceitfully."

 7. When considering the public interest  as  part  of  the  assessment  of
    proportionality  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  of  the   European
    Convention on Human Rights, I  am  required  by  section  117A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (introduced by section  19
    of the Immigration Act 2014)  to  have  regard  in  all  cases  to  the
    considerations listed in section 117B of the same  act.   Section  117B
    provides as follows:

      1) The maintenance of effective immigration control is in  the  public
         interest.
      2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
         the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English -
          a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
          b) are better able to integrate into society.
      3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
         the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons -
          a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
          b) are better able to integrate into society.
      4) Little weight should be given to -
          a) a private life, or
          b) a relationship formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.
      5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established  by  a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious.
      6) In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require a person's removal where -
          a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and
          b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.

 8. The Court of Appeal considered the application of  section  117B(6)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in  MA  (Pakistan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705, holding
    that when considering the  question  of  reasonableness,  wider  public
    interest considerations must be taken into account.  The  fact  that  a
    child has been in the United Kingdom for seven years would need  to  be
    given significant weight in the proportionality exercise, first because
    of its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the  child's
    best interests; and second, because it establishes a starting point the
    leave should be granted unless  there  were  powerful  reasons  to  the
    contrary.  The best interests of a child must be considered,  with  the
    same principles applying as those set out in EV (Philippines), but  are
    not determinative of the question of reasonableness.

Explanation for Refusal

 9. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application on the basis that he
    did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  there  were
    no exceptional circumstances for a grant of leave to remain outside  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The  Respondent  took  into  account  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's eldest child pursuant to section 55 of the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and considered  that  the
    family could return to Pakistan together, the country of which they are
    all nationals and where they could exercise full  rights  as  citizens,
    where their child would be able to enter education and where there  was
    nothing to suggest that the family could not provide for his safety and
    welfare.

The Appeal

10. The Appellant appeals on the grounds that his removal from  the  United
    Kingdom would breach his right to respect for private and  family  life
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and that his
    removal would be contrary to the best interests  of  his  eldest  child
    which had not been fully considered under section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

The Written Statements

11. In his written statement signed and dated 24 August 2016, the Appellant
    set out his immigration history and described his relationship with his
    wife and son.  His son's  mother  tongue  is  English  and  he  has  no
    experience of memory of living in Pakistan to the extent that he  feels
    British in every way.  It was in his son's best interests to remain  in
    the  United  Kingdom,  where  he  is  excelling  at   school   and   in
    circumstances where his removal would have a detrimental impact on  his
    education as well as on his private life in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    written statement from  Bushra  Khalid,  also  dated  24  August  2016,
    reiterated that it was in her son's best interests for the Appellant to
    remain in the United Kingdom as part of the family unit.

12. In his written statement signed and dated 24 July 2017,  the  Appellant
    expanded slightly upon his first statement, reiterating his son's  best
    interests to remain in the  United  Kingdom  with  both  parents,  with
    particularly reference to his success at school, being  at  a  critical
    stage of his education, the many good friends in the United Kingdom  he
    has, taking part in regular after-school activities  and  his  lack  of
    experience of living in Pakistan.  Again, a  supporting  statement  was
    made by Bushra Khalid, dated 24th of July 2017.

The Oral Evidence

13. The Appellant attended the oral hearing, adopted his written statements
    dated 24 August 2016 and 24 July 2017 and gave oral evidence through  a
    court-appointed Urdu interpreter.  He gave evidence as to his family in
    Pakistan and his wife's family in the United Kingdom and elsewhere.  He
    stated that his eldest son mostly speaks English but also Urdu and that
    he has never left the United Kingdom.  The only reason given  initially
    as to why he could not return to Pakistan together with his family  was
    that his wife and children are living in the United Kingdom and do  not
    want him to go.

14. In cross-examination the Appellant confirmed that he had never had  any
    lawful leave to remain in the United Kingdom since his arrival in  1999
    and that when he married his wife in 2007 she was fully aware  that  he
    was here unlawfully.  It was an arranged marriage between  cousins  and
    not for the purposes of obtaining an immigration benefit.   When  asked
    if he could stay temporarily with his parents on  return  to  Pakistan,
    the Appellant stated that he had been in the United Kingdom  for  about
    18 years, had  almost  forgotten  Pakistan  and  his  children  had  no
    familiarity with the country.  He then proceeded to  claim  that  there
    was an  ongoing  property  dispute  with  maternal  family  members  in
    Pakistan, which formed the basis of his original  asylum  claim.   That
    claim was refused and dismissed on appeal, although he maintained  that
    for the same reasons he remains at risk  on  return  to  Pakistan.   No
    direct answer was given to the question,  which  was  repeated,  as  to
    whether he would be able to stay with his parents on return to Pakistan
    at least temporarily.

15. The Appellant claimed that his wife had been absent from Pakistan for a
    long period of time, as he had, and the whole family would not be  able
    to adjust to life on return there.  Further, his eldest  son  was  very
    attached to his maternal grandparents in the United Kingdom and did not
    want to leave them.  It the Appellant had to return to  Pakistan  alone
    to make an application for entry clearance, he  stated  that  his  wife
    would not be able to manage on her own given their young  children  and
    her employment.  His wife's family would not be able to assist  because
    they are all busy with their own lives.

16. In response to questions I asked, the Appellant stated that his  eldest
    son was performing very well in school in the United Kingdom and  would
    find it difficult to adjust to education in Pakistan in a new  language
    and a new culture.  He confirmed that his son has no special  needs  or
    medical conditions.  If the Appellant was unsuccessful in  his  appeal,
    he did not think that his family would return to Pakistan with him.

17. In re-examination, the Appellant provided details as to the  employment
    or otherwise of his wife's family members.

18. The Appellant's wife, Bushra Khalid attended the oral hearing,  adopted
    her written statements dated 24 August 2016 and 24 July 2017  and  gave
    oral evidence through a court-appointed Urdu interpreter.   She  stated
    that she had not returned to Pakistan since leaving there in  2001  for
    Italy has no family home in Pakistan and it would be very hard for  her
    to return there.  She is married and has children in the United Kingdom
    who are all used to the system here and her son is doing very  well  in
    school.  Ms Khalid could not envisage the family being separated.

19. Ms Khalid is an employed administrator  earning  approximately  �900  a
    month net.

20. In cross-examination, she confirmed that her and  her  elder  son  were
    resident in the United Kingdom lawfully pursuant  to  an  EA  residence
    card as the extended family members of her father, an Italian  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom.   She  also  confirmed
    that her marriage was an arranged one at a time when she knew that  the
    Appellant was in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  Ms Khalid was aware of
    the Appellant's claim about a property dispute  in  Pakistan  from  the
    Appellant and from her mother-in-law, but nothing had been  said  about
    it recently.

21. Ms Khalid was asked if the  family  could  stay  with  the  Appellant's
    parents temporarily on return to Pakistan to which she  responded  that
    the Appellant could not survive in Pakistan as  he  has  no  source  of
    income there and she is unfamiliar  with  the  lifestyle  that  country
    given her long absence.  She stated that if the Appellant were  removed
    alone, her son would not be able to live without  his  father  and  her
    parents would not be able to assist with any childcare because of their
    age.

Closing Submissions

22. In closing on behalf of the  Respondent,  it  was  submitted  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  for
    a grant of leave to remain on the basis of  private  and  family  life.
    The matter fell to be considered outside of the rules under  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights and the  considerations  set
    out in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    were relevant to the balancing exercise required.  As to these factors,
    the  Appellant  does  not  speak  English;  he   is   not   financially
    independent; his time in the United Kingdom has been entirely unlawful;
    his relationships have been developed at a time when he had  no  lawful
    leave to  remain  and  until  relatively  recently  he  did  little  to
    regularise his immigration  status  following  refusal  of  his  asylum
    claim.  The Appellant has a very poor immigration history and has shown
    a very serious disregard for immigration control.

23. The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that  section  117B(6)  of
    the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was not  applicable  to
    the facts of  the  present  case  because  the  qualifying  child,  the
    Appellant's eldest son, had lawful leave to remain pursuant to  an  EEA
    Residence Card and there was therefore no expectation  of  him  leaving
    the United Kingdom where he could stay with his mother, who also has  a
    lawful basis for remaining here.  This  is  different  to  the  factual
    scenario in MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 where no family members had any leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom  and  the  outcome  of  all  of  their  futures  was
    dependent on the private life application of a  qualifying  child.   It
    was submitted that some meaning has be given to the  word  "expect"  in
    section 117B(6) to avoid an artificial consideration  of  a  qualifying
    child leaving the United Kingdom where there  is  no  expectation  that
    they would do so.

24. In any event, it was submitted that if section  117B(6)  was  found  to
    apply in the present  case,  that  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant's eldest child to leave the United Kingdom.  Although it  was
    accepted that it was primarily in his best  interests  to  remain  with
    both parents and as a secondary point to maintain  the  status  quo  by
    remaining in the United Kingdom, giving  weight  to  his  seven  years'
    residence here, it was still in any event reasonable for the family  to
    return together, taking into account the  immigration  history  of  the
    Appellant and that his relationships were formed in the United  Kingdom
    at a time when he was  here  unlawfully.   An  adverse  effect  on  the
    children was acknowledged but it was not accepted to be so  significant
    so as to make it unreasonable or disproportionate.  The eldest child is
    not in a crucial phase of his education, not too old to adapt  and  his
    been brought up within Pakistani culture with  his  family.   There  is
    nothing to suggest that extended family members  would  not  assist  on
    return to Pakistan.

25. At the hearing, the Appellant raised concerns as to whether he would be
    at risk on return to Pakistan but this was not raised in his notice  of
    appeal and there has been no recent protection claim by  him.   It  was
    submitted that the Appellant was merely perpetuating an exaggerated  or
    untruthful claim which was last dismissed in 2003.


26. In closing on behalf of the Appellant, Counsel  firstly  accepted  that
    the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and
    submitted that the key issue was whether it was  reasonable  to  expect
    the Appellant's eldest child to leave the United Kingdom and if not his
    appeal to should under section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  It was accepted that the Appellant's  immigration
    history  was  poor,  having  been  here  illegally  since   1999   with
    unsuccessful applications for leave to remain on a  variety  of  bases.
    However,  it  was  not  very  bad  and  there   were   no   aggravating
    circumstances and in accordance with the  Respondent's  guidance,  such
    that it would be inappropriate  to  separate  the  Appellant  from  his
    children without more.


27. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that it was  clearly  in  the  best
    interests of the eldest child to reside with both parents in the United
    Kingdom given that he has never been to Pakistan, has  extended  family
    support in the United Kingdom and there are no strong  reasons  in  the
    present case to justify the  removal  of  the  child  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

Findings and reasons

28. The sole issue in this appeal is whether the Appellant's removal  would
    be contrary to his right to respect for private and family  life  under
    Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   He  has
    established family life in the United Kingdom, consisting of his  wife,
    whom he married (in an Islamic ceremony) on 21 October 2007 and now two
    children, born on 30 October 2009 and 13 June  2017.   The  Appellant's
    family are all Pakistani nationals and his  wife  and  eldest  son  are
    currently residing in United Kingdom with benefit of an  EEA  Residence
    Card as family members of the  Appellant's  father-in-law,  an  Italian
    national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant
    has been living in the United Kingdom since 1999  and  it  is  accepted
    that during that time he has built up a degree of private life here  as
    well, although no specific or substantive aspects of private life  have
    been relied upon in the context of this appeal.


29.  The  Appellant's  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would   be   an
    interference with his private and family life established here  and  it
    is his and his wife's evidence that if this appeal is unsuccessful, she
    and  the  children  would  not  return  to  Pakistan  with  him.    The
    Appellant's removal would however be in accordance with the law and  in
    pursuit of the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration  control.   The  final
    question is whether the Appellant's removal would be a disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect for  private  and  family  life.
    When considering this, I take as the starting point the best  interests
    of the children involved.


30. The Appellant's eldest son is seven years old, a Pakistani national who
    speaks both English and Urdu and who is doing well in full-time primary
    education in the United Kingdom.  He was born in the United Kingdom and
    has spent all of his life here so far, without having  had  any  direct
    personal  experience  of  life  in  Pakistan.    He   has   established
    friendships and some limited degree of private life appropriate to  his
    age in the United Kingdom.  As is generally the case, it is in his best
    interests to remain with both parents.  The main  factor  supporting  a
    view that it is in his best interests to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    rather than moving to Pakistan, is that it maintains the status quo  of
    his living arrangements to date and allows weight to be attached to the
    length of his residence here.  However, it is only  marginally  in  his
    best interests to remain in the United Kingdom as opposed to being with
    his family in Pakistan for  the  following  reasons.   The  Appellant's
    eldest son is not at a significant or critical stage of his  education,
    he speaks Urdu and would be able to continue his education in Pakistan,
    enjoying the  full  benefits  of  his  citizenship  there.   Given  his
    relatively young age, with the support  of  his  immediate  family  and
    extended family in Pakistan, there is no reason as to why he could  not
    adapt to life in Pakistan, a culture with which he has some familiarity
    from  his  immediate  family  members  and   where   he   could   enjoy
    relationships with extended family members.  The Appellant's eldest son
    has no medical or special needs, nor is there  any  reason  to  suggest
    that his health and welfare would not be provided for by his family  in
    Pakistan.


31. The Appellant's youngest son is less than two months old and his  focus
    is entirely on his immediate family such that his  best  interests  are
    only to remain with both parents.  Given his age he has not established
    any independent private life and no factors have been identified  which
    would suggest that it is in his best interests  to  be  either  in  the
    United Kingdom or in Pakistan.


32. I do not accept the submission on behalf of the Respondent that section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  has  no
    application to the present appeal  because  the  Appellant's  wife  and
    eldest son are lawfully in the United Kingdom and as such would not  be
    expected to leave.  There is nothing to suggest, either in the  use  of
    the word "expect" or otherwise, that section 117B(6)  only  applies  to
    cases where no family members have a right  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom lawfully and there is no authority to support that  proposition
    either.   The  question  of  whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  a
    qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom can be undertaken  whether
    or not in fact it is likely that they would do so even if a parent were
    to be removed.


33. In accordance with MA (Pakistan),  I  consider  the  reasonableness  of
    expecting the Appellant's eldest child, the only  qualifying  child  in
    this case, to leave the United Kingdom taking  into  account  his  best
    interests as above, the fact that he has resided in the United  Kingdom
    for over seven years and the wider public interest considerations.   As
    to the latter, as is clear from the other parts of section 117B(6), the
    maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest and it  is
    also in the public interest that persons who wish to  remain  here  are
    able to speak English and are self-sufficient.  Further, little  weight
    should be given to private or family  life  established  at  a  time  a
    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


34. The Appellant has been in the United Kingdom unlawfully since 1999  and
    has made a variety of applications for leave to remain which  have  all
    been unsuccessful.  On any view, he has a very bad immigration history.
     The Appellant married and established family life  here  in  the  full
    knowledge that he had no right to remain, a fact  which  is  wife  also
    knew at the time of their Islamic  marriage.   The  Appellant  used  an
    interpreter to give oral evidence in his appeal and there was no  other
    indication that he could speak  English,  nor  was  there  anything  to
    suggest that he was self-sufficient in the  United  Kingdom  -  to  the
    contrary, he had previously claimed to be dependent on  his  father-in-
    law.


35. The Appellant is a Pakistani national who has spent the majority of his
    life in Pakistan and who has immediate family members there.  He  would
    be returning to a country where he still speaks the language and  where
    there is no reason why he could not reintegrate and use the benefits of
    his citizenship there to  obtain  employment  and  accommodation.   The
    Appellant's wife is also a Pakistani national who still speaks Urdu and
    although she has no immediate family members remaining in Pakistan, she
    has spent approximately half of her life there and no reasons have been
    put forward as to why she would not be able to reintegrate on return.


36. The Appellant claimed only in oral evidence before me that  he  was  at
    risk on return to Pakistan because of a family land dispute, which  was
    the basis for his original  asylum  claim  after  entering  the  United
    Kingdom.  There has been no such representation to the Respondent since
    his appeal against refusal of his asylum claim was dismissed  in  2003,
    nor has such a claim been included in the  grounds  of  appeal  or  any
    written or oral evidence prior to the hearing on 3  August  2017.   The
    Appellant has failed to establish that there is any risk on  return  to
    Pakistan to him and I find the very late claims made in this regard  to
    be an attempt merely to bolster an otherwise weak claim  for  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.


37. In  all  of  the  circumstances,  I  do  not  find  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the Appellant's eldest son to  return  with  his
    parents and younger sibling to Pakistan such that  section  117B(6)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 does  not  assist  the
    Appellant in this appeal.  In summary, the Appellant's eldest son is at
    an age where it would be  reasonable  for  him  to  adapt  to  life  in
    Pakistan with the support of  his  parents;  where  he  can  speak  the
    language; where he could enjoy the  benefits  of  his  citizenship  and
    where he can continue in his education.  The strong reasons against the
    Appellant being granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  human
    rights grounds in this case where his eldest son has been  resident  in
    the United Kingdom for over seven years, are the Appellant's  very  bad
    immigration history, his lack of English  language  ability,  the  fact
    that he is not self-sufficient and the fact that family life  has  been
    established while he was in the United Kingdom unlawfully, as  well  as
    that it is  only  marginally  in  the  Appellant's  eldest  son's  best
    interests to remain in the United Kingdom.


38. For the same reasons set out above, the Appellant's  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would not be a disproportionate  interference  with  his
    right to respect for private and family life under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  His appeal is therefore dismissed
    on human rights grounds.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  re-make  it  as
follows: Appeal dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]             Date     7th August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU057112015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th May 2017                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               naeem muhammad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


39. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Munonyedi promulgated on 31 October 2016,  in  which  the  Respondent's
    appeal against the decision to refuse  his  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  partner/parent/on  the  basis  of
    private and family life dated 10 September 2015 was allowed.  For  ease
    I continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, with Mr Muhammad as the Appellant and the Secretary of  State
    as the Respondent.

40. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 12 December  1976  who
    claims to have first arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 July 1999.  He
    claimed asylum on 28 July 2000 which was refused by the Respondent on 1
    February 2001 and his appeal against  that  refusal  was  unsuccessful.
    The Appellant next made an application for an EEA Residence Card on  27
    June 2013 which was refused on 9 November 2013 and a subsequent similar
    application was also refused on 26 March 2014.  The Appellant  appealed
    against the Respondent's refusal to issue an EEA Residence Card,  which
    was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shamash to the limited  extent
    that the matter should  be  remitted  to  the  Respondent  to  consider
    Article 8.  That decision was set aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Woodcraft on the basis that  the  Appellant  was  required  to  make  a
    freestanding Article 8 claim for the Respondent to consider such.  That
    application was made  on  24  June  2015  relying  on  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his wife and child.

41. The Respondent refused the  application  on  10  September  2015  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules both under the partner and  parent
    route.  That was on the basis that the Appellant's wife  did  not  have
    settled status in the United Kingdom, nor was she a British citizen  or
    in the United Kingdom with refugee leave  or  humanitarian  protection,
    and because the Appellant did not  have  sole  responsibility  for  his
    child.  The application was further refused  on  private  life  grounds
    under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules on the basis  that  the
    Appellant had not been living in the United Kingdom for a  sufficiently
    long period and there would no be very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration into Pakistan if required to leave the United Kingdom.

42. The Respondent further considered whether there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules but  found  there  were  none.   In  particular,  the
    Respondent considered the best interests of the Appellant's child,  who
    was at the time of the decision six years old  and  had  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom since birth.  The Appellant's child is also  a  national
    of Pakistan and would be able to enjoy his full rights as a citizen  if
    he accompanied the Appellant there, including being  able  to  continue
    his education and there was nothing  to  suggest  that  his  safety  or
    welfare could not be provided for there.  The Appellant's wife is  also
    a national of Pakistan and they could all return there  together  is  a
    family unit.

43. Judge Munonyedi allowed the appeal on 31 October 2016 on  human  rights
    grounds under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.
    The Judge referred to the unusual circumstances of this case and  found
    that having taken into account the public interest  considerations  set
    out in section 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 (the "2002 Act"), the interference to the family  and  private
    life of the Appellant, his wife and child would be disproportionate  to
    the legitimate aim of maintaining effective immigration control in this
    case.

The appeal

44. The Respondent appeals on three grounds,  first,  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to analyse the private and family life rights of  the  Appellant
    through the lens of the Immigration Rules and  in  particular  fail  to
    recognise that the Appellant's child had not been in the United Kingdom
    for seven years as at the date of the application and  therefore  could
    not  meet  the  requirements  set  out  in   Appendix   FM,   paragraph
    EX.1(i)(cc).  Secondly, although the Judge referred in her decision  to
    the Appellant being dependent on his father-in-law and on his wife, she
    failed to apply the public interest provision in section 117B(3) of the
    2002 Act.  Thirdly, that the Judge had failed to apply section  117B(4)
    of the 2002 Act, that little weight should be attached to  family  life
    established when a person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

45. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grant-Hutchinson on 11  April
    2017 on all grounds.

46. At the hearing, the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  relied  on  the
    written grounds of appeal and expanded upon them.   In  particular,  it
    was submitted that the Judge had failed to take into account the public
    interest factors in section 117B(1), (3) and (4) of the  2002  Act,  by
    failing to attach weight to the Appellant's  poor  immigration  history
    and that his relationship with his wife commenced at a time when he was
    in the United Kingdom unlawfully, his dependency on  his  father-in-law
    and the fact that he is not fluent in English.  Further, the Judge  had
    failed to attach weight to the significance of  the  Appellant's  child
    being under the age of seven years  as  at  the  date  of  hearing  and
    therefore not a qualifying child and not able to meet  the  Immigration
    Rules for that reason.  There was in any event no consideration of  the
    reasonableness of  the  child  leaving  the  United  Kingdom  with  the
    Appellant.

47. The Appellant's wife and child are lawfully in the United Kingdom  with
    the benefit of an EEA Residence Card, valid to 2019, which  was  issued
    on the basis that they were dependent family members of the Appellant's
    father-in-law, an Italian national exercising treaty rights  in  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant's wife and child are  Pakistani  nationals  and
    would have a choice as to whether to remain in United  Kingdom  without
    the Appellant, or to return to Pakistan with  him  as  a  family  unit.
    Although the provisions of section 117A and 117B of the 2002  Act  were
    cited by Judge Munonyedi in her decision, there  were  no  findings  of
    reasons given which showed that these were actually taken into  account
    in the proportionality assessment under Article 8.  Further, there were
    no findings as to the best interests of the child in this case.

48. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that when the decision was read  as
    a whole and in the context the findings made throughout  the  decision,
    the conclusions reached in paragraphs 43 and 44 of  the  decision  that
    the Appellant's removal would be a disproportionate  interference  with
    his right to respect for private and family life were  sustainable  and
    did not disclose any  error  of  law.   The  Judge  correctly  directed
    herself as to the factors to consider in  application  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules and noted the unusual position of the  Appellant  and
    compelling features in this case.  She correctly directed herself as to
    the public interest requirements in section 117B of the  2002  Act  and
    the Respondent's grounds  of  challenge  on  this  point  amount  to  a
    disagreement  of  form  rather  than  substance.   It  is  clear   from
    references throughout the decision that the  Judge  was  aware  of  the
    Appellant's  dependence  on  his  father-in-law  and  relied   on   the
    undisputed evidence of family life and the best interests of the child.

49. In any event, it was  submitted  that  any  errors  were  not  material
    because it was inevitable that a First-tier Tribunal would find that it
    was in the best interests of the Appellant's child  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom with both of his parents and without disruption  to  his
    education or relationships with wider family members.  It would also be
    inevitable that it was not in his best interests to  remain  in  United
    Kingdom without  the  Appellant.   It  was  further  submitted  on  the
    particular facts of this case that the same conclusion would be reached
    under section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, that it  would  be  unreasonable
    for the Appellant's child to leave the United  Kingdom.   In  light  of
    such inevitable findings, the only  conclusion  that  could  have  been
    reached on this appeal would be that the Appellant's removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would be a disproportionate interference with his  right
    to respect for private and family life contrary to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

Findings and reasons

50. I find that there is a material error of law in the decision  of  Judge
    Munonyedi promulgated on 31 October 2016, in that there was  an  almost
    complete failure to make any relevant findings for the determination of
    the appeal and no proper reasons were given for the overall  conclusion
    to allow the appeal.  The Judge set out the evidence on behalf  of  the
    Appellant in the appeal in paragraphs 11 to 14 and then went on to  set
    out  in  caselaw  for  consideration  of  the  appeal  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules under Article 8 and gave reasons for doing so.

51. It was found that the Appellant was in an unusual position  because  he
    was dependent on a person who was herself dependent on an EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in  United  Kingdom,  but  could  not  at  the
    relevant time establish his own dependency  on  an  EEA  national.   In
    paragraph 24, it was Judge Munonyedi's view that if the Appellant  were
    to return to Pakistan, he would be able to demonstrate that he  was  an
    extended family member of his father-in-law's  household,  therefore  a
    dependent of an EEA national and the case of Chikwamba v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40 therefore had  application
    to him as he would be able to  successfully  seek  entry  clearance  to
    return to the United Kingdom.  That is an  error  of  law  as  it  only
    considers one part of the requirements for the issue of an  EEA  family
    permit to a person such as the Appellant as an extended  family  member
    under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  and
    failed entirely to take into account that the issue of  such  a  family
    permit would require continuing dependency from Pakistan and is in  any
    event a matter of discretion for the Respondent to issue such a  permit
    in all of the circumstances.  It  is  far  from  established  in  these
    circumstances that the Appellant would be able to return to the  United
    Kingdom as found by Judge Munonyedi.

52. Judge Munonyedi then goes on to set out  the  requirements  of  section
    117A and 117B of the 2002 Act, the  five  stage  test  for  determining
    Article 8 cases set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, the duty to  consider
    the best  interests  of  the  child  in  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration 2009 and caselaw as to  the  same.   Within
    the lengthy recitation of these provisions and authority, there is only
    one  finding  of  fact,  in  paragraph  30,  that  the  Appellant   has
    established a family life in the United  Kingdom  and  his  removal  to
    Pakistan would interfere without  family  life.   Although  on  a  very
    generous view it may be inferred from  the  case  law  cited  that  the
    general assumptions as to the best interests of a child contain therein
    apply in this appeal, there are no express findings at all in  relation
    to the Appellant's child or his best interests.

53. In paragraphs 43 to 45, there is a bare  statement  that  having  taken
    into account the public interest consideration set out in section  117A
    and  117B  of  the  2002  Act,  the  Appellant's  removal  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference to his and his wife and child's right  to
    respect of private and family life.   There  are  no  express  findings
    whatsoever on the factors taken into account as part of  the  balancing
    exercise for Article 8 and no reference at all to any of  the  specific
    public interest considerations  which  would  support  the  Appellant's
    removal to Pakistan.  It is further not clear as to whether  the  Judge
    has considered the case on the basis  that  the  Appellant's  wife  and
    child would remain in  the  United  Kingdom  or  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for them to return to Pakistan with  the  Appellant.   There
    are simply no findings either way.

54. This is not a case in which  it  could  be  said  that  the  Judge  had
    appropriately directed herself and should be given the benefit  of  the
    doubt that those directions have been applied in reaching the decision.
     There is not a difficulty in this case with form over substance but an
    almost complete failure to make any relevant findings of fact  or  give
    any reasons for the decision reached.  I do not accept the  submissions
    on behalf of the Appellant that such errors are immaterial in this case
    nor that the overall conclusions would inevitably be the same  even  if
    all  of  the  relevant  factors  were  taken  into  account.   This  is
    particularly so when there was only very limited  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal as to the best interests of  the  child  such  that
    Counsel could only make general assumptions based on normal  principles
    rather than any analysis of the circumstances  of  the  child  in  this
    case.  Further, as confirmed by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  the
    best  interests  assessment  does   not   automatically   resolve   the
    reasonableness of return and the  concept  of  reasonableness  requires
    regard to be had to the conduct of the applicant and any other  matters
    relevant to the public interest.

55. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be  set
    aside as it involves the making of  material  errors  of  law  and  the
    appeal must be re-determined.

56. There is a further error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    in this case, which was accepted by Counsel for the  Appellant  at  the
    hearing.  It is not one which was expressly raised by the Respondent in
    their grounds of appeal however it comes within the general failure  to
    deal with the factors set out in section 117B of the 2002  Act,  albeit
    through no fault  of  Judge  Munonyedi  in  this  case.   Although  the
    decision under appeal was signed off by the Judge on 9 October 2016, at
    a time when the Appellant's child was still six years old, there was  a
    delay in the promulgation of the decision until 31  October  2016.   By
    the date of promulgation, the Appellant's child had reached seven years
    of age and had become a qualifying child  having  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since birth, such that section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act  should
    have been considered as at the date  of  promulgation.   In  accordance
    with the Court of Appeal decision in NA (Libya) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 143, a  failure  to  take  into
    account matters or evidence such as country guidance  decisions  as  at
    the date of promulgation is an error of law even if the Judges not,  in
    fact, aware that the decision has not yet been promulgated.   When  the
    appeal is re-determined, section 117B of the 2002 Act will need  to  be
    considered  to  determine  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant's child to go with him to Pakistan.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions to the parties

1. This appeal is adjourned to an oral hearing, to be relisted  before  UTJ
   Jackson to re-determine the appeal on human rights grounds.

2. Any further evidence relied upon by the parties shall be filed with  the
   Upper Tribunal and served upon the other party no  later  than  14  days
   prior to the hearing of the appeal.


3. The Appellant is to confirm no later than 14 days prior to  the  hearing
   of the appeal which witnesses are to be called to give oral evidence and
   what, if any, interpreters are required.

Directions to Administration

 1. The appeal is adjourned, to be relisted for an oral hearing before  UTJ
    Jackson on the first available date after 26 June 2017.

 2. The time estimate for the hearing is 1.5 hours.


 3. An Urdu interpreter is to be provisionally booked for  the  hearing  on
    the assumption that the Appellant's wife is to give evidence -  subject
    to confirmation from the Appellant of the need for an  interpreter  and
    in what language.


Signed   [pic]             Date     25th May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

