
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05578/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC (via Microsoft Teams)      |Decision promulgated    |
|On 12 August 2021                                  |On 14 September 2021    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                LARAIB MURTZA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr E Waheed instructed by Whitefield Solicitors Ltd.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Williams promulgated on 22 March 2021 in  which
        the Judge allowed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.
     2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 16  June  1993.  His
        application for leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
        spouse/partner of a British citizen was refused by the Secretary of
        State.

Background

     3. The Judge's finding the appellant can meet the Immigration Rules is
        set out at [10 - 16] and that the removal of the appellant  is  not
        proportionate pursuant to Article 8 ECHR at [18 - 30].
     4. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal the operative part of the grant  being  in  the  following
        terms:

        "2.  The grounds assert that the judge erred by  giving  inadequate
             reasons; and by failing to attach due weight to the factors set
             out in section 117 B.


        3.   On the one hand, it could be argued that the findings made  by
             the judge were open to the judge  on  the  facts  and  evidence
             available. On the other hand, it is open to argument  that  the
             judge may have placed inadequate weight on the public interest.
             It does  seem  that  the  factors  outlined  by  the  judge  in
             justifying and allowing the appeal are factors common  in  many
             appeals and not exclusive to this appellant.  In  my  view,  it
             must be explored further as to  whether  the  judge  has  given
             inadequate weight to the public interest in this case."


Error of law

     5. There are two difficulties for the Secretary  of  State  with  this
        appeal. The first is that there  is  no  challenge  in  the  ground
        seeking permission to appeal to the findings of the  Judge  between
        [10 - 16] in which it was  found  the  appellant  can  satisfy  the
        requirements of the  Rules.  The  Immigration  Rules  set  out  the
        Secretary of State's own view of  what  is  required  to  enable  a
        person to succeed with  their  application.  The  question  whether
        there are insurmountable obstacles  requires  a  judgement  by  the
        decisionmaker and if such is made out it follows  that  the  public
        interest   in   removal   is   weakened,   absent    countervailing
        circumstances.
     6. This is a human rights appeal and not against  the  decision  under
        the Rules as that kind of challenge has not  been  available  since
        the 2014 amendments, but ability to meet the Rules is a factor that
        is relevant to the proportionality assessment.
     7. The second issue is that the Judge refers  to  relevant  case  law,
        carries out proper factual analysis, balancing exercise, refers  to
        relevant case law,  and  makes  a  specific  finding  that  if  the
        appellant left the United Kingdom to make a fresh application to re-
        enter lawfully as a spouse/partner that application will be  likely
        to succeed.
     8. The Secretary of State seeks  to  challenge  the  final  conclusion
        reached by the Judge without identifying any material error of  law
        in the steps taken  by  the  Judge  in  identifying  factors  which
        reduced the weight to be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  his
        removal.
     9. The judge granting permission pose the question whether  the  Judge
        had given due weight to the public interest, but I find it has  not
        been established that the  judge  gave  inadequate  weight  to  the
        public interest in this case.
    10. As the judge granting permission noted, it could be argued that the
        findings  were  open  to  the  Judge  on  the  facts  and  evidence
        available. The Court of  Appeal  has  cautioned  appellant  judges,
        including their own, of not interfering  with  the  decision  of  a
        Court below unless legal  error  material  to  the  decision  under
        challenge is made out. In this case  the  Secretary  of  State  has
        failed to discharge the burden upon her to prove this is so.
    11. The decision to allow the appeal is clearly  within  the  range  of
        those  available  to  the  Judge,  especially  in  light   of   the
        unchallenged finding that the appellant  is  able  to  satisfy  the
        Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State may not like that outcome
        but that is not the applicable test.

Decision

    12. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

    13. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 12 August 2021










