

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: HU/05731/20i5
       HU/05735/2015
       HU/05743/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 August 2017                        |On 14 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                     s k
                                     m k
                                    m k k
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr M Blundell, of Counsel, instructed by Caveat
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The respondent challenges the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Rothwell to allow the appeal of the appellant and her two  children
         under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  article  8  grounds.   For
         convenience, I continue to refer to the parties as they were before
         the First-tier Tribunal.


      2. The appellants are all Pakistani nationals, born respectively on  5
         July 1975, [ ] 2006 and [ ] 2009.  The  first  appellant  initially
         visited the UK in 2005 and the second appellant was born  here  the
         following year. According to the respondent, there was no  evidence
         of entry or leave having  been  granted  and  her  status  here  is
         unclear from the evidence. It is also not  clear  as  to  when  the
         appellant left, possibly in 2007, but she re-entered in  2008  with
         her child and subsequently claimed asylum  which  was  refused.  An
         appeal against  the  decision  was  dismissed  in  June  2009.  The
         appellant made further  submissions  in  August  2010;  these  were
         rejected. In October 2013, she made an article 8 application  which
         was refused and in March 2014 another  article  8  application  was
         made; its refusal has led to these proceedings.


      3. The appeal came  before  Judge  Rothwell  at  Hatton  Cross  on  17
         September 2016. The respondent was not represented. Judge  Rothwell
         found that the appellant was a victim  of  domestic  violence  both
         here and in Pakistan and that she was separated from  her  husband.
         She found that it would not be reasonable  for  the  appellants  to
         leave the UK and that it was in the best interests of both children
         to remain here.



      4. The respondent sought and obtained permission to appeal on  26  May
         2017 on the basis that the judge had arguably  misdirected  herself
         and misapplied MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  in  assessing
         whether it would be reasonable for the minor  appellants  to  leave
         the UK and had  arguably  erred  in  failing  to  take  account  of
         relevant public interest factors  when  considering  s.117B.  Those
         factors could have materially impacted upon the decision.



         The hearing

      5. At the hearing before me on 10  August  2017,  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
         relied  on  the  grounds  for  permission  with   regard   to   the
         misdirection of the judge on MA. She criticized the  assessment  by
         the judge and submitted that she had failed to  have  regard  to  a
         significant accumulation of adverse factors  when  undertaking  the
         balancing exercise. She maintained that there could have materially
         impacted on the outcome of the appeal.


      6. Mr Blundell in response conceded that  the  judge  had  misdirected
         herself at paragraph 29 and had inaccurately set out  the  law.  He
         submitted, however, that she had subsequently undertaken a thorough
         assessment and that rescued the determination.   He submitted  that
         the judge had properly noted that strong and powerful reasons  were
         required to depart from the MA test and the facts of this case, all
         accepted  by  the  judge,  were  so  strong  that   even   if   the
         reasonableness test had been properly considered, there could be no
         other outcome. Mr Blundell relied on the sliding scale  of  conduct
         discussed  in  Kaur  (children's  best  interests/public   interest
         interface) [2017] UKUT 00014. He submitted that the  countervailing
         factors did not outweigh the best interests  of  the  children.  he
         accepted that there would be cases where reliance on  public  funds
         pressed significantly against an appellant and others, such as  the
         present case, where it did not. The countervailing factors in  this
         case fell at the lowest end of the spectrum.



      7. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that there had  been  a  reliance  on
         public funds  and  resources.  The  appellant  received  funds  and
         accommodation and had made use of the NHS and the education system.
         She pointed out this had been over a lengthy  period  of  time  and
         that it would continue  in  the  future.  She  submitted  that  the
         appellant's immigration history should have been taken into account
         when the assessment was carried out, her  unsuccessful  attempt  to
         claim asylum and her voluntary return to Pakistan.  The  judge  had
         not been able to assess her knowledge of English as an  interpreter
         had been used and there was no assessment of her ability to support
         herself and her children. A full assessment had  not  been  carried
         out. The failed asylum claim should have been the judge's  starting
         point. The absence of a presenting officer did not absolve a  judge
         from undertaking a full and proper assessment



      8. In response, Mr Blundell maintained that the asylum issue  had  not
         been raised in the grounds. The judge was not obliged to  obtain  a
         copy of the asylum determination. If the respondent had  wanted  to
         rely on it, she should have included  it  in  her  appeals  bundle.
         Further, he added that there had  been  agreement  reached  at  the
         Family Court for contact between the children and their father.



      9. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the previous  determination  was
         an obvious starting point given the appellant's immigration history
         and was relevant for the s. 117 assessment.



     10. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my determination which
         I now give.



     11. Conclusions



     12. Mr Blundell  was  plainly  correct  to  concede  that  the  judge's
         direction  in   paragraph   29   of   the   determination   was   a
         misrepresentation of the law as set out in  MA  (Pakistan).  Whilst
         the court held that a parent's conduct should not impact  upon  any
         assessment of the best interests of  the  children,  it  emphasised
         that it was a matter that must be included when the  reasonableness
         of return is assessed.  It is plain, then, that the judge erred  in
         law and that her assessment was carried out using the wrong test.



     13. Mr Blundell submitted, however, that the determination could  still
         be rescued because the judge had identified factors so  strong  and
         powerful that no other outcome would be possible and that  she  had
         taken  account  of  the  appellant's   immigration   history   when
         considering s.117B. As always, Mr Blundell's submissions were  ably
         made but, attractive as they were, I am unable to  agree  that  the
         decision can be salvaged.



     14. The difficulty is that the judge commenced her  assessment  with  a
         misdirection of law and that has  infected  the  remainder  of  her
         findings as she has assessed the facts using  the  wrong  lens  and
         from the wrong starting point.  The  respondent's  absence  at  the
         hearing was unhelpful however Ms Willocks-Briscoe is right to point
         out that that does not absolve a judge from undertaking a full  and
         thorough assessment. Whilst  I  accept  that  the  previous  failed
         asylum claim  was  not  specifically  raised  in  the  grounds  for
         permission, it  does  form  part  of  the  appellant's  immigration
         history and is a matter the judge should have explored.  The  judge
         did not consider the  appellant's  reliance  on  public  funds  and
         resources and indeed the only consideration of any public  interest
         factors appears in the penultimate paragraph of  the  determination
         when the judge briefly alludes to  the  appellant  overstaying  her
         visit visa in 2008. There is no consideration of the previous visit
         and apparent overstay or all the  other  factors  which  have  been
         identified above. Given the absence  of  a  full  assessment  under
         s.117 with all the relevant factors for both sides being considered
         and the conceded misdirection in law, I am unable to conclude  that
         the determination is sustainable. The judge erred in law such  that
         the errors materially impact on the decision and I  must  therefore
         set aside the determination in its entirety except as a  record  of
         proceedings.


     15. Both parties referred to further relevant documentary evidence they
         wished to rely on in the event of a re-hearing. Directions will  be
         issued by the First-tier Tribunal and will  give  the  parties  the
         opportunity to adduce any further evidence relevant to their  case.
         I  would  mention  here  that  it  would   be   helpful   to   have
         information/evidence as to the immigration status of the father  of
         the minor appellants. This may have to come from the respondent due
         to the fraught relationship between the appellant and her estranged
         husband.



     16. Decision


     17. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law such that  the  decision
         is set aside. It shall be re-heard afresh by a different  judge  of
         that Tribunal at Hatton Cross at a date to be arranged.












     18. Anonymity



     19. Although the First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order, I
         consider it appropriate  to  do  so  given  that  there  are  young
         children involved.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 11 August 2017








