
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05799/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Wednesday 6 January 2021                |On Friday 19 February 2021      |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                             ALPHA UMARU JALLOH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Lee, Counsel instructed by Bail for  Immigration
Detainees


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  I refer  to  the  parties
    hereafter as they were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  ease  of
    reference.  The Respondent appeals against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Kudhail  promulgated  on  25   February   2020   ("the
    Decision"). By the Decision, the Judge allowed the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision dated  14  March  2019  refusing  his
    human rights claims  in  the  context  of  a  decision  to  deport  the
    Appellant to Sierra Leone.

 2. The Appellant came to the UK, in June 1997, then aged fifteen years  as
    an unaccompanied minor.  He claimed  asylum.   The  Respondent  refused
    that claim on  11  October  2001.   The  Appellant  appealed  but  then
    withdrew his appeal.  He was appeal rights exhausted on 4 August  2003.
    In January 2008, the Appellant wrote to the Respondent challenging  the
    decision and asserting that he was  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  the
    Respondent's exceptional leave policy in  relation  to  Sierra  Leonian
    asylum seekers.

 3. On 31 March  2007,  the  Appellant  made  an  application  for  an  EEA
    residence permit as the partner of a  Swiss  national.   He  was  given
    approval to marry her in 2008.  He was given a five-year  permit  based
    on that relationship.  His subsequent application to extend the  permit
    was however refused.  That relationship has broken down.  The Appellant
    withdrew a further application when the Respondent agreed to grant  the
    Appellant  indefinite  leave  to  remain  ("ILR")   pursuant   to   her
    exceptional leave policy.  He was granted ILR outside  the  Immigration
    Rules ("the Rules") on 9 January 2018.

 4. On 26 September 2018, the Appellant was convicted of dangerous  driving
    and using a vehicle whilst uninsured.  He was sentenced to nine  months
    in prison on 22 October 2018  and  banned  from  driving  for  eighteen
    months.  This is the index offence on which the  deportation  order  is
    based.  The deportation order is premised on the Respondent's view that
    the offence  caused  serious  harm.   The  Appellant  has  two  earlier
    convictions, the first in December 2014 of several counts  of  employee
    theft and the second in 2017 for driving whilst uninsured  and  without
    an appropriate licence.  Neither of those offences led to a sentence of
    imprisonment.  Both offences  pre-date  the  granting  of  ILR  to  the
    Appellant.

 5. The Judge found at [35] of the Decision that the index offence had  not
    caused serious harm.  In  consequence,  she  found  at  [36]  that  the
    Appellant is not a foreign criminal for the purposes of  the  Rules  or
    Section 117C Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("Section
    117C").   The  Judge  went  on  to  consider  whether  deportation  was
    justified on the basis that the Appellant's presence is  not  conducive
    to the public good (under section 3(5) Immigration Act  1971).   Having
    conducted  the  balancing  exercise  between  interference   with   the
    Appellant's private and family life and the public interest, the  Judge
    concluded that the decision to deport was disproportionate and  allowed
    the appeal.

 6. The Respondent appeals on one ground only, namely that  the  Judge  has
    misdirected herself in law.  She submits that the Judge has  failed  to
    take into account that the Rules refer to the view of the Secretary  of
    State.  It is said that the Judge has failed to  give  weight  to  that
    view.  The Respondent also submits that the Judge has  failed  to  take
    into account other aspects of the offence and the wider harm caused  by
    offences of the nature of the index offence and/or that  the  Appellant
    has been assessed as presenting a medium risk of harm  of  reoffending.
    It is also asserted in the grounds that the Appellant is  a  persistent
    offender and that the Judge has failed to have regard  to  this  issue.
    The Secretary of State asserts that the Judge has,  by  reason  of  her
    misdirection, failed to apply the Rules in terms of the  exceptions  to
    deportation which would apply if  the  Appellant  is  classified  as  a
    person whose offence has caused serious harm.   She  submits  that  the
    Appellant is unable to satisfy the exceptions within  the  Rules.   His
    children live with their mother in Switzerland.  He is said to  have  a
    partner but, says  the  Respondent,  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    relationship is genuine and subsisting.  The Appellant cannot meet  the
    private life exception as he has not lived in the UK lawfully for  more
    than half his life.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on 13 March 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  It is arguable that the Judge has erred in law by  stating
         that paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules do not  apply
         when the Respondent is required to consider whether they  apply  as
         set out in paragraph 398(c) of the Immigration Rules and by failing
         to  take  into  account  the  said  provisions,  instead  makes  an
         assessment under the Razgar principles."

 8. The Appellant filed a  Rule  24  Reply  on  12  May  2020  and  further
    submissions on 18 June 2020.  Those written submissions were adopted by
    Mr Lee in oral submissions and I deal with them in substance below.

 9. By a Note and Directions sent on 10 June  2020,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan directed that there should be a remote hearing to determine the
    error of law issue.

10. So it is that the matter comes  before  me  to  determine  whether  the
    Decision contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either  re-
    make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  do
    so.  The hearing was attended by representatives for both  parties  and
    by the Appellant himself.  There were some  technical  issues  with  Mr
    Clarke's connection which were overcome by short delays whilst the link
    reconnected.  Those issues did not affect the conduct  of  the  hearing
    overall and all those present indicated that they were able  to  follow
    the hearing at all times.  I had before me the Appellant's documents as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal hearing (referred to hereafter
    as [AB/xx]) and a bundle provided by the Appellant which  included  the
    core documents in relation to the appeal.  I also had the  Respondent's
    bundle to which I refer below as [RB/xx].  My attention  was  drawn  to
    relevant authorities on which the parties relied as set out below.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

11. Before turning to consider the way in which the  Judge  approached  the
    issues in  this  appeal,  it  is  appropriate  to  set  out  the  legal
    framework.

    LEGAL FRAMEWORK

12. The parties' submissions turn  on  the  provisions  of  the  Rules  and
    definitions under Section 117D and it is therefore appropriate to start
    by setting out those parts which  are  or  might  be  relevant  for  my
    purposes as follows:

    The Immigration Rules

         "Deportation and Article 8

         A398. These rules apply where:

      a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
         deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations
         under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

         (b)  ...

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and

         (a)  ...;

         (b)  ...; or

         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
         public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other
         factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

             (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported, because of
             compelling circumstances over and above those described in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain
             in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
         his life; and

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."




    Section 117

         "117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
         question of whether an interference with a person's right to
         respect for private and family life is justified under Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2)  ...

         (3)  ...

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.

         117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
             integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

      1) In this Part-

             "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on
             Human Rights;

             "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18
             and who-

                  (a)  is a British citizen, or

                  (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                  period of seven years or more;

             "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

               a) is a British citizen, or

               b) ...

         (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,

             (b)  who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an
             offence, and

             (c)  who-

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
                  least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of an offence that has caused
                  serious harm, or

                  (iii)    is a persistent offender."

13. It is common ground that the Appellant does not meet the  criteria  for
    automatic deportation based  on  the  length  of  his  sentence.   That
    sentence was one of less than twelve months.  Accordingly, to bring the
    Appellant within the Rules at paragraphs 399 and 399A and Section  117C
    (via Section 117D definitions) the Respondent  has  to  show  that  the
    Appellant has committed an offence which causes serious harm  or  is  a
    persistent offender.  It is worth noting that the Respondent  does  not
    rely on the Appellant's offending as being persistent  in  her  reasons
    for deportation.

14. Although the Respondent's grounds do not cite authority in  support  of
    her propositions, Mr Clarke  drew  my  attention  to  SC  (Zimbabwe)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ  929  ("SC
    (Zimbabwe)"), and in particular what is  said  about  the  case  of  LT
    (Kosovo) and another v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 1246 ("LT (Kosovo)") at [17] to [22] of  the  judgment.
    The case of LT (Kosovo) might be said to support the Respondent's  case
    and I therefore set out the relevant extract from the  judgment  in  SC
    (Zimbabwe) dealing with that case as follows:

         "17. Mr Pilgerstorfer for the respondent took three points  on  the
         'persistent offender' issue which is at the heart of  this  appeal.
         First, he submitted that, having regard to the wording of paragraph
         398(c) of the Rules ('...in the view  of  the  Secretary  of  State
         ...[X] is a persistent offender who shows a particular  regard  for
         the  law'),  it  is  necessary  for  the  FTT  and  UT  to   attach
         'significant weight' to the respondent's view on the point.  ...

         18.  Mr Pilgerstorfer supported his first argument by  citing  this
         court's decision in LT (Kosovo) & anor.  v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
         1246.  The question in the case was whether an offence of supplying
         a Class A drug fell to be treated as within the 'serious harm' limb
         of paragraph 398(c) of the  Rules.   The  Secretary  of  State  had
         decided that the offences in those cases were offences which caused
         serious harm.  It was submitted that substantial weight  should  be
         given to that view.  Laws LJ (with whom Tomlinson and  Lewison  LJJ
         agreed) said (at paragraph 21):

             '21. If it were suggested that the tribunals were bound by the
             Secretary of State's  opinion  as  to  serious  harm  I  would
             disagree.  Such a conclusion would nullify the right of appeal
             and reduce it to a residual Wednesbury review [1948] 1 KB  23,
             whereas it is elementary that the right of appeal to  the  FTT
             is on the merits (see  now  section  84  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration & Asylum Act 2002, to which Mr Sedon took us  this
             morning).  That position is not shifted by  the  reference  in
             paragraph 398(c) to  the  Secretary  of  State's  view.   That
             feature of the language of the rule cannot,  in  my  judgment,
             deprive the appellants of their right to merits appeal.   This
             approach is, I think, supported by Bah [2012] UKUT  00196  and
             again Rehman [2001] 1 AC 153.  But that is not to say that the
             reference  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  view  is   of   no
             significance.  The Secretary of State is the primary decision-
             maker.   She  has  a  constitutional  responsibility  to  make
             judgments  as  to  the  force  of  the  public   interest   in
             deportation cases.   That  circumstance  has  to  be  balanced
             against the appellants' right  to  a  merits  appeal.   In  my
             judgment, that is to be done by requiring the tribunals  in  a
             paragraph 398(c) case, while considering  all  the  facts  put
             before them, to accord significant weight to the Secretary  of
             State's view of 'serious harm'.  They are not to be  bound  by
             it but they are  to  treat  [sic]  is  an  important  relevant
             factor.  I should add that I cannot see that this approach  is
             in any way undermined by the new provisions  in  section  117C
             and D of the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum  Act  2002,  to
             which Mr Sedon referred this morning.'

         19.  The LT case was  concerned  solely  with  the  application  of
         paragraph 398(c) of the Rules.  With respect to  the  short  obiter
         dictum in the last sentence of the passage just quoted,  I  do  not
         agree.  It seems to me to be quite clear that once the matter comes
         before a tribunal or a court, what has to be applied is s.117D  (c)
         of the Act.  The words  of  that  provision  are  the  words  which
         Parliament has chosen to enact, without more.  The  three  elements
         of that paragraph of the subsection are in clear terms and  do  not
         require any gloss to be put upon  them  by  the  reference  to  the
         Rules.  The view of the Secretary of State or indeed of a judge  in
         sentencing remarks may be of assistance to a tribunal or  court  in
         deciding whether an offence has caused serious harm or  whether  an
         offender is a persistent offender,  but  I  do  not  see  that  the
         statutory words compel any particular weight to  be  given  to  the
         Secretary of State's view on either in the  assessment.   I  would,
         therefore, reject Mr Pilgerstorfer's first submission.

         20.  As to the second and third arguments made by Mr Pilgerstorfer,
         it is necessary to consider  the  helpful  decision  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal (Andrews J and Upper Tribunal Judge Southern) in  Chege  v
         SSHD [2016] UKUT 00187 (IAC).

         ...

         22.  On the route to that decision, the UT considered  the  wording
         of rule 398(c), both as to 'serious harm' and 'particular disregard
         for the law', but did not express any view  on  the  weight  to  be
         attached  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  view  as  urged  by   Mr
         Pilgerstorfer in his first submission which I have rejected.   They
         did, however, say this in paragraph 33 of the Decision:

             '33. ... However  since,  in  order  for  s.117D(2)(c)  to  be
             engaged, the Secretary of State must already have  formed  the
             view that paragraph 398(c) of the Rules applies, the  Tribunal
             would not be applying s.117C  to  anyone,  however  persistent
             their offending, that the Secretary of State has  not  already
             considered showed a particular disregard for the  law  in  the
             sense explained above.'"

15. The Appellant's Rule 24 submissions  rely  on  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment in R (oao) Mahmood and others v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home  Department  [2020]  EWCA  717  (Civ)   ("Mahmood")   which   also
    incorporates reference to SC (Zimbabwe).  At [35] to  [42],  the  Court
    made a number of observations about deportation in the  context  of  an
    offence said to cause serious harm as follows:

         "35. First, the  three  categories  in  subsection  (2)(c)  have  a
         potential to overlap.  Plainly  an  offender  who  has  received  a
         sentence of more than  12  months  may  have  done  so  because  he
         committed  an  offence  which  caused  serious  harm.  Equally,  an
         offender who persistently offends is likely  to  receive  a  longer
         sentence (and more than 12 months) because  of  a  poor  antecedent
         history.

         36.  Second, the provision  must  be  given  its  ordinary  meaning
         informed  by  its  context.  The  three  categories  must  be  read
         together. This is more  than  simply  a  conventional  approach  to
         statutory interpretation.  It  is  plain,  for  example,  from  the
         structure of the provision that an offender who has been  sentenced
         to a term of less than 12 months for an offence may nevertheless be
         treated as a 'foreign criminal' if the offence caused serious harm;
         and that 'serious harm' will only be relevant when the sentence for
         an offence is less than 12 months. This throws light on what may be
         encompassed by an offence which causes serious harm.  While  it  is
         possible to think of  offences  which,  despite  causing  the  most
         serious harm, would  not  typically  attract  an  immediate  prison
         sentence of at least 12 months (causing death by  careless  driving
         is an example), in general paragraph (c)(ii) is not concerned  with
         the most serious kind of harm which comes before the Crown Court.

         37.  Third, Mr Biggs drew our attention to s.32(1)-(5)  of  the  UK
         Borders Act 2007 ('UKBA 2007'). Section 32(3) provides that,  where
         an offender is sentenced to imprisonment for an  offence  specified
         by the Secretary of State by order, a deportation order may be made
         under s.5(1) of the IA 1971. His submission was that  allowing  the
         'serious harm' test under s.117D(2)(c)(ii) to be satisfied where  a
         given type of offence has  been  committed,  merely  because  of  a
         perceived  generalised  harm  caused  by  such   offending,   would
         'trespass into territory' covered by s.32(3) of the  UKBA.  We  are
         not persuaded that there is any merit  in  this  argument.  Section
         32(3)  has  not  been  brought  into  legislative  effect  and  the
         Secretary of State has not made any order as envisaged; and part 5A
         of the NIAA 2002 was introduced  so  as  to  provide  a  structured
         approach to the issue of deporting foreign criminals  by  reference
         to rights under article 8 of the ECHR.

         38.  Although, Mr Biggs in his  attractive  submissions  sought  to
         confine the ambit of section 117D(2)(c)(ii)  by  reference  to  the
         words 'caused' and 'harm', these are words in common usage  and  do
         not call for extensive commentary.

         39.  So far as the  word  'caused'  is  concerned,  the  harm  must
         plainly be causatively linked to the offence. In  the  case  of  an
         offence of violence, injury will be caused to the immediate  victim
         and possibly others. However, what matters is the  harm  caused  by
         the particular offence. The prevalence of  (even  minor)  offending
         may cause serious harm to society, but that does not mean  that  an
         individual  offence  considered   in   isolation   has   done   so.
         Shoplifting, for example, may  be  a  significant  social  problem,
         causing serious economic harm and distress to the owner of a modest
         corner shop; and a thief who steals a single item of low value  may
         contribute to that harm, but it cannot realistically be  said  that
         such a thief caused serious harm himself, either to the owner or to
         society in general. Beyond  this,  we  are  doubtful  that  a  more
         general analysis of how  the  law  approaches  causation  in  other
         fields is helpful.

         40.  As to 'harm', often it will be clear from the  nature  of  the
         offence that harm  has  been  caused.  Assault  Occasioning  Actual
         Bodily Harm under s.47 of the Offences Against the Person Act  1861
         is an obvious example.

         41.  Mr Biggs argued on behalf of Mahmood that  the  harm  must  be
         physical or psychological harm to an identifiable  individual  that
         is identifiable  and  quantifiable.  We  see  no  good  reason  for
         interpreting the  provision  in  this  way.  The  criminal  law  is
         designed to prevent harm that may include psychological,  emotional
         or economic harm. Nor is there good reason to suppose  a  statutory
         intent to limit  the  harm  to  an  individual.  Some  crimes,  for
         example, supplying class A drugs, money laundering,  possession  of
         firearms, cybercrimes, perjury and perverting the course of  public
         justice may cause societal harm. In most cases the  nature  of  the
         harm will be apparent from the nature of the  offence  itself,  the
         sentencing remarks or from victim  statements.  However,  we  agree
         with Mr Biggs, at least to this extent: harm in this  context  does
         not include the potential for harm or  an  intention  to  do  harm.
         Where there is a conviction for a serious attempt  offence,  it  is
         likely that the sentence will be more than 12 months.

         42.  The adjective 'serious' qualifies the extent of the harm;  but
         provides no precise criteria. It is  implicit  that  an  evaluative
         judgment has to be made in the light of the facts and circumstances
         of the offending. There can be no general and all-embracing test of
         seriousness. In some cases, it will be a straightforward evaluation
         and will not need specific evidence of the extent of the harm;  but
         in every case, it will be for the tribunal to evaluate  the  extent
         of the harm on the basis of the  evidence  that  is  available  and
         drawing common sense conclusions."

16. It is not disputed that the burden  of  proving  that  an  offence  has
    caused serious harm falls on the Respondent to the civil standard ([47]
    of the judgment in Mahmood).  The Court  of  Appeal  went  on  to  make
    various observations about the nature  and  extent  of  evidence  which
    would be relevant to that assessment.  In relation to the relevance  of
    the Respondent's view, the Court said the  following  by  reference  to
    other cases:

         "54. As noted above, an issue arises as to the weight to  be  given
         to the views of the Secretary of State.

         55.  In SC (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2018] EWCA Civ 929,  the  Court  of  Appeal,  in  the  context  of
         s.117D(2)(c)(iii) of the NIAA 2002 ('persistent offender'), doubted
         the observation in LT (Kosovo) (above) at [21] that  the  Secretary
         of State's view as to 'serious harm'  was  'an  important  relevant
         factor' when  applying  s.117(2)(c)(iii).  McCombe  LJ,  with  whom
         Lindblom and Leggatt LJJ  agreed,  noted  that  it  was  an  obiter
         observation:

             '19. ...The view of the Secretary of  State  or  indeed  of  a
             judge in sentencing remarks may be of assistance to a tribunal
             or court in deciding whether an  offence  has  caused  serious
             harm or whether an offender is a persistent offender, but I do
             not see that the statutory words compel any particular  weight
             to be given to the Secretary of State's view on either in  the
             assessment...'

         56.  We agree.  The views of the Secretary of State are a  starting
         point and the reasoning of a decision letter may be compelling; but
         ultimately the issues that arise under s.117D(2)(c)(ii) will  be  a
         matter for the FtT.  Provided the tribunal has taken  into  account
         all relevant factors, has not taken into account immaterial factors
         and has reached a conclusion which is not perverse, its  conclusion
         will not give rise to an actionable error of law."

17. The principles enunciated by the Court of Appeal are  adopted  by  this
    Tribunal in  the  headnote  to  the  case  of  Wilson  (NIAA  Part  5A;
    deportation decisions) [2020] UKUT 00350 (IAC) ("Wilson").  I need  not
    set out [1] and [2] of the  headnote  which  are  encapsulated  in  the
    extracts from Mahmood above.  However, [3] of the headnote  contains  a
    useful summary of how the evidence should be approached as follows:

         "(3) In determining what factors are relevant  or  irrelevant,  the
         following should be borne in mind:

             (a)  The Secretary of State's view of whether the offence  has
             caused serious harm is a starting point;

             (b)  The sentencing remarks should be carefully considered, as
             they will often contain valuable information; not  least  what
             may be said about the offence having caused "serious harm", as
             categorised in the Sentencing Council Guidelines;

             (c)  A victim statement adduced in  the  criminal  proceedings
             will be relevant;

             (d)  Whilst the Secretary of State bears the burden of showing
             that the offence has caused serious harm, she does not need to
             adduce evidence from the victim at a hearing before the First-
             tier Tribunal;

             (e)  The appellant's own evidence to the  First-tier  Tribunal
             on the issue of seriousness will usually need  to  be  treated
             with caution;

             (f)  Serious harm can involve physical, emotional or  economic
             harm and does not need to be limited to an individual;

             (g)  The mere potential for harm is irrelevant;

             (h)  The fact that a particular type of offence contributes to
             a serious/widespread problem is not sufficient; there must  be
             some evidence that  the  actual  offence  has  caused  serious
             harm."

18. The Tribunal's decision in Wilson and  indeed  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment in Mahmood post-date the Decision but form a  useful  backdrop
    against which to assess the Judge's reasoning in this appeal. The Judge
    herself made reference to [19] of the judgment in SC  (Zimbabwe)  as  I
    note below.

19. In relation  to  the  subsidiary  issue  whether  the  Appellant  is  a
    persistent offender or, more accurately, whether the Judge has erred in
    failing to deal  with  this  point,  I  have  already  noted  that  the
    Respondent's decision does not rely on the Appellant being a persistent
    offender.  Although, in Mahmood, the Respondent was  permitted  to  add
    this as an additional reason for deportation in the Court of Appeal (in
    the linked case of Estnerie), the Appellant refers to the way in  which
    discretion ought to be exercised where an additional reason  is  relied
    upon at [68] of the judgment as follows:

         "68. It is established that this court has a discretion to allow  a
         point to be argued on appeal from the UT  notwithstanding  that  it
         was not taken in the proceedings before the FtT and the  UT.   That
         discretion must be exercised with caution so as to ensure that  the
         other  party  is  not  unfairly  prejudiced.   In  particular,  the
         discretion should rarely  if  ever  be  exercised  unless  all  the
         necessary facts have been found or if the tribunal's findings would
         or might have been affected by evidence which was  not  adduced  in
         the proceedings below..."

20. In relation to persistent offending, the Respondent places reliance  on
    the Tribunal's decision in Chege ("is a  persistent  offender")  [2016]
    UKUT 00187 (IAC)  ("Chege").   The  headnote  in  that  case  reads  as
    follows:

         "1.  The question whether the appellant "is a persistent  offender"
         is a question of mixed fact and law and falls to be  determined  by
         the Tribunal as at the date of the hearing before it.

         2.   The phrase "persistent offender" in s.117D(2)(c) of  the  2002
         Act must mean the same thing as "persistent offender" in  paragraph
         398(c) of the Immigration Rules.

         3.   A "persistent offender" is someone who keeps on  breaking  the
         law. That does not mean, however, that he has to keep on  offending
         until the date of the relevant decision or that the  continuity  of
         the offending cannot be broken. A "persistent offender"  is  not  a
         permanent status that can never be lost once it is acquired, but an
         individual can be regarded  as  a  "persistent  offender"  for  the
         purpose of the Rules and the 2002 Act even though he may  not  have
         offended  for  some  time.  The  question  whether  he  fits   that
         description will depend on the overall picture and pattern  of  his
         offending over his entire offending history up to that  date.  Each
         case will turn on its own facts."

21. The Appellant's Rule 24 submissions  draw  attention  to  [54]  of  the
    judgment in Chege which is cited by the Court of Appeal  with  approval
    at [24] and [25] of the judgment in SC (Zimbabwe) as follows:

         "Plainly a persistent offender is not simply  someone  who  offends
         more than  once.   There  has  to  be  repeat  offending  but  that
         repetition,  in  and  of  itself,  will  not  be  enough  to   show
         persistence.  There has  to  be  a  history  of  repeated  criminal
         conduct carried out over a sufficiently  long  period  to  indicate
         that the person concerned is  someone  who  keeps  on  reoffending.
         However, determining whether the offending  is  persistent  is  not
         just a mathematical exercise.  How  long  a  period  and  how  many
         offences will be enough will depend very much on the facts  of  the
         particular case and the nature and circumstances of the  offending.
         The criminal offences need not be the same, or  even  of  the  same
         character as each other.  Persistence may be shown by the fact that
         a person keeps committing the same type  of  offence,  but  it  may
         equally be shown by the fact that he has committed a  wide  variety
         of different offences over a period of time."

22. Finally, in relation to the weight to be  given  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's view of the offending and in particular as to the importance of
    that view when dealing with  the  public  interest  in  the  Article  8
    balance under the Rules, Mr Clarke relied on the Supreme Court judgment
    in Agyarko and Ikuga v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11 ("Agyarko") at [46] and [47] as follows:

         "46. In considering that question, it is  important  to  appreciate
         that the Rules are not simply the product of a legal analysis: they
         are not intended to be a summary of  the  Strasbourg  case  law  on
         article 8. As was explained at para 10 above, they  are  statements
         of the practice to be followed, which are approved  by  Parliament,
         and are based  on  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  as  to  how
         individual rights under article 8 should be  balanced  against  the
         competing public interests. They are designed  to  operate  on  the
         basis that decisions taken in accordance with them  are  compatible
         with article 8 in all but exceptional cases. The Secretary of State
         is in principle entitled  to  have  a  policy  of  the  kind  which
         underpins the Rules. While the European court has provided guidance
         as  to  factors  which  should  be  taken  into  account,  it   has
         acknowledged that the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  competing
         considerations, in striking a fair balance, falls within the margin
         of appreciation of the national authorities, subject to supervision
         at the European level.  The  margin  of  appreciation  of  national
         authorities is not unlimited,  but  it  is  nevertheless  real  and
         important. Immigration control is an intensely political issue,  on
         which differing views are held within the contracting  states,  and
         as between those states. The ECHR has therefore to be applied in  a
         manner which is  capable  of  accommodating  different  approaches,
         within  limits.  Under  the  constitutional  arrangements  existing
         within the UK, the courts can review the compatibility of decision-
         making in relation to immigration with the Convention  rights,  but
         the authorities responsible for determining policy in  relation  to
         immigration,  within  the  limits  of  the   national   margin   of
         appreciation, are the Secretary of State and Parliament.

         47.   The  Rules  therefore  reflect  the  responsible   Minister's
         assessment, at a general level,  of  the  relative  weight  of  the
         competing factors when striking a fair balance under article 8. The
         courts can review that general assessment in  the  event  that  the
         decision-making process is challenged as  being  incompatible  with
         Convention rights or based on an  erroneous  understanding  of  the
         law, but they have  to  bear  in  mind  the  Secretary  of  State's
         constitutional responsibility for policy  in  this  area,  and  the
         endorsement of the Rules by Parliament. It is also the function  of
         the courts to consider individual cases which come before  them  on
         appeal or by way of judicial review, and that will require them  to
         consider how the balance is struck in individual  cases.  In  doing
         so, they have to take the Secretary of State's policy into  account
         and to attach considerable weight to it at a general level, as well
         as considering all the factors which are relevant to the particular
         case. This was explained in Hesham Ali at paras 44-46, 50 and 53."

THE DECISION AND RELEVANT EVIDENCE

23. In order to set the parties' competing submissions in  context,  I  set
    out the relevant passages from the Decision as well  as  extracts  from
    the  evidence  upon  which  reliance  was  placed  in  the  course   of
    submissions.

24. The Judge considers the issue whether the Appellant  has  committed  an
    offence which has caused serious harm at [31] to [36] of  the  Decision
    as follows:

         "31. The appellant has made a human rights claim, as a  result  the
         respondent  considered  the  claim  under  paragraph  398  of   the
         immigration rules as she is required to do.  Section  117C  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002as amended is a  mirror
         image of the requirements.  The first consideration in this case is
         whether appellant is a Foreign Criminal as defined.  In  this  case
         the respondent argues that the appellant has been convicted  of  an
         offence which has caused serious harm as per Section  117D  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  In  doing
         so she points to the appellant's  criminal  offence  of  'dangerous
         driving and using a vehicle whilst uninsured' as her primary reason
         for this, effectively the trigger offence.  The appellant  received
         a 9 months sentence for this offence.  At the time of the decision,
         taken on 29 November 2018, the appellant also  had  other  previous
         convictions of (1) five counts of employee theft  receiving  a  160
         hours voluntary service and a  fine;  and  (2)  driving  without  a
         license [sic] and using an uninsured vehicle receiving fines and  6
         points on his license [sic].  These have not been  referred  to  as
         the reason for the decision that serious harm was caused (paragraph
         25/RFRL/p24/AB).

         32.  The first question given all  of  the  above  is  whether  the
         appellant's offending amounts to  causing  serious  harm.   In  the
         Respondents Guidance 'Criminality: Article  8  ECHR  cases  Version
         8.0, 13 May 2019', it states:

             'Serious harm

             It is at the discretion of the Secretary of State  whether  he
             considers an offence to have caused serious harm.

             An offence that has caused 'serious  harm'  means  an  offence
             that has caused serious physical or psychological  harm  to  a
             victim or victims, or that has  contributed  to  a  widespread
             problem that causes serious harm to a community or society  in
             general.

             The foreign criminal does not have to have been  convicted  in
             relation  to  any  serious  harm  which  followed  from  their
             offence.  For example, they may fit within this  provision  if
             they are convicted of a lesser offence because  it  cannot  be
             proved beyond reasonable doubt that  they  were  guilty  of  a
             separate  offence  in  relation  to  the  serious  harm  which
             resulted from their actions.

             Where a person has been convicted  of  one  or  more  violent,
             drugs or sex offences, they will usually be considered to have
             been convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm.'

         33.  In SC (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2018] EWCA Civ 929, Lord Justice  McCombe  gives  comment  on  the
         weight the Courts should give to the Secretary of State view or the
         sentencing  judges  remarks  when  considering  serious   harm   or
         persistent offending, he states:

             '19. ... It seems to me to be quite clear that once the matter
             comes before a tribunal or a court, what has to be applied  is
             s.117D(c) of the Act.  The words of  that  provision  are  the
             words which Parliament has chosen to enact, without more.  The
             three elements of that paragraph  of  the  subsection  are  in
             clear terms and do not require any gloss to be put  upon  them
             by the reference to the Rules.  The view of the  Secretary  of
             State or indeed of a judge in sentencing  remarks  may  be  of
             assistance to a tribunal  or  court  in  deciding  whether  an
             offence has caused serious harm or whether an  offender  is  a
             persistent offender, but I do not see that the statutory words
             compel any particular weight to be given to the  Secretary  of
             State's view on either in the assessment."

         34.  I have considered the appellant evidence's [sic] with  regards
         to the circumstances of the offence and how it  occurred.   I  also
         have the sentencing judges remarks which I  have  considered.   The
         sentencing judge does not make comment on the serious  harm  caused
         on the passenger in the vehicle  at  the  time  the  appellant  was
         driving.  He does however refer to the hysteria in the case and the
         fact she was calling the police at the time.  This  I  find,  is  a
         natural reaction to the circumstances she found herself in.

         35.  I also take into account the police chase and damage caused to
         property.  The appellants evidence is that he has apologised to the
         victim and they are now on speaking terms.  There  was  no  witness
         statement from the victim on this.  Neither did  I  have  a  victim
         impact statement.  Therefore, this is neutral and does not take  me
         further forward with regards to the serious  harm.   The  Probation
         report dated 26 August 2018 (p83/AB),  refers  to  the  appellant's
         risk of reconviction as low and that  he  has  a  'medium  risk  of
         serious harm to the general public'.  However, the Probation report
         dated 07 August 2019, refers to the appellant seeking to  undertake
         volunteering  work  and   his   compliance   with   his   probation
         requirements.  Taking the above into account and applying it to the
         facts of this case I conclude that the  appellant  has  not  caused
         serious  harm  due  to  his  offending  as  there  is  no  evidence
         supporting serious psychological or physical harm to the victim  or
         that he contributed to a widespread  problem  that  causes  serious
         harm to a community or to society in general.

         36.  As a consequence, the appellant is  therefore  not  a  foreign
         criminal for the purposes of Section 117C  and  the  provisions  of
         paragraph 398,399 or 399A of the immigration rules do not apply  to
         him.  This leaves me with a decision by the respondent  to  make  a
         deportation order under section 3(5) of the  Immigration  Act  1971
         for the purposes of the refusal of the human  rights  claim.   This
         requires an assessment under Razgar."

25. In light of the Judge's reliance on the sentencing remarks, I set those
    out in full.  They appear at [RB/261-262]:

         "RECORDER HUNTER: Mr Jalloh if you would please stand up.

         You are now aged 36, having been born on the 7th of March of  1982,
         and on the 26th of September of this year, you  pleaded  guilty  of
         two offences, for dangerous driving, about which I have  heard  and
         also an offence of no insurance because  you  don't  have  a  valid
         driving  licence.   There  were  other  offences  I  haven't  heard
         anything about and I disregard them for the purposes of  sentencing
         you.

         This  is  your  second  offence,  however,  for   driving   without
         insurance, when just over a year ago you were fined 120  and  your
         licence endorsed with six penalty points.  Following your  plea  of
         guilty, you were committed to this court for  sentence.   I  accept
         the remorse  that  has  been  urged  on  the  court  that  you  now
         demonstrate, but you weren't demonstrating any during the piece  of
         shocking driving, and it can only be described in that way.

         Your reasons that you have  given  for  driving  in  that  way,  as
         they've been urged upon this court, I don't entirely accept because
         I've also read what else was in the car and  the  circumstances  of
         the passenger and the degree of hysteria that you  placed  her  in.
         This was, as I say, a shocking piece of driving.  You were  driving
         between 50 and 60 miles an hour in residential  streets  where  the
         speed limit is 30 miles an hour.  You drove at speeds of  over  110
         miles an hour on roads where the speed limit was 40 miles an  hour.
         You skidded through red  traffic  lights.   You  forced  a  private
         vehicle off the road.  You drove erratically over speed  bumps  and
         mini roundabouts, you overtook vehicles.   You  rammed  one  police
         car, damaged  another  and,  as  I  say,  the  offence  is  further
         aggravated by the fact that you were carrying a passenger  who  was
         hysterical and herself phoning the  police  whilst  urging  you  to
         stop.

         A number of police vehicles had to be engaged in  pursuit  of  you,
         and were only capable of stopping you when you damaged your vehicle
         to the extent that it was almost impossible for you  to  drive  off
         further.  You disregarded the warnings of others and  when  stopped
         had to be placed on the  floor.   At  that  point  you  immediately
         conceded that your driving had been dangerous, although you claimed
         in your handcuff predicament that you were not dangerous and agreed
         that you had severely f***** up, I think your words.

         I've read the pre-sentence report and considered carefully what  it
         suggested and I've read the references that were  uploaded  shortly
         before I cam into court  and  I  of  course  give  you  credit  for
         pleading guilty.  But this offence, as  your  own  counsel  clearly
         concedes, crosses the custody threshold and I'm afraid this  is  an
         offence for which the  only  appropriate  punishment  that  can  be
         achieved is the imposition of an immediate custodial sentence.  And
         so, for this piece of driving, which would have received a sentence
         of imprisonment of 12 months, had you not pleaded guilty, I pass  a
         sentence of imprisonment for nine months, of which you  will  serve
         half.

         You will be disqualified from driving for a period  of  18  months,
         longer than the minimum 12 months because you will spend the  first
         part of that period in custody.  You will remain disqualified until
         you have passed an extended retest.

         For the offence of no insurance, of course, you would have  been  a
         totter in any event,  and  you're  already  disqualified,  so  your
         licence will be endorsed and I order whatever  is  the  appropriate
         Victim Surcharge."

26. Since it is the Respondent's case, in effect, that the Judge has failed
    to give sufficient weight to her views, and since Mr Lee relied on  the
    paucity of the Respondent's reasoning in that regard, I  set  out  also
    the relevant extract from the Respondent's decision letter (at  [AB/30-
    55]) which is indeed brief as follows:

         "25. Your deportation is conducive to the public good  and  in  the
         public interest because you have been convicted of an offence which
         has caused serious harm.  This is  because  dangerous  driving  and
         using a vehicle while uninsured.   Therefore,  in  accordance  with
         paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  public  interest
         requires  your  deportation  unless  an  exception  to  deportation
         applies.  The exceptions are set out at paragraphs 399 and 399A  of
         the Immigration Rules."

   I note the incorporation of the sentencing remarks as set  out  above  at
   [18] of the decision letter.

DISCUSSION

27. I begin with the thrust of the  Respondent's  argument  concerning  the
    wording of the Rules.  It is asserted  in  the  grounds  that,  because
    paragraph 398(c) of the Rules refers to the Respondent's  view  whether
    the offence has caused serious harm, the Judge has erred by failing  to
    acknowledge this factor.

28. It is not suggested by the Respondent and nor  could  it  be  that  the
    Judge was bound to accept the Respondent's view as determinative.   The
    argument concerns the weight to be given to her view.

29. I begin with the Rules themselves.  Paragraph 398(c) does  indeed  make
    reference to the view whether an offence has caused serious harm to  be
    that of the Secretary of State.  That is  an  express  reference  which
    does not appear in  all  paragraphs  of  the  Rules.   However,  it  is
    implicit from any decision of the Respondent that it must be  the  view
    of the Respondent (or more accurately the person making the decision on
    her behalf) that a person  either  satisfies  or  does  not  satisfy  a
    particular requirement of those Rules.  That may be said of  the  Rules
    in any context and not simply  deportation  cases  or  cases  involving
    consideration of the public interest.  It is also worthy of  note  that
    paragraph 398(c) refers to the requirement to consider  paragraphs  399
    and 399A being placed on the Secretary of State where the assessment is
    reached.  As one  would  expect,  the  rule  says  nothing  about  that
    obligation being placed on a  Tribunal  or  Court  simply  because  the
    Secretary of State has made the assessment that the offence has  caused
    serious harm.

30. Mr Clarke relies on Agyarko as requiring particular weight to be  given
    to the Respondent's view in a case such as this.  He says that this  is
    because the rule in question imports a  public  interest  consideration
    which it is for the Respondent to  determine  in  the  first  instance.
    However, although Agyarko supports the proposition that it is  for  the
    Respondent in the  first  instance  to  determine  the  general  policy
    position in relation to the balance to be struck between the rights  of
    the individual and the public interest, the judgment does not extend to
    the assessment of a Tribunal or Court which is reaching a determination
    of the rights of the individual and the public interest in a particular
    case.

31. That position can be illustrated in this case by the following example.
     If the Judge in this case had concluded that the  Appellant's  offence
    had  indeed  caused  serious  harm,  but  this  was  not  a  sufficient
    justification for deportation generally (rather than by balancing  that
    factor against the interference), that would amount to a clear error of
    law.  The Respondent has set out her views in the Rules and in  statute
    to indicate that  the  public  interest  requires  an  offender  to  be
    deported if the offence is one which has caused serious harm unless the
    exceptions are met or there are  other  very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above those exceptions which  outweigh  the  public  interest.
    However, the issue whether the offence is one which has caused  serious
    harm is a matter of assessment for the Judge in the individual case. It
    is only if the assessment is that serious harm has been caused that the
    exceptions under the Rules or Section 117C have to be considered.

32. I accept that LT (Kosovo) as cited in SC (Zimbabwe) might lend  support
    to the Respondent's argument that, when reaching the assessment whether
    an offence has caused serious harm, a "significant  weight"  should  be
    given to the Respondent's view (see [21] of that judgment as  cited  in
    SC (Zimbabwe) and set out  at  [14]  above).   That  arises  from  "the
    constitutional  responsibility  [placed  on  the  Respondent]  to  make
    judgments as to the force of the public interest in deportation cases".



33. What is said in LT (Kosovo) though has to be read now with both Section
    117 and the later Court of Appeal judgments following the  introduction
    of that legislation.  As noted by the Court of Appeal in SC  (Zimbabwe)
    at [19] of its judgment, the remarks of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  LT
    (Kosovo) regarding the introduction of Section 117  were  obiter.   The
    Court of Appeal in SC (Zimbabwe) expressly disagreed with those remarks
    and made plain in that paragraph that "once the matter comes  before  a
    tribunal or a court, what has to be applied is s.117D(c) of  the  Act".
    That is part of the extract cited by the Judge.  The Court of Appeal in
    Mahmood expressly agreed with the view expressed in SC (Zimbabwe)  that
    "the statutory words [do not] compel any particular weight to be  given
    to the Secretary of State's view".  The Court  on  that  occasion  held
    that "[t]he views of the Secretary of  State  are  a  starting  point".
    That is the wording adopted by this Tribunal in Wilson.

34. Although both Mahmood and Wilson post-date the Decision, Judge  Kudhail
    was bound by the Court of Appeal's judgment in SC (Zimbabwe) which  she
    cited and on which she placed reliance.  There can be no error  in  her
    doing so.

35. Insofar as the Respondent's grounds assert that the Judge has failed to
    "acknowledge the fact that 398(c) specifies that it is the Secretary of
    State's view as to whether the deportation of the person  is  conducive
    to the public interest", that  submission  has  no  merit.   The  Judge
    begins her consideration at [31] of the Decision with reference to  the
    Respondent's view.  She reminds herself of and sets out at [32] of  the
    Decision the Respondent's policy concerning  the  meaning  of  "serious
    harm".

36. The question thereafter is one of the appropriate weight to be given to
    the Respondent's view in this case.  Much must depend in  this  context
    on the extent of the evidence and reasoning  on  which  the  Respondent
    relies.  The issue is, as I  have  already  noted,  one  on  which  the
    Respondent bears the burden.  I have  cited  at  [26]  above  from  the
    Respondent's decision letter.   Although  I  do  not  accept  that  the
    reference to the sentencing remarks in  the  decision  is,  as  Mr  Lee
    submitted, irrelevant to the Respondent's consideration, her  reasoning
    is no more than mere assertion; it is undeveloped by reference  to  the
    nature and components of the offence.  That is reflected in the Judge's
    analysis at [31] of the Decision.

37. For those reasons, I am unpersuaded by the submission  that  the  Judge
    has failed to have regard to the Respondent's view  when  dealing  with
    the issue of serious harm.  She has given it some weight but the weight
    which she could give it is impacted  by  the  level  of  the  reasoning
    given.

38. Turning then to the other aspects of the Judge's  reasoning  which  are
    criticised in the Respondent's grounds, it is said that the  Judge  has
    relied on the absence in the sentencing  remarks  of  mention  of  harm
    caused to the passenger of the car who was one of the  victims  of  the
    offence.  That criticism has no merit.  I have set out  the  sentencing
    remarks at [25] above.  Those remarks clearly encompass the  impact  of
    the offence on the victim.  Judge Kudhail clearly has regard to what is
    said in  those  sentencing  remarks  about  the  impact  ([34]  of  the
    Decision).  It might be said that, at [35] of the Decision,  the  Judge
    did not exercise the  sort  of  caution  towards  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence which the guidance in Wilson advocates.   However,  when  that
    paragraph is read with [34] of the Decision, it is clear that the Judge
    discounts the Appellant's evidence about the longer-term impact due  to
    lack of evidence from the victim herself but, at the same time, did not
    give weight adversely to the Appellant due to lack  of  evidence  about
    what that impact was.  Whilst  the  authorities  make  clear  that  the
    Respondent is not required to  disclose  the  victim  impact  statement
    (even assuming she has it in her possession), the burden in relation to
    demonstrating serious harm is on the Respondent and it is  for  her  to
    point to whatever evidence she has in that regard or to the factors  on
    which she relies.

39. Nor can it be said that the Judge has failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    other potential victims of this offence.  As Mr Clarke submitted and  I
    accept, given the description of the extent and nature of  the  offence
    as set out in the sentencing remarks, it is extremely  fortuitous  that
    no-one was  injured  or  even  killed  by  the  Appellant's  "shocking"
    driving.  However, albeit a brief reference, it cannot be said that the
    Judge has failed to note the other  components  of  the  offence.   She
    refers at [35] of the Decision  to  the  police  chase  and  damage  to
    property caused.  As is made clear in the authorities, it  is  not  the
    potential for harm which is  relevant  but  the  harm  which  has  been
    caused.

40. That also is the answer to Mr Clarke's reliance on the characterisation
    of the offence as "dangerous driving".   As  Mr  Lee  submitted  and  I
    accept, the question is whether the offence has  caused  harm  and  not
    whether it has given rise to danger.  That the driving was  undoubtedly
    dangerous, as the Appellant accepts, gives rise to  the  potential  for
    harm but that is not enough to satisfy the requirement for the  offence
    to cause harm.

41.  Neither  can  it  be  said  that  the  Judge  has  ignored  the  wider
    implications of this type  of  offending.   The  Judge  refers  to  the
    "widespread problem that causes serious  harm  to  a  community  or  to
    society in general" at [35] of the Decision.  As Mr Lee submitted and I
    accept, that perhaps goes too far in terms of  relevant  considerations
    (see in particular [3(h)] of the guidance in  Wilson).   Any  error  in
    that regard however cannot assist the Respondent.

42. Ultimately, as the Judge noted at [35] of  the  Decision,  she  had  to
    assess whether the offence caused serious harm on the  evidence  before
    her.  As the Tribunal indicated in Wilson, if the Judge has had  regard
    to all relevant factors, has not had regard to irrelevant  factors  and
    has not reached a decision which is perverse, there is no  error.   The
    conclusion reached by the Judge may not be that which many other Judges
    (including myself) would have reached on these facts  but,  ultimately,
    the conclusion was one for this Judge on her assessment of the evidence
    and the only issue for me is whether her assessment contains errors  of
    law.  It does not.

43. Although not the subject of submissions before me, I also observe that,
    notwithstanding the conclusion of the Judge that Section 117C  was  not
    triggered, her assessment of the Appellant's private life in particular
    at [46] to [59] of the  Decision  closely  mirrors  the  considerations
    which would arise if this case were being considered  applying  Section
    117C (viz length of lawful residence, social and  cultural  integration
    and obstacles to integration in home country).

44. I deal finally and very briefly with the  alternative  submission  that
    the Judge has not considered whether the Appellant's offending  amounts
    to persistent offending.  Not only is  that  not  a  reason  given  for
    deportation by the Respondent in her decision, but it  is  not  clearly
    suggested by the facts in this case.  As Mr Clarke pointed  out  and  I
    accept, in Estnerie which was one of the linked cases in  Mahmood,  the
    Court of Appeal permitted the Secretary of State to introduce this at a
    very late stage notwithstanding the omission of it as a reason from the
    outset.  That has to be set in the context of what is said  about  that
    appellant's offending at [71] of the  judgment  in  Mahmood.   In  this
    case, as Mr Lee pointed out and I accept, the Appellant has been  found
    guilty of other offences on two separate occasions, in 2014  and  2017.
    However, as the Judge noted at [49] of the Decision, those  convictions
    pre-dated the granting of ILR to the  Appellant  in  January  2018  and
    could not of themselves have been considered by the Respondent at  that
    time to be grounds for deportation.  Not only is it the case  that  the
    facts do not suggest that the offending was  also  persistent  but  the
    Judge's finding in relation to the previous offences is  fatal  to  the
    Respondent's alternative submission.

    CONCLUSION

45. For the foregoing reasons, I am  satisfied  that  the  grounds  do  not
    disclose an error of law in the Decision.  I therefore uphold  it  with
    the result that the Appellant's appeal remains allowed.

    DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kudhail  promulgated  on  25
    February 2020 does not involve the making of an error  on  a  point  of
    law.  I therefore uphold the Decision.




Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  25 January 2021

