
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05998/2017
                                                               HU/01546/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Glasgow  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 7th February 2019                                                   On
7th March 2019



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  LIEN [P]
                                 MOHSIN [K]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Wintor, Counsel, instructed by Latta and Co
For the respondent:    Mr A Govan, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The 1st appellant is a national of Vietnam and the 2nd appellant is a
      national of Pakistan. They are married and have a daughter, [A].

   2. The 1st appellant came to the United Kingdom on the 28 December 2009
      as a student. She was granted further leave until her application as a
      Tier 1 entrepreneur was refused on the 11th August 2014. Her
      successful appeal was overturned by the Upper Tribunal. She then made
      a further application on 8 December 2016 based on article 8 which was
      refused. There was then a decision on the on 18 April 2017 which,
      unlike the earlier decision, conferred an in country right of appeal.
      Her application was founded upon her marriage to the 2nd appellant as
      well as her private life here.

   3. The 2nd appellant came to the United Kingdom as a student on 18 August
      2010. He was granted further leave as a general migrant which was
      subsequently curtailed. Then, on 22 October 2015 he applied for leave
      to remain also on the basis of his family and private life. This was
      refused on 11 January 2017.

The First-tier Tribunal

   4. The 1st and 2nd appellant's respective appeals were linked. They were
      heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge R Handley at Glasgow on 12
      January 2018. In a decision promulgated on 22 March 2018 they were
      dismissed.

   5. The judge accepted that they were in a genuine relationship. The judge
      heard expert evidence about the possibility of the family relocating
      to Pakistan. The judge considered racial and religious differences and
      concluded there would be significant obstacles to family life
      continuing there.

   6. The judge then turned to consider the possibility of family life
      continuing in Vietnam. There was expert evidence to the effect that to
      obtain a spousal Visa the 2nd appellant would need approval from the
      Pakistani authorities and there would be various other difficulties.
      Nevertheless,the judge concluded that the family could relocate to
      Vietnam and family life continuing from there.

The Upper Tribunal

   7. Permission to appeal was granted primarily on the basis that the judge
      had not dealt with the expert report which suggested they would be
      difficulties about obtaining the necessary household registration
      document in Vietnam and the parties could be apart for a lengthy
      period.

   8. These were agreement between the parties that there was material error
      of law in relation to the how the judge dealt with the practicalities
      of Mr Khan relocating to Vietnam with his wife and the assessment of
      the expert report on this issue. The other points raised in the
      grounds were disputed. Both representatives asked that I remake the
      decision rather than remit it and indicated that they intended to
      proceed by way of submissions in relation to the expert report. Given
      this net point I was agreeable to the course proposed.

   9. The expert report was prepared by Dr Anh and there is an update 28
      January 2018.Mr Winters took me through the relevant aspects of the
      report. The expert referred to the problems Mr Khan would face in
      obtaining entry clearance to Vietnam because he would need to make
      application for his Visa from Pakistan. The expert considered what
      would be involved in him applying for a work permit for Vietnam and
      anticipated difficulties. The expert also referred to the difficulties
      Mr Khan and the child will experience in accessing healthcare
      facilities in Vietnam. The expert also set out the employment
      situation in Vietnam. The expert also looked at matters from the view
      of the child and referred to healthcare costs and educational
      facilities in Vietnam. I was referred to the household registration
      system in Vietnam, with the expert being of the view would take 1 to 2
      years before this can be achieved. The delay was attributable to the
      fact that there was a requirement that Mrs Pham reside in Vietnam for
      a year before the application is made.

  10. In terms of section 117 B he pointed out that both appellants speak
      English and are not reliant upon public benefits. They also entered
      the United Kingdom lawfully and their relationship developed in this
      context.

  11. In summary, Mr Wintor argued that the effect of the refusal was
      disproportionate in the circumstance.

  12. Mr Govan referred me to the 1st ground upon which permission had been
      granted and acknowledged the time would be involved in relocating and
      before the family could be settled as a unit. Whilst he sought to
      challenge some of the statements expressed in the expert opinion he
      confirmed the respondent had not provided rebuttal evidence. He
      acknowledged the expert report had not been adequately dealt with in
      the First-tier and accepted merit in the 1st ground for which
      permission was sought. He submitted that the remaining grounds
      advanced amounted to a disagreement with the outcome. The judge had
      commented upon the limited information about the child health care
      needs. At paragraph 27 and 29 of the decision the judge dealt was Mr
      Khan's ability to integrate into life in Vietnam.

  13. Regarding the expert report, Mr Govan submitted it lacked objectivity.
      Although the respondent had not challenged the judge's finding that
      the parties could not relocate to Pakistan Mr Govan questioned the
      ability of the expert to comment upon the situation in Pakistan. He
      questioned the basis for some of the statements made in the report,
      such as a requirement that Mr Khan obtain permission from the Pakistan
      government to apply for entry to Vietnam. He also question the
      relevance of the report dealing with Mr Khan's ability to obtain
      Vietnamese nationality rather than whether he could be with his wife
      and child there. The expert report referred to the need for Mr Khan to
      have a job offer and to have applied for a work permit. He submitted
      it was not clear from the report why he could not do this.

  14. Mr Govan referring to the limited evidence about the healthcare needs
      of the child of the family and questioned how the expert can give an
      opinion here.

Consideration

  15.  The 1st Tier judge accepted the genuineness of the relationship
      between the appellants. He also found that they could not live
      together in Pakistan. The respondent has accepted these findings. This
      then leaves the question of family life being enjoyed in Vietnam.

  16. It is not in dispute that family life exists. The appellant have a
      young child. The child as a heart murmur. There was limited evidence
      before the judge as to its severity but what there was indicates that
      she is currently stable and will be reviewed in a few years' time. In
      considering the decision her interests must be a primary
      consideration. Those interests are best served by her being in a
      stable home environment with both parents. It is common case that the
      only place, apart from the United Kingdom, where the family can live
      as a unit is in Vietnam.

  17. I place reliance upon the expert report. Mr Govan has attempted to
      challenge the opinions expressed there and has suggested the expert
      had acted in places as if an advocate for the appellants. However, the
      respondent has not provided any country information which would call
      into doubt the key findings of the expert. The report indicates the
      family would face difficulties in trying to establish themselves in
      Vietnam. Primarily this relates to the fact that Mr Khan is not a
      Vietnamese citizen and by reason of the household registration system
      which is necessary to access key services.

  18. The expert acknowledges that there are routes whereby Mr Khan could
      enter Vietnam but it seems likely that this would involve a separation
      for at least a time of the family unit. The expert has suggested a
      period of at least 2 years. The expert states that before his wife can
      obtain household registration she would have to have lived in Vietnam
      for one year. Then, there would be the processing time. For Mr Khan to
      gain access he would have to return to Pakistan and make application
      from there. In order to obtain employment in Vietnam he would need to
      have obtained a work permit. This would involve the employer
      justifying his employment over and above a domestic worker. As he is
      not from Vietnam and has no experience of the country, its culture or
      language he would appear to be at a disadvantage in the labour market.
      Whilst he has his own skills the evidence would not suggest they are
      so scarce he can command employment. I have not seen anything which
      detracts from the expert opinion in this regard.

  19. There are other features which have been raised in argument, primarily
      towards the appellant's child. There have been issues about healthcare
      and education. However, the issue arising is not a comparison between
      different countries. I find these arguments carry less weight.

  20. Ultimately, bearing in mind the best interests of the child and the
      limited options available to the couple it is my conclusion the
      respondent's decision is disproportionate. As stated I do place
      reliance upon the expert report. Clearly this anticipates a
      significant period of separation within the family and then an
      uncertain future in Vietnam. It is my conclusion that the child's best
      interests are in the family remaining in the United Kingdom. What is
      in the child's best interests is not determinative but is a primary
      consideration. Allied to this I am influenced by the immigration
      history of the couple and the circumstances were their relationship
      began. I have had regard to the factors set out in section 117 B.
      Looking at all of these facts is my conclusion that it would be a
      disproportionate breach of their protected rights not to allow them to
      remain.

Decision

The appeals are allowed under article 8.

DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


















