

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: hu/05645/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 October 2017                          |On 15 November 2017            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                            YVONNE ELAINE HEWITT
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Puar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica  who  was  born  on  13  September
   1948.  Her human right's  claim  was  refused  by  the  Respondent  on  4
   September 2015 and her appeal against  this  decision  was  dismissed  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Coaster in a decision promulgated on 27 January
   2017. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against  that  decision
   was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale in a decision  dated
   17 August 2017.
2. In granting permission, no  arguable  merit  was  found  in  the  grounds
   relating to the First-tier Tribunal's treatment of EX.1 or  the  findings
   in relation to  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  her  sisters.
   Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable that  the  Judge
   erred regarding the  relationship  enjoyed  by  the  Appellant  with  her
   elderly mother for whom she provided regular,  including  overnight,  and
   personal care. It was arguable that the Judge erred by applying  Kugathas
   v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 too strictly without  regard  to  the  guidance
   given in Ghising family  life-adults-Gurkha  policy)  [2012]  of  'real',
   'committed' or 'effective' support. It was  found  arguable  that  having
   failed to find family life established with the Appellant's  mother,  the
   Judge's decision was arguably incomplete as this was  not  considered  in
   the proportionality exercise.


3. On 18 September  2017  the  Appellant  sought  to  renew  her  permission
   application to the Upper Tribunal concerning her challenge to the finding
   that she did not have family life with her sister. That  application  was
   made late and time was not extended.

4. The grounds are therefore limited to the alleged error of law in  respect
   of the First-tier Tribunal's findings  regarding  family  life  with  the
   Appellant's mother, Mrs Lyn. The grounds assert that the Judge's findings
   at paragraph 60 did not accord with the evidence. It is  also  said  that
   there were 'erroneous facts' in paragraph 8 onwards as the Appellant  did
   not, as was recorded by  the  Judge,  work  unlawfully.  Further,  it  is
   submitted that the Judge seemed to  have  concluded  that  there  was  no
   evidence of more than the normal emotional ties because the care  of  her
   mother was shared by her sister and  half-siblings.  It  is  argued  that
   simply because care is shared with her siblings this does not  mean  that
   family life does not exist. The only reason  that  was  advanced  by  the
   Judge was that care was shared. It is said that the evidence was that the
   Appellant was the main carer in that she was  her  mother's  first  born,
   there was significant guilt in the separation in the 60's and her  mother
   would only permit the Appellant to carry out specific  tasks  and  became
   significantly distressed when she was not around. The  reference  to  the
   youngest sister doing to most was a reference to physical work around the
   house and not to the care of the mother. It is  also  asserted  that  the
   Judge had ignored the evidence of the Appellant's sister who stated  that
   their mother would not accept care from anyone outside of the family  and
   that NHS care was not appropriate in a home setting.


5. I heard submissions from Mr Puar. He said that  the  original  grant  was
   silent as to the recording of errors of fact in significant aspects.  The
   finding of fact that she worked illegally tainted the way  in  which  the
   Judge determined the appeal.  She  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  a
   student nurse for a period and that was the oral evidence. She did  part-
   time work for a short period to support her full time studies.  According
   to paragraph 12 her student visa ended in 2003, she had met  her  partner
   in 2003 and the relationship developed  in  2007.  The  second  important
   aspect were the findings at paragraphs 58, 59 and  60.  It  was  recorded
   that the Appellant told the Tribunal that she provided  majority  of  the
   care. The evidence was that the younger sister provided the heavy work at
   the premises. The third issue was at paragraph 43 where it was  said  she
   had been a burden on UK tax payers. What happened was that she  paid  her
   health surcharge in respect of the application.  The  NHS  wrote  to  her
   regarding NHS treatment. The demand came after the application for leave.




6. The Appellant's case was that she enjoyed family  life  with  mother  and
   leave was granted on the restrictive approach to family life.  The  Judge
   only cited the key parts of Kugathas rather considering whether there was
   real, committed and effective support and she  did  not  have  regard  to
   paragraph 56 of Ghising. It was not clear whether Ghising was considered.
    The evidence was that she would stay on 3 to 4 nights and the  level  of
   care was onerous and extreme. Her other siblings were working  and  there
   had been forced separation and the emotional bond was closer than  before
   and the learned Judge accepted that substantial care was given. The  care
   was shared and it was not a rational finding where there was a background
   and real and committed and effective care over  a  14  year  period.  The
   threshold was not  as  high  for  engaging  Article  8  as  it  had  been
   previously been found.  The level of emotion or connection could  not  be
   continued and hence it was relevant to proportionality.  Had  there  been
   greater regard to Ghising and a test of  real,  committed  and  effective
   support over 14 years it would have made a  material  difference  as  the
   learned Judge would have to grasp with splitting the family.


7. Mr Richards  asked  me  to  find  that  the  determination  disclosed  no
   material error and  Kugathas  was  correctly  cited  and  applied.  These
   circumstances could be distinguished from Ghising which was  saying  that
   family life did not cease  at  midnight  of  the  18th  birthday.  Taking
   account of the particular circumstances in overage dependents  in  Gurkha
   families even in those circumstances  regard  was  still  to  be  had  of
   continuing  dependence.   The  Judge  correctly  directed   herself   and
   conducted an examination of the  circumstances  of  the  particular  case
   whether the family life extended to this relationship.  In  a  series  of
   detailed findings beginning with the self-direction at paragraph  55  and
   going through to 62 the Judge examined the facts of this case and came to
   a well-reasoned conclusion that whilst there was deep  affection  between
   the Appellant and her mother and personal regret at separation  that  did
   not amount to more than the usual emotional ties even taking  account  of
   the personal care and she was entirely justified in  finding  that  there
   was not family life. That was a finding entirely open to her on  the  law
   and on the facts of the case and she gave full reasons and it  could  not
   be said that there was a material error leading to that finding.  In  all
   of the circumstances the determination ought to stand and he  invited  me
   to dismiss the appeal.


   Discussion


8. Permission was granted in respect of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding
   as to whether family life existed for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR.  It
   is said at paragraph 5 of the grounds and in submissions that the Judge's
   findings were coloured by an erroneous finding that the Appellant  worked
   illegally in paragraph 12 of the decision. Firstly,  at  this  point  the
   Judge was recording the proceedings and evidence and not making findings,
   and secondly there is no basis for concluding that this had any impact on
   her findings with regard to family life between  the  Appellant  and  her
   mother.  The finding referred to by  Mr  Puar  at  paragraph  43  of  the
   decision that the Appellant was  a  burden  on  UK  tax  payers  was  not
   challenged in the grounds of appeal.


9. The grounds assert at paragraph 4 that the Judge's findings at  paragraph
   60 did not accord with the evidence. The grounds state 'this  wasn't  the
   evidence' but do not go on to state what the evidence was  and  where  it
   was to be found. The Judge kept a careful, typed record of  the  evidence
   which accords with the facts as she found them to be. In the  absence  of
   any indication in paragraph 5 of what evidence the Judge should have  and
   failed to take into account I do not find that this  allegation  is  made
   out.


10. I find no error in the Judge's self-direction at paragraphs  56  and  57
   of the decision. She cited Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and S v  UK
   (1984) 40 DR 196 and properly formulated the applicable test.  The  Judge
   is criticised for not citing and relying on the case of  Ghising  (family
   life-adults-Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 and in particular failing to
   have regard to the finding of the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 56 that the
   judgment in Kugathas had been interpreted too restrictively in the  past.
   However, the  issue  in  that  case  related  to  young  adults  and  the
   relationship between parent and child after the child  has  attained  his
   majority. This was not a relevant issue in this appeal.


11. It is clear from the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Singh  v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  630  and  the
   decision of the European Court of Human Rights in GHB  v  United  Kingdom
   [Application number 42455/98] that the question of whether  there  exists
   family life between, or among, those under scrutiny will invariably be an
   intensely fact sensitive one.


12.  Further,  as  the  Upper  Tribunal  recently  recalled   the   relevant
   principles in the case of Dasgupta (error  of  law  -  proportionality  -
   correct approach) [2016] UKUT 00028 this is an error of  law  appeal  and
   not a challenge on the merits. Accordingly I apply the Edwards v Bairstow
   [1956] AC 14 prism. There, in an error of law appeal, the House of  Lords
   applied the standard of " the true and only reasonable  conclusion"  open
   to the Commissioners [at p10] and, notably, in doing  so,  employed  then
   language of " perversity" [at p 6]. They defined the latter as a case  in
   which -

   " ..... the facts found are such that no  person  acting  judicially  and
   properly  instructed  as  to  the  relevant  law  could   come   to   the
   determination under appeal."


13. [per Lord Radcliffe at p 10]

14. In the language of Viscount Simonds [at p 6]:


   " For it is universally conceded that, although it is a pure  finding  of
   fact, it may be set aside on grounds which have been  stated  in  various
   ways but are, I think, fairly summarised by saying that the court  should
   take that course if it appears that the commissioners have acted  without
   any evidence or upon a view of the facts which could  not  reasonably  be
   entertained."


15. Having correctly addressed the relevant law,  the  Judge  accepted  that
   the Appellant made a significant contribution to the care of  her  mother
   but shared these duties with  her  other  sisters.  She  found  that  the
   Appellant visited her mother three times a week  and  on  four  days  her
   mother was cared for by other  family  members.  It  was  stated  by  the
   Appellant's sister, Mrs Shaw, that the  youngest  sister  did  the  most.
   These findings accorded with the evidence before her and as  recorded  by
   her and were open to her on the facts of the case. The  finding  that  on
   these facts there was not  an  emotional  dependency  which  went  beyond
   normal emotional ties was entirely open to her. It was  perfectly  proper
   to take into account that care was shared amongst a number of siblings in
   coming to this conclusion. I find that there was no error of law  in  the
   decision.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                             Date

[pic]


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

