
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05040/2018
                                                               HU/12387/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2019                     |On 03 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr Pavel Hasan Khan
                              ms Sabrina Sohany
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Wilson Barca LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondents are a married couple from Bangladesh.

 2. On 11 August 2017 the first respondent (hereinafter "the claimant")
    applied for indefinite leave to remain in the UK pursuant to paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules.  His application was refused under
    paragraph 276B(iii) by reference to paragraph 322(5) on the basis that
    the income he had declared to HMRC in the tax years 2010/11 and 2012/13
    was significantly less than the amount he declared in immigration
    applications made in March 2011 and May 2013.

 3. The Secretary of State did not accept the claimant's claim that the
    discrepancy was because of a mistake by his accountant and concluded
    that it would be undesirable for him to remain in the UK in light of
    his dishonesty.

 4. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  His appeal was heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon, who, in a decision promulgated on
    19 December 2018, allowed the appeal.  The judge found that the
    Secretary of State had not established that the claimant had acted
    dishonestly.  His reasons for reaching this conclusion were that:

      a) the discrepancy was noticed by the claimant before he applied for
         indefinite leave to remain and he approached his accountant about
         it;

      b) the claimant's accountant accepted in writing full responsibility
         for the error and stated that the claimant correctly reported the
         figures to them;

      c) the claimant made a formal complaint against the accountant;

      d) the claimant is not trained in accounts and placed his trust in the
         professional he employed;

      e) the claimant rectified the position and paid the tax;

      f) HMRC chose not to execute a penalty.  At paragraph 19 the judge
         stated:

             "Significantly HMRC chose not to exact any penalty against
             [the claimant] which they would have been entitled to do if
             they were of the view that he had acted without reasonable
             care or had deliberately sent incorrect information.  Their
             lack of penalty for [the claimant] suggests that they
             determined he had not acted with dishonesty."

      g) the mistakes in reporting income identified in the refusal letter
         are the only ones that have emerged;

      h) no immigration application has been made in reliance on any tax
         return containing errors;

      i) the claimant brought the errors to the attention of the Secretary
         of State.

 5. The grounds of appeal contend that the judge erred by finding the
    absence of punitive action by HMRC as "being in some way determinative"
    of whether the claimant acted dishonestly.

 6. At the error of law hearing, Ms Isherwood argued that the absence of a
    penalty from HMRC is not a basis to dislodge a decision to refuse
    leave.  She also, relying on Khan [2018] UKUT 00384, submitted that the
    claimant cannot avoid responsibility by simply blaming his accountant.



 7. Mr Sharma argued that the only issue in the grounds is whether the
    First-tier Tribunal treated the absence of a penalty from HMRC as
    determinative; and as the judge did not treat it as determinative (it
    was just one of several factors) the appeal must fail.  He also argued
    that the judge was entitled to treat the absence of a penalty as a
    relevant (but not determinative) factor in assessing whether the
    claimant had been dishonest.

 8. The grounds of appeal refer to the judge treating the absence of
    punitive action by HMRC as "in some way determinative".  Ms Isherwood
    confirmed that the Secretary of State's case is that the judge erred
    because he treated the absence of a penalty as determinative. She
    clarified that it was not being argued that it was an error of law to
    treat the absence of punitive action as a material matter.

 9. The difficulty with the Secretary of State's case - and the reason the
    Secretary of State cannot succeed - is that, as submitted by Mr Sharma,
    the judge did not treat the lack of punitive action by HMRC as "in some
    way determinative".

10. The judge identified multiple factors (as summarised in paragraph 4
    above) which, taken together, lead him to the conclusion that the
    Secretary of State had not discharged the burden of establishing
    dishonesty.  These included that the claimant's accountant took
    responsibility for the mistake, that the claimant brought the error to
    the Secretary of State's attention, that no immigration application had
    been made on reliance on the tax returns containing the error and that
    the tax had been paid.  The lack of punitive action was only one of
    numerous reasons given by the judge and was by no means treated as
    determinative.

11. It may well be that, as argued by Ms Isherwood, the approach taken to
    the blame being placed on the claimant's accountant was misconceived
    and inconsistent with Khan. However, this (and criticism of other
    factors identified by the judge as indicating the claimant was not
    dishonest) cannot be relied on to challenge the decision as they were
    not raised in the grounds of appeal.

12. The grounds of appeal make a single argument, which is that the judge
    erred by treating the lack of punitive action by HMRC as "in some way
    determinative".  However, it is clear from the decision that although
    the judge treated the lack of punitive action by HMRC as relevant he
    did not treat it as determinative. As the grounds of appeal do not
    identify an error of law the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 1 April 2019                  |

