
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05999/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision and Reasons promulgated  |
|On 8 February 2018                       |On 6 April 2018                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    P K R
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw instructed by Rashid & Co Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals with permission against a  decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge P J  Holmes  ('the  Judge')  who  in  a  decision
       promulgated on 6 September 2017 dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on
       human rights grounds.




Background


    2. The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica born on [ ] 1992, claims to  have
       entered  the  United  Kingdom  aged  6.  The  appellant  was  granted
       indefinite leave to remain in 2001 but was subsequently convicted  in
       the United Kingdom on six occasions  between  2009  and  2016  for  a
       variety of offences including wounding, possession  of  a  prohibited
       weapon and possession of cannabis. On 11 February 2016 the  applicant
       pleaded  guilty  at  Wolverhampton  Crown  Court  to  two  counts  of
       possessing a controlled drug with intent to supply. The appellant was
       sentenced to 45 months imprisonment on  5  May  2016  for  the  first
       offence and a concurrent sentence of 8 months on the other count. The
       first count related to cocaine with a  street  value  of  �1,200  the
       second account to cannabis.

    3. In view the latest convictions a decision  was  made  to  deport  the
       appellant. The appellant opposed the deportation  decision  asserting
       his removal from the United Kingdom will breach  the  rights  of  his
       family and private life under article 8 ECHR.

    4. The Judge sets out findings of fact between  [19]  and  [41]  of  the
       decision under challenge. Those findings  can  be  summarised,  inter
       alia, in the following terms:

        i. The appellant is not entitled to a derivative right of residence
           under the EU treaties for the reasons set out  in  the  decision
           letter [19].


       ii. The appellant  has  committed  criminal  offences;  the  offence
           leading to the deportation order representing an  escalation  in
           his  criminality.  Whilst  evidence  was  provided  showing  the
           appellant's conduct improved significantly  since  he  had  been
           imprisoned and that he has been good for the past year the Judge
           found that does not deal with the damaging discrepancies between
           "the appellant's fine words in his letter and his bad  behaviour
           continuing at the time when he wrote the same" which  was  found
           to cast doubt upon the sincerity of the insight he claims [20].


      iii. It is not in issue that the appellant has lived  in  the  United
           Kingdom from sometime before 6 April 2001 as at the age of 8  he
           was granted indefinite  leave  to  remain.  The  Judge  did  not
           accept, however, that the appellant was entirely estranged  from
           Jamaica having visited it as recently as 2014.  Close  relatives
           live in Jamaica  in  addition  to  the  appellant's  father.  No
           satisfactory evidence of any sustained  attempts  to  trace  the
           family or reason why  they  would  not  welcome  contact  or  be
           unwilling  to  provide  at  least  emotional  support  for   the
           appellant, in the event that he is deported, was made out [22].


       iv. In light of the case made by the appellant and his witnesses  on
           the subject of conditions in Spanish Town, enquiries might  also
           have been made in relation to other places in Jamaica  to  which
           the appellant could return which might not suffer from the acute
           social problems he claims exist  in  Spanish  Town.   The  Judge
           found no evidence of any such practical  enquiries  having  been
           made [23].


        v. The Judge found it had  not  been  suggested  that  any  of  the
           avenues of support for deportees in  Jamaica  discussed  by  the
           respondent at the bottom of the decision  letter  would  not  be
           available or that for any reason the appellant would not be able
           to gain access to the same [23].


       vi. The appellant has been assessed as posing a 'medium risk' to the
           public in the community and 'low'  in  other  areas.  The  Judge
           accepted the appellant had  made  attempts  to  rehabilitate  by
           improving his behaviour in prison and that he provided  evidence
           of an offer of re-engagement with  the  apprenticeship  that  he
           partially served prior to his  conviction,  although  the  Judge
           noted the offer was from a close  relative  who,  by  virtue  of
           having been the appellant's employer in 2014-15, demonstrated an
           inability to exercise sufficient  positive  influence  over  the
           appellant's  behaviour.  The  Judge   would   also   have   been
           "distinctly  more  impressed"  had  the  author  of  the  letter
           attended the appeal hearing in order to support what was stated.
           Accordingly, the Judge attached little weight to  that  evidence
           [24].


      vii. The appellant's partner has been granted a Residence  Permit  in
           her capacity as the mother of a British Citizen child. The Judge
           noted her letter in support but concluded she was clearly  aware
           of the appellant's conduct but  could  not,  or  chose  not,  to
           exercise sufficient  influence  to  prevent  his  bad  behaviour
           continuing. The Judge noted the letter had nothing to say  about
           the example that the appellant chose to give, four  years  after
           their child was born, of his criminal behaviour which was  found
           to demonstrate plainly that  the  appellant  had  not  genuinely
           "turned his life around". The Judge  noted  in  reply  to  cross
           examination that the appellants partner seemed to  indicate  she
           was unaware of any crime committed by the appellant although did
           admits later that she was aware of his conviction leading  to  a
           finding by the Judge that the witness was "clearly in a state of
           denial as to the seriousness of the appellants crime" [25].


     viii. The Judge found  the  appellant's  partner's  mother's  evidence
           reflected the approach  taken  by  the  appellant's  partner  in
           praising the appellant's relationship  with  his  child  and  in
           downplaying his criminal  behaviour.  The  Judge  finds  she  is
           unable to attach weight to the claim by this witness of  massive
           change in the  appellant  and  regret  for  committing  criminal
           offences due to confirmation in oral  evidence  by  the  witness
           that she had not visited the appellant in prison and when  asked
           to explain how she could have seen any changes in  him  referred
           to matters that clearly predated his serious offending [26].


       ix. The  Judge  found  only  the  appellant's  mother,  of  all  the
           witnesses,  demonstrated  some  insight  into  the   appellant's
           failures both as a father and a son which are manifested in  his
           criminal conduct.  The  Judge  accepted  the  evidence  of  this
           witness [27].


        x. The Judge considered evidence not only from family  members  but
           also the letter from  Handsworth  Day  Care  Centre.  The  Judge
           accepted a parental relationship was established  and  has  been
           maintained by the appellant and his child; but did not find  the
           evidence supported the claim by the appellant that  he  was  the
           main carer of his daughter. The Judge did not  accept  that  the
           evidence from the Day Care Centre, or any other evidence  before
           the Judge, led to the conclusion that the parental  relationship
           is "extraordinary" in the sense that it involves  anything  more
           than the normal emotional ties between a parent and  child.  The
           Judge did not find it extraordinary for a father to be concerned
           about his child's education  and  development  and  to  take  an
           interest in his daughter's welfare [28].


       xi. The Judge noted the appellants claim that the bond  between  him
           and his daughter is so strong that his absence whilst in  prison
           had a significant detrimental impact on  the  child.  The  Judge
           finds the evidence discloses there had been  other  problems  in
           the child's life which could in themselves fully account for the
           observations of the Day Care Centre, although the author of  the
           letter  from  the  Centre  had  not  seen  the  child  since  an
           unspecified date in 2016. The Judge found the evidence  provided
           did not  properly  explain  the  assertion  by  the  appellant's
           partner that she  struggled  to  maintain  herself  financially,
           become homeless, was being housed with her daughter  in  council
           funded hotel accommodation, leading the Judge to  conclude  that
           the appellants partner had such a falling out  with  her  mother
           that she was unable to continue living in her mother's home  and
           had to seek assistance from social services. The Judge concluded
           "upon the evidence before me it is regrettably not at all  clear
           how long the  situation  continued  in  which  [Ms  S]  and  her
           daughter were living in a hostel but evidently by  the  date  of
           the appeal hearing the rift had been mended they  are  now  back
           living with [Mrs W]" [29].


      xii. In relation to the best interests of the child, the Judge  noted
           if the appellant is deported and the child remains in the United
           Kingdom  the  child  would  lose  any  opportunity  for  regular
           personal  contact  with  her  father.  The  Judge  accepted  the
           respondents point that the child's mother is available  to  care
           for her in the United Kingdom and that there was no evidence the
           appellant's presence was required to prevent  ill-treatment  and
           that he could remain in contact with his partner  and  daughter,
           but finds these points insufficiently recognise that the child's
           welfare  involves  not  only   material   but   also   emotional
           considerations and did not feel able to  say  that  a  child  of
           nearly 6, deprived of direct personal contact with  the  father,
           would not be at any risk  of  detriment  to  her  well-being  or
           development. The Judge was satisfied that  the  removal  of  the
           appellant would be against the child's best interests [30].


     xiii. The Judge was satisfied that the  length  of  sentenced  imposed
           brought the case with  in  paragraph  398  (b)  which  meant  it
           appropriate  to  consider  paragraph  399  and   399A   of   the
           Immigration Rules [31].


      xiv. The  Judge  notes  it  is  not  disputed  the  appellant  has  a
           subsisting parental relationship with his daughter who is  under
           eighteen and that it was therefore necessary to consider of  the
           question of whether it be unduly harsh for the child to live  in
           Jamaica or whether it be unduly harsh for her to remain  in  the
           United Kingdom without the appellant.  It  was  recognised  that
           both questions must be answered in the affirmative if 399 (a) is
           to be applicable [32].


       xv. The Judge noted no party was suggesting the appellant's daughter
           ought to go to live in Jamaica. The Judge did not feel  able  to
           find, in all the circumstances, that it would  be  unduly  harsh
           for the child to live in Jamaica [33].


      xvi. The Judge finds when considering 399(a)(ii) that it would not be
           unduly harsh for the  appellant's  daughter  to  remain  in  the
           United Kingdom without him [34].


     xvii. Considering 399(b), is not disputed the appellant has a  genuine
           and subsisting relationship with his  partner  although  she  is
           neither a British Citizen or settled in the United Kingdom.  The
           Judge finds that even if the requirements of condition 399(b)(i)
           were satisfied, as they were conceded in  the  decision  letter,
           she would not have been satisfied that conditions (ii) and (iii)
           would have been satisfied save only that the immigration  status
           of the appellants partner is no longer pending [35].


    xviii. The Judge finds the appellant's offending demonstrates a lack of
           respect for the United Kingdom's laws and social  norms  but  is
           satisfied on the basis of the evidence  that  the  appellant  is
           socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom  [36  -
           37].


      xix. The Judge was  satisfied  there  will  be  no  very  significant
           obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  into  Jamaica,  if
           returned [38].


       xx. The Judge finds as the appellant had not shown either  paragraph
           399 or 399A are applicable the First-tier Tribunal was  required
           to look for very compelling circumstances over and  above  those
           described in those paragraphs [39].


      xxi. The Judge considered the requirements  of  section  117  of  the
           Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 before finding,  for
           the reasons given, that the effect of the appellants deportation
           on his daughter would not be unduly harsh [40].


     xxii.  The  Judge  sets  out  the  conclusions  in  relation  to   the
           proportionality of the decision at [41] in the following terms:


                "Taking account  for  the  evidence  before  me,  I  finally
                consider the question of proportionality. I allow due weight
                to the British nationality of the appellant's daughter,  the
                existence of a genuine and subsisting parental relationship,
                the detriment to the daughter's well-being that is likely to
                be involved in separation from her father for a  long  time;
                also to his genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
                partner and the probable impact on the partner if the family
                is separated; but also his wider family social relationships
                in  this  country;  I  take  into  account   the   practical
                difficulties and  uncertainties  which  (as  the  respondent
                conceded) are likely to face the appellant in Jamaica; but I
                find that  none  of  these,  individually  or  cumulatively,
                amount to very compelling circumstances which  outweigh  the
                public  interest  in  his  deportation.  Something  more  is
                required to weigh in the  balance  and  I  find  nothing  of
                substance has been offered. I therefore  conclude  that  the
                respondent's decision to refuse the appellant's human rights
                claim is proportionate and should be upheld.


Error of law


The Submissions

    5. Mr Bradshaw behalf of the appellant submitted that although the Judge
       had made some findings the Judge had not embarked on a  proper  legal
       analysis. The Judge found removal of the appellant  will  be  against
       the child's best interests but  stated  there  were  no  findings  in
       relation to the child's best interests if the child  was  in  Jamaica
       which it was argued the Judge was required to consider.

    6. It was put to Mr Bradshaw by the Tribunal that in reality this was  a
       family splitting case in that the Judge  clearly  accepted  that  the
       reality was that the child will remain in the United Kingdom with her
       mother  if  the  appellant  was  removed.  In  response  Mr  Bradshaw
       submitted that the Judge did  not  carry  out  the  required  balance
       assessment regarding the impact of the appellant's removal which  was
       required in the context of the unduly harsh test.

    7. Mr Bradshaw further submitted that the reasons  given  by  the  Judge
       were not sufficient and that there were  no  findings  indicating  an
       identification of the factors or realisation of  the  impact  on  the
       child. It was submitted that at [34] the  Judge  adopts  the  refusal
       letters reasons but does not engage with relevant argument.

    8. It was submitted the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  positive  and
       negative elements of the  case.  In  relation  to  the  private  life
       aspects, it was argued the appellant had been in the  United  Kingdom
       for more than half his  life  and  been  granted  ILR  prior  to  the
       deportation order.  The Judge was required to consider these  aspects
       of the private life  claim  and  the  integration  question.  It  was
       submitted the findings at [37] required a broad  evaluative  approach
       as the Judge is set out at [6], yet the  Judge  failed  to  undertake
       this evaluative judgment.

    9.  Behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  Mr  Mills  submitted  it  was
       permissible for the Judge to look at the individual parts of the case
       and then reach  conclusions.  In  this  appeal  the  Judge  sets  out
       findings  and  conclusions  throughout  the  decision,  dealing  with
       various elements, and accordingly it was submitted no error  is  made
       as asserted by the appellant when the decision is read as a whole.

   10. It is submitted the Judge considered the  impact  on  the  child  and
       whether the decision would be unduly harsh,  factoring  this  into  a
       proportionality exercise, which concluded that it  is  proportionate.
       The Judge found for the appellant in relation to the  best  interests
       of the child but balanced the same with the other  evidence  and  the
       public interest in deportation.

   11. Mr Mills submitted the reasons go beyond only looking at the fact the
       appellant had committed a serious crime and refers to  relevant  case
       law such as that at [39]. It was submitted it is perfectly acceptable
       to find the best interests of the child may be for the  appellant  to
       remain in the United Kingdom yet to find the deportation decision  is
       proportionate on the evidence.

   12. In relation to the issue of whether the decision is unduly harsh,  Mr
       Mills  submitted  the  appellant  would  have  received  a  four-year
       sentence but this was reduced due to  his  guilty  plea.   There  was
       still a strong public interest in this  case.  The  Judge's  findings
       that the matters relied upon by the appellant did  not  outweigh  the
       public interest does not disclose arguable legal error.

   13. The Judge accepted, in relation to the appellant's private life, that
       he had spent  most  of  his  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  had
       integrated  and  went  on  to  consider  significant   obstacles   to
       integration into Jamaica which had  not  been  made  out.  The  Judge
       arguably  conducted  the  broad  evaluative  judgment  required  when
       considering this issue before finding as he did.

   14. In relation to the assertion the Judge only relied upon  the  reasons
       for refusal letter; Mr Mills submitted such  claim  has  no  arguable
       merit.  The reasons for refusal had been served on both  the  parties
       and the Judge explains why he accepted some of the points made by the
       respondent in that document.

  My Findings

   15. The fact the appellant claims to be a reformed  character  is  not  a
       determinative factor but one aspect of the proportionality assessment
       that had to be undertaken.

   16. It is clear from reading the decision under challenge that the  Judge
       considered the evidence with the required degree of anxious  scrutiny
       and was fully aware of the competing arguments and the composition of
       the appellant's family unit.

   17. The Judge rejected the  appellant's  arguments  in  part,  for  which
       adequate reasons have been given, include the weight  the  Judge  was
       prepared to give to the evidence of some witnesses  which  was  found
       not to pay appropriate  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
       criminality.

   18. There is no arguable error in the conclusion of the  Judge  that  the
       offences which led to making of the deportation order represented  an
       escalation in the appellant's conduct. There is no arguable error  in
       the conclusions by  the  Judge  that  the  claim  to  be  a  reformed
       character was contradicted by other aspects of the evidence.

   19. It is not disputed that the appellant was convicted as a drug dealer.
       The Sentencing Judge's remarks clearly show  this  is  the  basis  on
       which the appellant possessed the  cannabis  and  cocaine  and  other
       paraphernalia he was caught with by the police.  It is known that the
       impact of drugs on society  is  incredibly  damaging  and  those  who
       engage in dealing such prohibited substances should not be  surprised
       if the consequences are  not  only  the  passing  of  a  considerable
       sentence of imprisonment  but  also,  for  foreign  criminals,  their
       removal from the United Kingdom.

   20. The appellant is the subject of a lawful order  for  his  deportation
       from the United Kingdom. The appellant seeks to rely on an  exception
       set out in the UK Borders Act 2007, namely that his removal from  the
       United Kingdom will breach his rights under the  European  Convention
       on Human Rights based upon his article 8 family and private life.

   21. The deportation regime reflects not just the Secretary of  State  but
       also Parliaments view of what should happen to foreign criminals  who
       receive a sentence of imprisonment. The length of such sentence  will
       determine the factors that  have  to  be  taken  into  account  by  a
       decision-maker. The conclusion by the Judge  that  the  appellant  is
       unable to succeed under the Immigration Rules, for the reasons given,
       has not been shown to be infected by arguable legal error  as  it  is
       within the range of decisions reasonably open to  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence. The finding by the Judge when weighing on the one hand  the
       nature of the appellant's offending and the strong public interest in
       his removal from the United Kingdom  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the
       impact of his removal upon the appellant,  his  daughter,  and  other
       members of family in the United Kingdom, that it had not  been  shown
       that  the  decision  to  remove  will  result  in  consequences  that
       satisfied test of being 'unduly harsh'  has  not  been  shown  to  be
       outside the range of findings reasonably open to  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence.

   22. We have been reminded in cases such as  Hesham  Ali  in  the  Supreme
       Court that the jurisdiction of the Tribunals in  such  matters  is  a
       human  rights   jurisdiction   requiring   an   assessment   of   the
       proportionality of any decision made. The Judge  makes  no  error  in
       approaching the decision in the structured  manner  revealed  in  the
       determination when considering the position under the Rules first but
       thereafter outside the Rules.

   23. The Judge was required by section 117C of  the  2002  Act,  which  is
       reflected in paragraph 398, to consider whether 399 or  399A  applied
       and, if it does not, the public interest in deportation will only  be
       outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are   very   compelling
       circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraph  399  and
       399A. This is the test recognised and properly applied by the Judge.

   24. In relation to the meaning of "very compelling circumstances over and
       above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2 as found in section 117 C
       (3)" the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary State the  Home
       Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 considered the meaning of this  phrase
       and  concluded  in  paragraph  29  that  a  foreign  criminal  facing
       deportation is "entitled to rely on such matters, but he  would  need
       to be able to point to features of his case of a  kind  mentioned  in
       Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paragraph 399 or 399A of the 2014  rules),
       or features falling outside those circumstances  described  in  those
       exceptions and those  paragraphs,  which  make  his  claim  based  on
       article 8 especially strong".

   25. The Judge clearly considered the connection of the appellant  to  the
       United Kingdom  and  the  question  of  insurmountable  obstacles  to
       rehabilitation. The conclusion no such obstacles had been made out on
       the evidence is a finding within the range of those available to  the
       Judge.

   26. In Hesham Ali, at paragraph 38, Lord Reed explained:

             "The implication of the new rules is that  paragraph  399  and
             399A identify particular  categories  of  case  in  which  the
             Secretary of State accepts that the  public  interest  in  the
             deportation of the offender is outweighed under article  8  by
             countervailing factors. Cases not covered by those rules (that
             is to say, foreign offenders who have received sentences of at
             least four years, or who have received sentences of between 12
             months and four years but his private or family life does  not
             meet the requirements of paragraph 399 and 399A) will be dealt
             with on the basis that great weight should generally be  given
             to the public interest in the deportation of  such  offenders,
             but that it can  be  outweighed,  applying  a  proportionality
             test, by very compelling circumstances: in other words,  by  a
             very strong claim indeed, as Laws LJ put in the  SS  (Nigeria)
             case [2014] 1 WLR 998. The countervailing considerations  must
             be very compelling in order to  outweigh  the  general  public
             interest in the deportation of such offenders, as assessed  by
             Parliament  and  the  Secretary  of  State.   The   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence indicates  relevant  factors  to  consider,  and
             paragraph 399 and 399A provide an indication of  the  sort  of
             matters  which  the  Secretary  of  State  regards   as   very
             compelling. As explained at para 26, they can include  factors
             bearing  on  the  weight  of  the  public  interest   in   the
             deportation of a particular  offender,  such  as  his  conduct
             since the offence was committed, as well as  factors  relating
             to his private or family life. Cases falling within the  scope
             of section 32 of the 2007 Act in which the public interest  in
             deportation is outweighed, other than those specified  in  the
             new rules themselves, are likely to be a very  small  minority
             (particularly in non-settled cases). They need not necessarily
             involve any circumstance which is exceptional in the sense  of
             being extraordinary (as counsel for  the  Secretary  of  State
             accepted, consistently with the Huang case [2007]  2  AC  167,
             para 20),  but  they  can  be  said  to  involve  'exceptional
             circumstances' in the sense that they involve a departure from
             the general rule."


   27. The finding of the Judge, having examined all the  relevant  aspects,
       was that the appellant had not made out that the circumstances of his
       case were sufficiently strong to warrant departure from  the  general
       rule that as a  convicted  foreign  criminal  who  is  subject  to  a
       deportation order he is to be removed from the United Kingdom.

   28. The Judge was entitled to find the best interests of  the  child  are
       for the child to remain in the United Kingdom with  both  her  mother
       and father but that  is  not  the  determinative  factor.  The  Judge
       clearly weighed that finding in the balance together with  all  other
       factors relied upon by the appellant and respondent but did not find,
       on the evidence, that the impact  of  the  appellants  removal  would
       either be unduly harsh or tip the balance in the  appellant's  favour
       in relation to the child or any other family member.

   29. The Judge undertook a properly structured assessment of the  evidence
       and has given adequate reasons in relation to the findings made,  and
       in light of the fact it has  not  been  shown  the  Judge  failed  to
       consider any material aspect of the evidence adequately, or has  made
       a decision not reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence when
       applying the relevant law, the weight to be given to the evidence was
       a matter for the Judge.  It is settled law that a properly  conducted
       proportionality exercise is only challengeable on public law  grounds
       of which none of been made out in relation to this case.

   30. The Court  of  Appeal  have  recently  reminded  us  again  that  the
       challenge in an appeal of this nature is to the decision made by  the
       Judge. In this case the decision is that the  appellants  deportation
       is proportionate and the dismissal of his human rights claim.  Having
       considered the submissions evidence and determination, I do not  find
       the appellant has established arguable legal error  material  to  the
       decision to dismiss  the  appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper
       Tribunal interfering with this decision.

Decision

   31. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

   32. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 4 April 2018












