

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05691/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 25 July 2019                 |On 2 August 2019                |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                               Mr MOHAMED [M]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



      1.    Permission to appeal was refused to the Appellant and  his  wife
           in their linked Article 8 ECHR appeals  by  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Grimmett on 2 May 2019.  (The Appellant's wife, Mrs  [NR],
           had appealed under reference HU/09865/2018.)    The  application
           was renewed to the Upper Tribunal for the Appellant only.


      2.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Eshun
           on 17 June 2019 against the decision to dismiss the  Appellant's
           Article 8 ECHR appeal made by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kimnell
           in a decision and reasons promulgated on 23 January  2019.   The
           Appellant  and  his  wife  are  nationals  of  Sri  Lanka.   The
           Appellant had sought leave to remain under paragraph 276B of the
           Immigration Rules, i.e., 10 years' continuous lawful  residence.
           His wife had applied as his dependant.  Their applications  were
           refused on 11 April 2018.


      3.    Judge Kimnell found that neither Appellant had shown  that  they
           met the Immigration Rules.  He  found  that  the  Appellant  had
           deliberately submitted false figures in his tax return, and that
           paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules  had  been  correctly
           applied: it was undesirable that the Appellant be granted  leave
           to remain.  Nor could either of the Appellants  show  that  they
           satisfied the requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE in
           any event: neither was a  British  Citizen  or  settled  in  the
           United Kingdom.  At the date of application their three children
           did not meet the seven  year  requirement.   Paragraph  EX1  was
           inapplicable because there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to
           the continuation of family life in Sri  Lanka,  the  country  of
           nationality of  both  Appellants.  It  was  reasonable  for  the
           children to go to Sri Lanka with their parents.   There  was  no
           Article 8 ECHR disproportionality in such  circumstances.  Hence
           the linked appeals were dismissed.


      4.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Eshun
           because she considered it was arguable that the judge had failed
           to consider that the Appellant's eldest child was  a  qualifying
           child and  arguably  had  failed  to  consider  whether  it  was
           reasonable to expect the child to accompany  the  Appellant  and
           their family to Sri Lanka.


      5.    There was no rule 24 notice from the Respondent  but  Mr  Walker
           indicated at the start  of  the  hearing  that  the  appeal  was
           opposed.


      6.    The Appellant who is now acting  in  person  produced  a  letter
           dated 3 July 2019 from the solicitors who  had  previously  been
           acting for him, which enclosed a copy of a letter dated 27  June
           2019 from the Home Office.  The letter  was  addressed  to  Miss
           [KI], born on 7 October 2010, the Appellant's  eldest  daughter.
           She was granted a period of 30 months limited leave to remain on
           the basis of  Article  8  ECHR  (private  life).   The  tribunal
           explained to the Appellant that as this evidence post dated  the
           First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision, it could  not  support  an
           error of law finding.  It was, however, open to the Appellant to
           make a fresh application to the Home Office  based  on  the  new
           situation.


      7.    Mr Walker for the Home Office attempted to contact a  caseworker
           in case any view was taken as  to  withdrawal  of  the  previous
           decision.   It  was  not  possible  for  him   to   obtain   any
           instructions.


      8.    The hearing accordingly proceeded.  There  was  nothing  further
           which the Appellant wished to say.   Mr  Walker  submitted  that
           there was no error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
           which should stand.


      9.    It is not easy to see why permission to appeal  was  granted  on
           the renewed  permission  to  appeal  application  made  for  the
           Appellant alone.  His appeal is wholly lacking in merit.   There
           was no challenge to the judge's findings that  paragraph  322(5)
           of the Immigration Rules applied and that paragraph 276B was not
           met.  Both  claims  were  dismissed  by  the  judge  with  clear
           findings  and  sound  reasons.   They  stand  and  are  to   the
           Appellant's obvious discredit.


      10.   The renewed grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  (dated  22
           May 2019) are misleading.  The Appellant's eldest child was  not
           a qualifying child at the date of the Appellant's and his wife's
           application to the Home Office.  The  qualification  requirement
           applicable under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules is as
           at the date of  the  application,  as  Judge  Kimnell  correctly
           stated in his determination.  Thus the grant  of  permission  to
           appeal was on a mistaken basis.


      11.   Moreover and in any event, the grant was plainly misconceived as
           the very experienced  judge  considered  the  reasonableness  of
           return of the  children  in  depth:  see  [32]  onwards  of  the
           determination.  He correctly directed himself in accordance with
           KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, and at [36], with reference to Home
           Office policy. He observed "there is no  other  factor  in  this
           case more important than the best interests of the children".


      12.   The key fact was the choice of the venue for the couple's family
           life was not one which they could dictate absent compliance with
           the Immigration Rules or very compelling  circumstances  outside
           the rules, which the judge found did not exist. As noted  above,
           the judge carefully considered the Appellant's  children's  best
           interests  and  reached  sustainable  conclusions  as   to   the
           reasonableness of  the  children's  departure  from  the  United
           Kingdom with their parents. In the tribunal's judgment, the very
           experienced  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  produced  a  full  and
           balanced determination, reflecting  current  law.  The  tribunal
           finds that there was no error of law and the onwards appeal must
           be dismissed.




      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


      There was no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




      Signed                            Dated 25 July 2019


      Deputy         Upper          Tribunal          Judge          Manuell















































































































































































































































































































