
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05674/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th May 2018                               |On 15th October 2018          |
|16th July 2018                                |                              |
|13th September 2018                           |                              |
|And decided on the papers on 10th October 2018|                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR DEVIRAM SUNUWAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery (8th May 2018)
                    Ms A Fijiwala (16th July 2018)
                    Mr T Wilding (13th September 2018)
                    (Senior Home Office Presenting Officers)
For the Respondent:    Mr R Jesurum (instructed by Everest Law Solicitors)
                    on 8th May 2018 and 6th July 2018)
                    Not represented on 13th September 2018


                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Entry Clearance Officer,
with permission, in relation to a judgment of the First-tier Tribunal,
Judge Coll, promulgated on 10th July 2017 in which she allowed the appeal.

For the purposes of this judgment I shall continue to refer to the Entry
Clearance Officer as the Respondent and Mr Sunuwar as the Appellant.

I am deciding this case without a hearing for reasons which will become
apparent later in this judgment.

The Appellant in this case is a citizen of Nepal, 34 years of age at the
date of his application to the Entry Clearance Officer. He had sought
settlement in the United Kingdom as the adult dependent child of a former
Gurkha. His father was born on 18 May 1938 and is currently therefore 80
years of age. The Entry Clearance Officer's decision was taken on 16th
January 2016.

The background to the application was that the Sponsoring father had
applied for indefinite leave to enter the UK with his daughter under the
Secretary of State's 2009 policy for former Gurkhas. At that time his
daughter was 23 years of age and the Appellant 29. The Sponsor's
application was granted but his daughter's application was refused.

The Sponsor entered the UK on 30th July 2010 and in 2011 his daughter was
successful in an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. She subsequently
entered the United Kingdom leaving the present Appellant in Nepal.

The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application because: -

      a) The Appellant failed on suitability grounds because he had failed
         to disclose material facts, having untruthfully claimed not to have
         left Nepal in the preceding 10 years when he had in fact left to
         work in Malaysia.

      b) The Appellant did not satisfy Annexe K of the Immigration Rules
         because he was over 30 years old at the date of application, lived
         separately for the Sponsor for over two years and is not
         emotionally or financially dependent on him.

      c) The Respondent's reasons for refusal outweighed the consideration
         of historical injustice in the article 8 proportionality assessment
         and

      d) The Appellant had not established family life with the Sponsor over
         and above that between adult child and parent. This was said to be
         further evidenced by the Sponsor's decision to move to the UK
         without him.

At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the Judge heard evidence from
the Sponsor and his daughter. She made various findings of fact and set out
the relevant case law concerning Article 8 and the historic injustice cases
in relation to former Gurkhas in particular. In carrying out the balancing
exercise the Judge at paragraph 50 found further factors in the Appellant's
favour over and above those set out in section 117B of the Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002. She found further factors in the Appellant's favour to be:-


      e) "His close family unit is in the UK: The Appellant as a single man
         is closest to his original family unit, his father (Sponsor) and
         his sister.

      f) Sacrifice by Sponsor: The Sponsor dedicated many years of his
         family life in order to serve the Crown. The Gurkhas suffered
         greater separation from their family than soldiers of other British
         Army units (see R (Purja) v MoD [2004] 1 WLR 289. The Sponsor
         served well in excess of the four years necessary to qualify for
         settlement and was promoted to become Sergeant.

      g) Health and well-being of the daughter: The daughter is most willing
         to carry on selflessly looking after her father. She however is
         showing the signs physically and mentally of considerable strain.
         If she is to carry on in good health and continue to support the
         Sponsor as he moves into his 80s, she will need to be relieved of
         being the 24/7 carer. Her brother's entry into the UK for
         settlement will achieve that.

      h) The best interests and welfare of the Sponsor as an elderly man:
         Although I may not regard the Sponsor as a child or treat him as
         such in elevating his best interests to be the most important
         factor, it is incontestable that he is likely to become
         increasingly frail in his 80s. he is 79 and already requires round-
         the-clock care. The Appellant will be able to ensure that he
         receives ongoing care since he will work as a team of carers with
         his sister. At present the burden of care falls mostly on the
         daughter with little state contribution".

Having so found the Judge went on to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds
only. Regrettably the Judge made an error at paragraphs 51 and 52 referring
to the Appellant's removal when this case was about entry; not removal.
That is however not material.

It is appropriate at this point to indicate the difficulties faced by the
Sponsor. He has profound sensory neural hearing loss which he incurred
whilst being a rifle instructor with the Gurkhas. He does not know sign
language and has limited ability to lipread. He communicates primarily
through written Nepali. He also has mobility problems due to osteoarthritis
and suffers from Tinnitus, visual impairment and dementia. He is in receipt
of attendance allowance.

The Judge noted the considerable strain on his daughter in being his carer
and noted that she looked exhausted and demoralised.

Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the Upper Tribunal who found
merit in the assertion that the Judge's findings on family life and the
purchase of Article 8 were inconsistent with the principles in Kugathas
[2003] EWCA Civ 31.

Thus, the matter came before me for the first time on 8 May 2018. On that
occasion I found the Judge had erred in her assessment of whether Article 8
was engaged, concentrating as she did on the Sponsor's frailty and care
needs rather than the Appellant's dependency upon his father. The reasoning
was thin and concentrated more on the situation of father and daughter in
the UK than on the Appellant's situation. I set aside the decision and
adjourned the matter for further evidence to be filed before I dealt with
it at a resumed hearing. I did however preserve the findings of fact and
the issue for me to decide at the resumed hearing was whether those
findings of fact meant that Article 8 was engaged.

When the matter came before me on 16 July 2018 the matter had to be
adjourned as the Tribunal had not booked a Nepali interpreter and one could
not be obtained on the day. With great regret therefore, the matter had to
be adjourned.

The matter then came before me on 13th September 2018. On that occasion the
Sponsor and his daughter, with helpers, attended the hearing but there was
no representative. One of the helpers contacted the solicitors who then
sent an urgent fax to the Tribunal indicating that they had not received
any notice of the resumed hearing. I can confirm that the file indicated
that the notice of hearing was sent to an incorrect address for the
representatives.

Thus, most regrettably the matter had to be adjourned for a third time.

I was very concerned that the Appellant in this case, now 80 years of age,
had travelled now three times from Reading for the purposes of this appeal.
It is now well over two years since the Entry Clearance Officer's decision.
The Sponsor has considerable disabilities and is a vulnerable witness. It
is highly unsatisfactory that he should have had to attend on three
occasions, on two of which the matter was adjourned through no fault of his
or his son the Appellant.

Being aware that on occasions the Home Office concede that appeals should
be allowed on Article 8 grounds in light of the historic injustice I
consulted another senior Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr I Jarvis who
very helpfully agreed to review the file.

The Appellant's representatives had filed, for the resumed hearing in the
Upper Tribunal, an addendum bundle which contained witness statements from
the Sponsor, his daughter and a friend. It also included a large volume of
records of communication between the Appellant and his UK family.

It is apparent that there is very frequent contact between the Appellant
and his father. The evidence of all of the witnesses was that the family
are extremely close. Had it been possible, the Sponsor would have come to
the UK upon his discharge from the Gurkhas in 1995 at which time both
children would have been minors. The Sponsor served with the Gurkhas for 19
years. He continues to financially support his son in Nepal and the
separation is causing extreme hardship to all three members of the family.
The Appellant is uneducated and not working.

Mr Jarvis, having reviewed the file, emailed me on 3rd October 2018 saying
this: -

         "I write on behalf of the ECO in this case - it is understood that
         the UT has previously identified material error in the FtT decision
         and the matter remains to be decided by yourself. I have today been
         able to have access to the Home Office files which contain the
         recent detailed evidence bundles from the Appellant and Sponsor.
         Having had the opportunity to read through that evidence which,
         predominantly, was not before the ECO at the time of making the
         decision, the ECO is now able to accept that the Appellant has made
         out his burden in establishing family life for the purposes of
         Article 8 (1) ECHR and as such, there being no public interest
         issues raised against the Appellant, the ECO accepts that the
         appeal should be allowed on the basis of the positive interaction
         of the historic injustice with Article 8 (2)."

I am most grateful for the efforts of Mr Jarvis in this case, particularly
as it means that the Appellant and Sponsor will be subject to no further
delays nor the Sponsor any further journeys from Reading to central London.
In light of the Entry Clearance Officer's stance I allow the appeal on
Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the Decision  and  Reasons  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  In  redeciding  the  Appellant's  appeal
against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision it is allowed  on  Article  8
grounds with the consent of the Entry Clearance Officer.

No anonymity direction is made.

As the appeal has been allowed on the basis of evidence not put  before  the
Entry Clearance Officer I make no fee award.




Signed   [pic]         Date 10th October 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


