

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number HU/05884/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
             Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 20th May 2019                                    On 21st May 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                             DAMIAN VELROY HILL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr R Parkin (Counsel, instructed by Alfred James
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr D Clarke (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. In this decision the term Appellant refers to Damian Hill as he was the
   Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal and Respondent refers to the
   Secretary of State although the proceedings in the Upper Tribunal have
   been brought on the application of the Secretary of State.

2. The Appellant applied for entry clearance as a child of his mother who
   is present and settled in the UK. The application, which is the last in a
   number of applications, was refused and the Appellant appealed to the
   First-tier Tribunal. The appeal was heard over 2 days on the 15th of
   January 2019 and the 5th of February 2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   James at Taylor House. The appeal was allowed for the reasons given in
   the decision promulgated on the 25th of February 2019.

3. The Secretary of State submitted grounds of application for permission
   to appeal to the Upper Tribunal raising an issue of procedural fairness.
   The hearing had been adjourned from the 15th of January as the Sponsor
   had not provided any supporting documentation relating to the issue of
   sole-responsibility, in a decision promulgated in 2017 the Appellant had
   been found to be living with his father.

4. The complaint raised by the Home Office is that the Judge wrongly
   informed the Presenting Officer that there was no new documentation for
   the hearing on the 25th of February 2019 which led the Presenting Officer
   to rely on previous submissions and to leave the hearing to attend to an
   issue in a separate appeal. Referring to the previous findings about the
   living arrangements for the Appellant it is argued that the Home Office
   was denied the opportunity to challenge the evidence that Judge James had
   relied on in making his decision.

5. The Home Office's position is supported by the attendance note of the
   Home Office Presenting Officer and by her witness statement of the 17th
   of May 2019 which confirms the train of events.

6. The Appellant opposes the Home Office application. Reliance is placed on
   the witness statement of Mr A Sijuwade of the 16th of May 2019 which
   states that the case handler received new evidence from the Appellant's
   High School on the 4th of February 2019 and that that was sent to the
   Home Office on the same day. At the hearing Mr Clarke confirmed that the
   bundle was on the file that he had.

7. The submissions are set out in the Record of Proceedings, each side
   maintained their position. For the Appellant it was argued that if there
   was an error, and that was not conceded, then it was not material as the
   Home Office had not identified what questions and challenges would have
   been made to the material that the Appellant had submitted. The Home
   Office response was that materiality had been raised in the grounds and
   the findings in the previous decision, whilst not subject to the
   Devaseelan guidelines were relevant and required exploration.

8. However it came about it is clear that the Home Office Presenting
   Officer did not have the Appellant's bundle for the hearing on the 25th
   of February 2019 and had she been aware that there was such a bundle I am
   satisfied that she would not have absented herself from the hearing. The
   Judge does not appear to have made clear to the Home Office Presenting
   Officer what evidence was being considered or to have clarified the
   position with regard to the documentation that was actually available.

9. There is a criticism of the failure of the Home Office to match the
   bundle submitted with the file but that does not by itself answer the
   question that arises. It was incumbent on the Judge to ensure that both
   sets of representatives had access to the evidence that had been
   submitted and the opportunity to consider that evidence and that does not
   appear to have been done. The willingness of the Home Office Presenting
   Officer to leave the room and make no reference to the documentation that
   the Judge had before them should have indicated that there was a
   misunderstanding and led to further discussion. In the circumstances I am
   satisfied that the events were procedurally unfair to the Home Office.

10. With regard to materiality it is not necessary or desirable for someone
   complaining of procedural irregularity to have to set out the precise
   nature of the objections that would have been taken or the questions
   asked. The questions would depend on replies given. In this case the Home
   Office have indicated the area where concerns would have been raised and
   objection taken focussing on evidence previously considered which went
   directly to the living arrangements of the Appellant and so if it could
   be said that the test for sole responsibility was met. The grounds give
   sufficient indication of the concerns that arose and which would have
   been dealt with the Home Office Presenting Officer and I am satisfied
   that they are material to the decision made.

11. In the circumstances I find that there was procedural irregularity in
   the conduct of the hearing of the appeal on the 25th of February 2019 and
   that was material to the outcome of the decision. In the circumstances it
   is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted for re-hearing with no
   findings preserved from the First-tier Tribunal decision of the 25th of
   February 2019.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
for re-hearing with no findings preserved, not to be heard by First-tier
Tribunal Judge James.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In setting aside this appeal I make no fee award which remains a matter for
the First-tier Tribunal at the conclusion of the remitted hearing.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 20th May  2019


























