
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/05784/2016
                                                               HU/05782/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2 January 2018                     |On 30 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 BASIRAT [O]
                                    [o s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Seelhoff, Solicitor of A. Seelhoff Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants, nationals of Nigeria, appeals  against  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 24 February 2016.  In  these  appeals  the
    Appellant is referred to as the Secretary of State and the  Respondents
    are the Claimants.

2.   The Claimants' appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge I M  Scott
    (the Judge) whose decision [D], on 24 April 2017 allowed their  appeals
    in the following manner.  The appeal of the second  Claimant  [OS]  was
    allowed with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The appeal of the first Claimant, her mother, was allowed  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The Secretary of State applied and was  granted
    permission to appeal the decisions of the Judge by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cruthers on 31 October  2017.   The  Claimants  made  a  Rule  24
    response dated 15 November 2017.

3.   At the hearing of the appeals essentially the argument presented by  Mr
    Kotas was that quite simply the Judge had failed to give an explanation
    as to why it was not reasonable to expect the second Claimant to  leave
    the UK and live with the first Claimant in Nigeria.  It  followed  that
    that decision, if it was wrong, necessarily affected the grant  of  the
    allowing  the  appeal  of  the  first  Claimant  by  reference  to  her
    continuing to care for the second Claimant.

4.   Looking at this decision  it  is  accepted  that  the  Judge  correctly
    stated the law in relation to relevant considerations and D 33, 34,  35
    and 36 are a  correct  statement  of  the  law  and  in  particular  of
    published policy held by the Secretary of State in relation to the IDIs
    dated August 2015 which deal with whether it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect a non-British citizen child to leave the UK.

5.   I agree with Mr Kotas to a certain extent  that  some  of  the  Judge's
    reasoning is perhaps best described as thin, but it seemed to  me  that
    even though it might be better  expressed,  that  of  itself  does  not
    demonstrate that, any other Tribunal correctly  instructing  itself  by
    reference to the evidence and the positive findings the Judge  made,  a
    different decision was likely to be reached.  Rather it  seemed  to  me
    that this is a case where, as is often the way, the Secretary of  State
    challenges appeals allowed on Article 8 ECHR  grounds  and  essentially
    argues that the threshold now is so  high  that  cases  such  as  these
    should not succeed. I agree that in some cases the  proper  application
    of the facts and law shows how difficult it maybe.

6.   Each case must be looked at on its merits.  I take the  view  that  the
    Judge set out the relevant considerations for  the  child,  the  second
    Appellant, who had been in the United Kingdom since the age of  9,  who
    had been at least more than seven years present, and the considerations
    that flowed from it.  I might not have reached the same decision by any
    means but that does not demonstrate there was an error of  law:  It  is
    not for me to substitute my view of the merits. I find that there is no
    error of law which is material to  the  outcome.   For  these  reasons,
    brief as they are, I conclude that  the  Original  Tribunal's  decision
    stands.

DECISION

The Appeal is dismissed.

7.   No anonymity order was made previously and none is now required.


Signed                                  Date 28 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

