
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: hu/05378/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On    07.01.2019                     |On 16.01.2019                        |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                     rmm
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:  Nabila Mallick (counsel instructed by North Kensington
Law Centre)
For the respondent: Mr Toby Lindsay

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Jeremy Callow), sitting at Taylor House on 6  July,  to
    a human rights appeal against deportation by a citizen of Zambia,  born
    1972. The appellant, his wife and son, born 2000, had all arrived  here
    on visit visas in 2001: a daughter (now a British citizen) was born  on
    5 September 2003, but in 2008 an application for discretionary leave to
    remain was rejected for non-payment of the required fee. Also in  2008,
    the appellant was sentenced to 15  months'  imprisonment  for  using  a
    Zambian passport with a false visa to get work.

 2.  That  resulted  first  in  the   appellant's   being   excluded   from
    discretionary leave given to his wife and son on a renewed application,
    and then in notice of intention to deport. An appeal against that  came
    to a final end with refusal  of  permission  to  appeal  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in 2011, following which deportation orders were made  against
    all of them, later revoked in the cases of the wife and son.

 3. This appeal followed refusal of further submissions for  revocation  of
    the deportation order against the appellant on 9 March 2017. Ground  4,
    criticizing the judge for delaying from 6 July 2018  to  1  October  in
    sending out his decision is misconceived: as shown quite clearly at the
    foot, he wrote it on 17 September. More  important  are  those  dealing
    with the substance.

 4. At paragraph 32 the judge referred to Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR
    - Extra-Territorial Effect) [2002] UKIAT 702*,  but  acknowledged  that
    there had been a good deal of water under the bridge since the previous
    appeal. He rightly rejected a  submission  by  Miss  Mallick  that  the
    appellant's conviction was now spent, so of no effect:  as  he  pointed
    out, the validity of the deportation order had to be judged  as  things
    stood when it was made.

 5. On the other hand, the judge  realized  he  needed  to  carry  out  the
    balancing exercise between  the  public  interest,  and  those  of  the
    appellant and his family as at the date of the hearing. At 33, he noted
    the situation of the appellant's children, and went on


       "While it might  be  unduly  harsh  to  be  separated,  the  fact  of
       harshness has to be  considered  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's
       immigration and criminal history."

 6. This showed the judge acknowledging, not only that it would be  in  the
    children's best interests to remain in this country, but that, on their
    situation alone, it would be unduly harsh to  require  them  either  to
    leave, or to go on living here without  their  father.  The  judge  was
    writing before KO (Nigeria) & others  [2018]  UKSC  53,  so  cannot  be
    criticized for not referring to it.

 7. However, the principles set out by the Supreme Court still  had  to  be
    applied. The judge (see his 15) held it necessary for there to be 'very
    compelling reasons' in a case of this kind; but, for the reasons  given
    in KO at 23, that was wrong. The  other  main  principle,  for  present
    purposes (see KO at 32) effectively overrules the view of  the  law  as
    previously understood from MM (Uganda) & another [2016] EWCA  Civ  450:
    whether a decision is unduly harsh to children  must  depend  on  their
    position, and not on a parent's criminal or immigration history.

 8. On the other hand, at 33 the Supreme Court  approved  Judge  Southern's
    decision in the lead case (the passages cited need to be read in full),
    and it is clear that something more than the ordinary effects  of  "...
    any disruption  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    arising from deportation" is required for the effect of the decision to
    be unduly harsh.

 9. The appellant's son was already grown-up at the date  of  the  hearing,
    and, as his mother told the judge (see paragraph 4) was himself serving
    a  sentence  of  six  months'  imprisonment,  presumably  in  a   young
    offenders' institution. He is no longer a 'qualifying child', and  does
    not enter into the equation.

10. So far as the daughter is concerned, the  respondent  may  well  accept
    that her own best interests as a British  citizen  of  15,  here  since
    birth, lie in staying in this  country,  either  with  or  without  her
    father. Whether it would be unduly harsh for her to be required  to  do
    so without him needs to be re-assessed in the light of all the relevant
    evidence, including the independent social worker's report, but on  the
    basis set out at paragraphs 32 and 33 of KO.

11. For the reasons I have given, this case needs to be  re-assessed  on  a
    full view of the evidence about the appellant's daughter, in the  light
    of KO. As agreed before me, this can best be done by  way  of  a  fresh
    hearing on that basis, before another first-tier judge.

Appeal : first-tier decision set aside
Fresh hearing at Taylor House, not before Judge Callow
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                   7 January 2019
