
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/05002/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2019                   |On 23 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr mohammed lukman uddin
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Clarke, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Lemer, Counsel instructed by JKR Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Specialist Appeal Team has appealed to the Upper Tribunal from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Adio sitting at Hatton Cross
    on 20 September 2018) allowing the appeal of  the  claimant  (d.o.b.  5
    October 1969) against the decision of the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department ("the Department") to refuse  to  grant  him  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of family and private life established in the  UK
    following his entry to the UK on 24  April  1982,  and  his  continuous
    residence in the UK thereafter.  The judge allowed the appeal under the
    twenty year rule in Rule 276ADE(1)(iii) and  also  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds outside the rules. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that the  claimant  requires
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as it was arguable that the Judge  did
    not consider all parts of the immigration rules under which the refusal
    was made; and it was arguable that he had placed insufficient weight on
    the evidence that for a significant period the Appellant  had  employed
    deception in relation to his status.

Discussion

 3. The Department accepted that the claimant had accrued thirty-five years
    continuous residence in the UK since arriving from Bangladesh in  1982.
    The Department refused the application on suitability grounds. In  1998
    the claimant had become aware of his true parentage, and hence that  he
    was not entitled to hold a British passport as the child of  a  British
    citizen.  But the claimant had not disclosed this to  the  authorities,
    and he had renewed his British passport on two occasions after 1998  in
    the knowledge that he was not entitled to hold one. He had also  failed
    to disclose in his application  a  conviction  for  a  driving  related
    offence in 2009 and a caution for common assault in December 2008.

 4. While not withdrawing the Department's case that the Judge was wrong to
    excuse the claimant's conduct on the ground that he was  "a  victim  of
    circumstances", and that the Judge had failed to take into account that
    the claimant had only come clean  after  he  was  "found  out"  by  the
    passport office, Mr Clarke volunteered at the  outset  of  the  hearing
    that he had difficulty in arguing Ground 3.

 5. Ground 3 is that, in the light of the Judge's errors in the disposal of
    the claim under the Rules, the Article 8 assessment outside  the  Rules
    is fatally flawed.

 6. At paragraph [27] of his decision, Judge Adio  applied  the  five-point
    test in Razgar, and concluded that  the  strength  of  the  Appellant's
    family and private life claims outweighed the public  interest  in  his
    removal,   and    accordingly    the    proposed    interference    was
    disproportionate.  In  reaching  this  conclusion,  Judge  Adio  placed
    considerable weight on the fact that the appellant's wife and  children
    were all British citizens; and that his removal would  not  be  in  the
    best interests of his youngest child, who was still under  the  age  of
    18.

 7. Mr Clarke concedes that this conclusion would have been reasonably open
    to the Judge even if he had accepted the  Department's  case  that  the
    claimant failed under the Rules on  suitability  grounds.   Indeed,  Mr
    Clarke concedes that the strength of the  private  life  claim  of  the
    youngest child impels  a  proportionality  finding  in  favour  of  the
    claimant. Accordingly, if the Judge erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
    claim under the Rules,  his  error  is  not,  as  Mr  Clarke  concedes,
    material to the ultimate outcome.



Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's  appeal
    on human rights (Article 8 ECHR) grounds did not contain  an  error  of
    law, and the decision stands.



Signed                              Date 14 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

