
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/05127/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 22 March 2018                      |          On 13 April 2018            |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - pretoria
                                    Appellant
                                     and

                              anitah muwanguzi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No legal representation (Mr S Lwetutte - Litigation
Friend)


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the Entry Clearance Officer's (ECO) appeal against the decision
    of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shore  promulgated  28  December  2017,
    allowing the appeal of Mrs Anitah Muwanguzi, against  the  decision  of
    the ECO, dated 1 February 2016, to refuse her application made pursuant
    to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (the Rules) for entry clearance
    to join her partner in  the  UK.  It  is  relevant  to  note  that  Mrs
    Muwanguzi's partner is a British citizen resident in the  UK  with  her
    two children who are also British citizens.

 2. While this an appeal by the ECO, hereinafter,  I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal;  the  ECO  as  the
    respondent and Mrs Muwanguzi as the appellant.

Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 3. At her appeal  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  the
    appellant was represented by her partner  (sponsor)  and  Mr  Lwetutte,
    acting as he did before me as a litigation friend, and  the  respondent
    was represented by Ms Lambert. Before the FtT  the  appellant  did  not
    dispute that she could not meet the financial requirements of  Appendix
    FM of the Rules. The appeal was argued on her behalf on the basis  that
    refusal  of  entry  clearance  was  unlawful  in  consequence  of   the
    respondent's failure to consider the best interests  of  her  children,
    and that, refusal infringed her human rights contrary to Article  8  of
    the ECHR. The FtT heard evidence from the sponsor and while it was  not
    satisfied that the financial requirements of the Rules were met or that
    the sponsor had  four  other  children  in  the  UK,  it  accepted  the
    sponsor's evidence that he lived in the UK  with  the  appellant's  two
    children. The FtT found that as the sponsor and two children  were  all
    British citizens it was not reasonable to expect them  to  relocate  to
    Uganda. It further found that there had been a failure by  the  ECO  to
    consider the best interests of the children.  The  FtT  thus  concluded
    that the decision to refuse entry clearance was not in accordance  with
    the law.

 4. Further still, the FtT stated that in  balancing  the  public  interest
    against the family life established between the appellant, the  sponsor
    and their children; their status as British citizens and the effect  of
    requiring them to relocate to Uganda, that refusal of  entry  clearance
    infringed Article 8 of the  ECHR.  Accordingly,  the  FtT  allowed  the
    appeal.

5.    The ECO sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the  FtT
    failed to have proper regard to the public interest when  carrying  out
    the proportionality assessment, in that, it did not have full regard to
    the provisions of s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 (2002 Act) and/or that it did not give adequate  reasons  for  its
    decision given that the children had been born overseas and  there  was
    no consideration of why they would not be able  to  adapt  to  life  in
    Uganda given their young ages.

6.    On 24 January 2018,  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy
    granted permission to appeal on all grounds.

7.    Thus, the matter came before  me  to  decide  in  the  first  instance
    whether the FtT materially erred in law. The task of  the  tribunal  in
    that regard was explained to the sponsor  and  Mr  Lwetutte.  Mr  Avery
    briefly amplified the grounds of appeal in submissions and  Mr  Lwettue
    urged the tribunal not to penalise the appellant and her family for any
    error the FtT may have made. Mr Lwetutte also filed a skeleton argument
    which I had not seen prior  to  the  hearing  and  in  consequence  the
    tribunal  indicated  that  it  would  pronounce  its   decision   after
    consideration of the same at a later date, which I now do.

Discussion and Decision

8.    For the reasons summarised below, I found such error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the FtT as to require the decision to be  set
    aside.

9.    In this case the only viable ground of  appeal  was  on  human  rights
    grounds. The FtT was obliged to consider whether the refusal  of  entry
    clearance infringed the human rights of the appellant and anybody  else
    affected by that refusal contrary  to  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  That
    assessment was to be conducted through the lens of the Rules, which the
    FtT found could not be met.  It  was  also  incumbent  on  the  FtT  to
    consider and have regard to the public interest criteria  by  reference
    to s.117B of the 2002 Act and  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  the
    conclusions reached taking into account all relevant  factors.  This  I
    find it failed to do.

10.   The FtT's entire  basis  for  allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  8
    appears to be that  it  was  unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellant's
    British family members to relocate to Uganda. At [41]  the  FtT  stated
    thus:

    "The balance that I undertook were the public interest  in  refusal  of
    entry leave (sic), to which I gave considerable weight, and the  family
    life with  the  Sponsor  and  her  daughters  that  the  Appellant  has
    established. I also considered the British citizenship of  the  Sponsor
    and the children and the effect of requiring them to relocate to Uganda
    would have on them."

11.   I find that the FtT failed to conduct an  adequate  Article  8  Razgar
    assessment and failed to conduct the crucial proportionality  balancing
    exercise by reference to the public interest factors it was mandated to
    consider by reference to s.117B of  the  2002  Act.  Nor  did  the  FtT
    consider  the  respondent's  submission  at  [27]  that  it   was   not
    disproportionate to preserve the status quo by expecting the sponsor to
    continue  to  look  after  the  children  in  light  of  the   personal
    circumstances, namely, that the children were born overseas and that  a
    choice had been made to separate them  from  their  mother.  All  these
    matters were relevant to a proper assessment of whether the refusal  of
    entry clearance was disproportionate.

12.    I  find,  therefore,  that  the  FtT  erred  in  its  assessment   of
    proportionality and these errors clearly impinge on  the  FtT's  lawful
    assessment of whether the ECO's  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance
    leads to a breach of Article 8 ECHR, the sole ground  deployed  by  the
    appellant in the appeal before the FtT.

13.   Taking all of this into account, while I have considered the  skeleton
    argument on behalf of the appellant which seeks to reargue her case,  I
    conclude that the FtT erred and that the correct course is  for  me  to
    set aside the decision of the FtT and to remit the appeal back  to  the
    FtT to consider afresh.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the FtT to be determined afresh by a  judge  other
than Judge Shore.

Signed:

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Bagral
Date: 25 March 2018
