
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05551/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on:         |
|by Microsoft Teams                   |                                     |
|On 11 June 2021                      |On 23 June 2021                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                           Jeevithan Mahendirajah
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Parminder Saini of Counsel, instructed by My
Legal Limited
For the respondent:    Mr Stephen Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 4 January  2021  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision on 13 March 2021 to refuse him leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom on long  residence  grounds  pursuant  to  paragraph
    276B(i)(a) (10 years'  lawful  residence),  276ADE(1)(vi)  (significant
    obstacles to reintegration in his country of  origin)  or  outside  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) on Article 8  ECHR  human  rights
    grounds. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.

 2. Mode of hearing.  The hearing today took place  remotely  by  Microsoft
    Teams.  I am satisfied that all parties were in  a  quiet  and  private
    place and that the hearing was completed fairly, with  the  cooperation
    of both representatives.

 3. Technical difficulties.  Mr Saini, who appears for the appellant, is  a
    practising barrister who is also a Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge.    He
    appeared on Teams this morning as 'Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Saini',
    having signed in with his eJudiciary email address.  Mr Saini explained
    that he was having some technical  difficulties  in  switching  between
    that and his professional identity as Counsel.

 4. I have made it clear to Mr Awan (the appellant's solicitor) and to  the
    appellant that this error is a professional matter which will  have  no
    effect on the outcome of the appeal.  Mr Whitwell, who appeared for the
    respondent, consented to the Upper  Tribunal  proceeding  to  hear  the
    appeal.

Background

 5. The appellant came to the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  student  on  24
    October 2009.  He made his application for indefinite leave  to  remain
    on the basis of 10 years' lawful residence on 1 October 2019,  when  he
    was three weeks short of the required 10 years' residence,  leaving  to
    one side the question whether such residence was lawful.

 6. His history is that he had Tier 4 leave until 15 March  2014,  when  it
    ended by curtailment with no right of appeal.  On 14 March 2014, before
    the curtailment took  effect,  the  appellant  made  an  in-time  fresh
    application for further Tier 4 leave but that was  refused  on  27  May
    2014.  The respondent's case is that the appellant had no extant  leave
    thereafter.

 7. On 16 June 2014, the appellant made another Tier 4 application  in  the
    Integrated Case Worker process, which was refused  with  an  in-country
    right of appeal on 19 May 2015.  The  appellant  now  asserts,  without
    proof, that he was never served with the 27 May 2014 refusal letter and
    that the 16 June 2014 application was a variation of his 14 March  2014
    application, which if correct  would  extend  his  valid  leave  to  16
    November 2017. The appellant was appeal rights exhausted on 16 November
    2014 on that application.

 8. On 30 November 2017, the appellant made an in-country  application  for
    leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  grounds  outside  the  Rules.    The
    application was refused initially with  an  out  of  country  right  of
    appeal, then reconsidered and voided on 20 September 2019.  On 8 August
    2018, the appellant made a private and family  life  application  which
    was also declared void on 14 October 2019.

 9. On 1 October 2019, the appellant submitted the present application.



Refusal letter

10. In her letter of 13 March 2020, the respondent noted the  gap  of  more
    than 30 days between 27 May 2014 and 26 June 2014, such that section 3C
    of the Immigration Act 1971 did not apply  to  extend  the  appellant's
    lawful residence.  The appellant's continuous lawful  residence  was  4
    years and 7 months and  paragraph  276D  with  reference  to  paragraph
    276B(i)(a) was inapplicable to him.

11. No family life was or is asserted.  In considering  private  life,  the
    respondent applied paragraph 276ADE.  The appellant was 33 years old at
    the date of decision, having come to the United Kingdom  in  2009,  age
    22.  Sub-paragraphs 276ADE(1)(iii),(iv), and (v) were not applicable on
    the facts. Sub-paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) (very significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration) was not applicable either as the appellant had not shown
    that he had completely lost all ties to Sri  Lanka:  his  mother  still
    lived there and he had spent 2/3 of his life there before coming to the
    United Kingdom.

12. Nor were there any exceptional circumstances for  the  grant  of  human
    rights leave to remain outside the Rules.  The appellant had only  ever
    had limited leave as a student which was not  a  route  to  settlement.
    The appellant had not relied on any family life  relationships  in  the
    United Kingdom and the state had a right to control the entry  of  non-
    nationals into  its  territory.    The  appellant's  removal  would  be
    proportionate.   No compassionate factors had been advanced.

13. The respondent refused the application and the  appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

14. On 7 January 2021, First-tier Judge O'Rourke dismissed the appeal.   It
    is relevant to note at [15 (iii) and (iv)] certain of  the  submissions
    made by Mr Awan, the appellant's solicitor, who argued that:

         "15. ...(iii) It is conceded that  applying  [Hoque  &  Ors  v  The
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1357 (22
         October 2020)], the  appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276B, even if applying paragraph  39E,  when  considering
         open-ended overstaying.  Nonetheless, the Tribunal  is  invited  to
         find, as a fact, that he remained within the ambit  of  39E,  as  a
         result of his valid application in  2017.   If  indeed  he  had  no
         status,  why  was  he  subsequently  given  a  right   of   appeal?
         Therefore, applying 39E and  taking  into  account  his  consistent
         immigration  history, he has not overstayed.   In any event, as  it
         seems likely that Hoque is to go to appeal to  the  Supreme  Court,
         the appellant reserves his position on this issue. ...

         (v)  In respect of Article 8, the Rules don't have  to  be  met  to
         make a positive finding, and in this case, as the  appellant  meets
         all the requirements of section 117B [(2) and (3)]  in  respect  of
         language,  behaviour   and   educational   quals,   it   would   be
         disproportionate to refuse his appeal.  It cannot be in the  public
         interest, in respect of the United Kingdom econ, to return  such  a
         highly-educated person  to  Sri  Lanka,  particularly  when  he  is
         already integrated into the United Kingdom."

15. The First-tier Judge found as a fact that the appellant could not  show
    10 years' continuous lawful residence, since from June 2014, he was  an
    'open-ended' overstayer to whom paragraph 39E was not  applicable.   He
    had not made the June 2014 application within 14 days of the expiry  of
    his most recent leave, nor shown any good reason beyond his control  as
    to why he could not have done so.

16. The appellant conceded in his chronology for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that his previous Article 8 ECHR appeal  had  been  unsuccessful.   His
    evidence on job offers and so forth in the United Kingdom was described
    as 'confused and contradictory'  and  the  judge  noted  that  applying
    Jeunesse v. the Netherlands - 12738/10 [2014] ECHR 1309 he had no right
    to expect that he would be permitted to settle in the United Kingdom.

17. The judge then applied section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).  He gave little  weight  to  the  private
    life the appellant developed while unlawfully in  the  United  Kingdom.
    At [24(iii)] he may have misdirected himself  in  relation  to  section
    117B(4)(a), but plainly, section 117B(4)(b) does not apply.  All of the
    appellant's residence in the United Kingdom has been either  precarious
    or unlawful.  There was in any event, very little evidence  of  private
    life, even had there been no such statutory presumption in operation.

18. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal and the appellant appealed to
    the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

19. The application for permission to the Upper Tribunal on 21 January 2021
    argued that:

      a) the First-tier Judge's  findings  of  fact  about  the  appellant's
         immigration  history were inadequate. His appeal rights on  the  26
         June 2014 ICW application were  not  exhausted  until  16  November
         2017, not 2016, by which time paragraph 39E had been added  to  the
         Immigration Rules (it  was  added  on  24  November  2016).     The
         applicant contended that he had section 3C leave during the  appeal
         and that he had made his next  application  on  30  November  2017,
         within 14 days of becoming appeal rights exhausted on that  appeal.
         The Upper Tribunal had failed to make solid  findings  of  fact  on
         this point; and that




      b) the 26 June 2014 application was a timely application under the pre
         39E version of the Immigration Rules.  The applicant  had  been  an
         overstayer only since 16 November 2017.

    The appellant continued to reserve his position  pending  the  expected
    appeal to the Supreme Court against the Court of Appeal's  decision  in
    Hoque.   There was no challenge  to  any  other  findings  of  fact  or
    credibility in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

20. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge  Parkes,  for  the
    following reasons:

         "...2.   The grounds argue that the judge  erred  in  the  findings
             made on the appellant's  immigration  history  and  failed  to
             address the length of the  appellant's  lawful  residence  and
             whether the appellant had overstayed from 27 May 2014 or  from
             16 November 2017.

           3. With some hesitation, it may be arguable that  the  judge  did
             not address properly  the  actual  lawful  residence  and  the
             periods involved.  I bear in mind the differences expressed in
             Hoque, but as Dingemans LJ observed, it could  not  have  been
             intended that an appellant would qualify if an application was
             refused and followed by a further application with  [sic]  the
             required period. ..."

21. Following triage directions given in the light of the  Covid  pandemic,
    both parties agreed to a remote video hearing and made further  written
    submissions.

Appellant's skeleton argument

22. For the appellant, Mr Saini in his skeleton  argument  identified  that
    there was an issue as to whether the appellant's 3C leave ended  on  27
    May 2014 or 16 November 2017, Mr Saini set out the chronology  at  [9].
    I do not recite the chronology here, since it is not disputed, save for
    the argument as to service of the 27 May 2014 decision.

23. Mr Saini contended that it was for the respondent to show that the  May
    2014 decision had been served, and that as the appellant had been given
    a right of appeal against the respondent's decision of  26  June  2014,
    that raised a presumption that it had not  been  served  and  3C  leave
    still applied.  The respondent had not produced evidence of service  of
    the 27 May 2014 decision and that  the  June  2014  application  was  a
    variation of the application made  in  March  2014,  thereby  extending
    section 3C leave until 16 November 2017.    The  First-tier  Judge  had
    erred in failing to resolve the issue.

24. Mr Saini in his skeleton argument criticised the decision of the  Court
    of Appeal in Hoque and put the Upper Tribunal on notice that  if  Hoque
    were followed in this decision, he would seek permission to  appeal  by
    way of leapfrog directly to the Supreme Court.  That is  a  matter  for
    the appellant and his advisers, not for this Tribunal.  Hoque  has  not
    been overturned by the Supreme Court nor does it appear that permission
    to appeal  was  granted  there:  accordingly.  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment remains binding on the Upper Tribunal, as  are  all  Court  of
    Appeal decisions.

25. Mr Saini's skeleton argument contains submissions on whether the appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, if the decision were set
    aside.    That argument is not reached, because for the reasons I  give
    below, I am not satisfied that the grounds  of  appeal  or  Mr  Saini's
    skeleton argument identify any material error of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Respondent's case

26. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 Reply but  did  file  a  position
    statement following the triage directions, settled by Mr Stefan  Kotas,
    a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.   Mr  Kotas  accepted  that  a
    further hearing was necessary, and rule 34  was  not  applied  to  this
    appeal.

27. Mr Kotas noted that the appellant had accepted  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that he could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276B, and
    on that basis, argued that his  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain within the Rules was bound to fail.   Mr  Kotas  contended  that
    the appellant would not have submitted a fresh Tier 4 application on 26
    June 2014 had he still been awaiting the  outcome  of  his  March  2014
    application.  He invited me to find that it was more  likely  than  not
    that the May 2014 refusal had been served.

28. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

29. At the hearing today, Mr Saini accepted, as he must, that the appellant
    could not show  10  years'  lawful  residence.   However,  applying  TZ
    (Pakistan) and PG (India)  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 (17 May 2018), he argued that there was
    a reduced public interest in the appellant's removal, and repeated  his
    contentions regarding the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Hoque.

30. For the respondent, Mr Whitwell acknowledged that the 2014  application
    would have been handled under the Integrated Case Worker process (ICW).
     That platform was  now  defunct  and  it  was  not  possible  for  the
    respondent to interrogate it and provide  any  further  information  on
    what had been served, or when.  The evidence that the appellant had, or
    had not, sought  to  vary  his  application  in  2014  was  within  the
    appellant's possession or control and he should have produced it, if he
    had it.

31. The  accepted  immigration  history  could  not  be  explained  by  the
    appellant having asked to vary his application: the section 2014 Tier 4
    student application was on its face a fresh application and  the  grant
    of an in-country right of appeal was not dispositive  of  jurisdiction.
    The appellant's latest argument, as set  out  in  Mr  Saini's  skeleton
    argument, required an application to vary the grounds of  appeal  which
    had not been made.

32.  The  appellant  had  not  challenged  the   judge's   conclusions   on
    proportionality, either in the grounds of appeal or in the  appellant's
    skeleton argument.  There was no material error of law and Mr  Whitwell
    invited the Upper Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.

33. In reply, Mr Saini said that  the  appellant,  who  had  formerly  been
    represented by different solicitors, had no recollection  of  receiving
    the May 2014 refusal letter.  Mr Saini had sought instructions from his
    present solicitors and the appellant while Mr Whitwell was speaking: he
    had been unable to obtain clear instructions or evidence that the  June
    2014 application was a variation, rather than a fresh application.

34. If the Upper Tribunal were minded to set aside the decision,  Mr  Saini
    was instructed to ask for the appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal rather than for  the  decision  to  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

35. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Analysis

36. It is quite clear to me that whichever date is applied,  the  appellant
    could  not  at  the  date  of  application  or  the  date  of  decision
    demonstrate 10 years' lawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    entered on 24 October 2009 and on his best case, had no leave after  16
    November 2017.  He was an 'open-ended' overstayer, in Hoque terms.  The
    judgments of Lord  Justices  Underhill  and  Dingemans  in  Hoque  were
    subject to a dissent by Lord Justice McCombe.  It is the majority  view
    which binds the Upper Tribunal.

37. I have regard to the approach in TZ (Pakistan) and approach  the  Rules
    first, before moving to consider the judge's analysis of Article 8 ECHR
    outside the Rules.  The judgment of Underhill LJ in Hoque  sets  out  a
    the correct approach to paragraph 276B(v) on which this appellant would
    have to rely in order to succeed:

         "8.  Paragraph 276B provides (so far as material for our purposes):



             "The requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for  indefinite
             leave to remain on the ground of long residence in the  United
             Kingdom are that:

             (i) ... he  has  had  at  least  10  years  continuous  lawful
             residence in the United Kingdom.

             (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons
             why it would be undesirable for him  to  be  given  indefinite
             leave to remain on the ground of long residence, ... and

             (iii) the applicant  does  not  fall  for  refusal  under  the
             general grounds for refusal.

             (iv) the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of
             the English language and sufficient knowledge  about  life  in
             the United Kingdom ... .

             (v) [A] the applicant must not be  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
             immigration laws, [B] except  that,  where  paragraph  39E  of
             these Rules applies, any current period of overstaying will be
             disregarded. [C] Any previous period  of  overstaying  between
             periods of leave will also be disregarded where -

                  (a) the previous application was made before  24  November
                  2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or

                  (b) the further  application  was  made  on  or  after  24
                  November 2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied."

         I have inserted the letters [A]-[C] before each of the elements  in
         sub-paragraph (v) so  as  to  make  subsequent  reference  to  them
         easier.

         9.   To anticipate, these appeals primarily focus on the effect  of
         sub-paragraph (v) of paragraph 276B. I will have to analyse it more
         fully later, but at this stage it is  important  to  note  that  it
         consists of the primary "requirement" ([A]), followed by  provision
         for two circumstances  in  which  periods  of  overstaying  may  be
         "disregarded" ([B] and [C]), the first of which relates to "current
         ... overstaying"  and  the  second  to  "previous  ...  overstaying
         between periods of leave". Those  two  kinds  of  overstaying  were
         referred to in the argument  before  us  as,  respectively,  "open-
         ended" and "book-ended" overstaying. I should also explain that the
         distinction  under  element  [C]  based  on   the   date   of   the
         previous/further application reflects the  fact  that  as  from  24
         November 2016 the  previous  general  policy  under  the  Rules  of
         disregarding periods of overstaying of under 28 days was  abandoned
         and a regime  providing  for  different  kind  of  disregard  ("the
         paragraph 39E regime") was introduced. ..."

38. The appellant, on his best case, was lawfully  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom from 24 October 2009 to 16 November 2017, a period of less than
    10 years.  As conceded in the First-tier Tribunal, he cannot  therefore
    succeed within the Rules and the First-tier Judge did  not  err  in  so
    finding.

39. There remains the question whether the appellant  can  succeed  outside
    the Rules. As regards the question of proportionality, the  grounds  of
    appeal do not challenge the judge's analysis, save to contend that  the
    appellant should be given credit for being able to meet  sub-paragraphs
    117B(2) and (3).   In relation to sub-paragraph 117B(2) and (3),  I  am
    guided by the reasoning of Lord Justice Sales (with whom Lord  Justices
    Moore-Bick and Sir Stephen Richards agreed) at [59]-[65] in Rhuppiah  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  803  (02
    August 2016).  While an inability to speak English may  be  a  negative
    factor, an ability to speak English is neutral in  the  proportionality
    assessment, and the same is true of  financial  independence.   I  note
    that the appellant required a  fee  waiver  in  this  appeal,  but  the
    respondent has not challenged his  assertion  that  he  is  financially
    independent.

40. There is no challenge in  the  grounds  of  appeal  or  in  Mr  Saini's
    skeleton argument to the conclusion of fact that the appellant had only
    a minimal private life, as evidenced by a  number  of  letters  in  his
    First-tier Tribunal bundle, but no  witnesses  at  the  hearing.   Such
    private life as he developed in his period of lawful leave can be given
    little weight (section 117B(4)(a)) and section  117B(5)  also  requires
    that little weight be given to the period when he was here  unlawfully.
    The First-tier Judge did not, therefore, err in giving little weight to
    his private life.

41. No exceptional circumstances or compassionate circumstances  have  been
    advanced.  It was also open to the First-tier Judge  to  conclude  that
    the appellant, who lived in Sri Lanka until he was 22, and whose mother
    still lives there, had not satisfied  him  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration,  if  he  were  required  to
    return to Sri Lanka now.

42. For all of the above reasons, I find that the grounds of  appeal,  even
    taken with the novel contentions in Mr Saini's  skeleton  argument,  do
    not disclose any material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

43. The appeal is dismissed.


DECISION

44. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law


    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     11 June
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



