
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05669/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 30 May 2017                      |On 2 June 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                erkan atalay
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, Counsel, instructed by Ashton Ross Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Turkey, brings a challenge to the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Walters  sent  on  24  October  2016
    dismissing his appeal against a decision made by the  respondent  on  8
    September 2015 refusing to grant him leave to remain.

2.   I am grateful to both parties for their submissions.  I  can  be  brief
    since this is a case where the FtT Judge has clearly erred in law in  a
    number of respects.

3.   First of all the judge wrongly concluded that  the  appellant's  family
    and private  life  were  not  engaged  because  there  was  no  removal
    decision.  Given that (i) the respondent's decision letter  included  a
    decision that the  appellant  met  neither  the  Immigration  Rules  on
    private and family life nor the  requirement  to  show  exceptional  or
    compassionate circumstances pertaining to Article 8 outside the  Rules;
    and (ii) the appellant's grounds of appeal raised  Article  8  grounds,
    this was a plain error.

4.   Second, insofar as the judge purported  to  conduct  a  proportionality
    assessment within the parameters of the Rules, his assessment failed to
    take into account all material factors,  in  particular  there  was  no
    assessment of the weight to  be  attached  to  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant's wife had close family ties with her mother who depended  on
    her  to  a  significant  extent.   Another   factor   not   given   any
    consideration was the fact that the appellant's wife had  been  granted
    refugee status.

5.   Third, the  judge  appears  not  to  have  properly  applied  Chikwamba
    principles to the  appellant's  case.   On  the  judge's  findings  the
    appellant met almost all of the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    on spouses, although he felt unable to reach  any  definitive  view  as
    regards the financial requirements.   The  appellant's  wife  was  also
    expecting a child.  Whilst ordinarily a  court  or  Tribunal  will  not
    consider a family to include a child until there is an actual birth, in
    this case the guidance given by the House of Lords in Chikwamba  [2008]
    UKHL 40 is clearly forward-looking, having regard to the reasonableness
    of expecting an appellant to apply subsequently  for  leave  to  remain
    from abroad.  At the very least the judge  should  have  assessed  this
    issue on the basis that the case had a maternity  dimension.   Further,
    in rejecting the reliance  the  appellant's  representative  sought  to
    place on Chikwamba, the judge wrongly considered he could not weigh  in
    the balance such factors as whether the appellant would be able to meet
    the financial requirements, because assessment of such requirements was
    too  uncertain  and  was  "impossible  to  predict".  The   judge   had
    considerable evidence before him as to the appellant's ability to  meet
    the financial requirements as at the date of hearing  and  should  have
    considered whether it was reasonably likely that in a relatively  short
    time after, the appellant would still be able to meet them.

6.   I am  satisfied  that  the  aforementioned  errors  were  material  and
    accordingly I set aside the decision of the FtT judge.

7.   I sought submissions from the parties as to how I should proceed  if  I
    found a material error of law.  Mr Murphy urged that I remit it to  the
    FtT; Mr Singh said he would not object to that course, although equally
    he would not object if it were reheard in the Upper Tribunal.

8.   Having considered the matter I conclude that it  would  be  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal as there was not  in  fact
    any effective proportionality assessment.   It  will  be  open  to  the
    appellant in compliance with Tribunal directions to rely on the further
    evidence as regards the birth of the child  in  January  2017  and  the
    conferment on the child of British citizenship shortly after, and as to
    the appellant's and his wife's financial circumstances.

9.   I would add the observation that in light of the reported  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in SF and  others  (Guidance-post-2014  Act)  [2017]
    UKUT 120 (IAC), the respondent may  wish,  before  the  case  is  heard
    before the First tier Tribunal - to reconsider  her  decision  in  line
    with her own policy that it is  not  reasonable  to  expect  a  British
    citizen child to leave the territory of the UK or  the  European  Union
    and that as a consequence  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    Section 117B(6), unless there are any  significant  criminal  or  other
    public policy considerations.

Notice of Decision

10.  For the above reasons:

     The decision of the FtT judge has already been set aside  for  material
    error of law.

     The case is remitted to be heard in the First-tier Tribunal not  before
    Judge Walters.

     No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                                  Date: 31 May 2017
               [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

