
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05419/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st May 2019                 |                                |
|                                |On 4th June 2019                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                     And

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES



                                   Between

                           Jumoke Rhoda AKINYOKUM

                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person

For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria born  on  17th  May  1973.   She
    appealed with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Buckwell dated 14 June 2018 dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 5 February  2018  to  refuse  her  application
    dated 8th March 2017 to remain under human rights grounds, particularly
    paragraph 276ADE (1) of the Immigration Rules and under the ECHR.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal judge's decision was considered  at  a  hearing
    attended by Mr Deller on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    appellant in person.  It was noted that at paragraph 38 of his decision
    the First-tier Tribunal judge stated, with  respect  to  the  appellant
    spending twenty years in this country as required by paragraph 276ADE,

         "Whilst I heard oral evidence from the Appellant I have to take the
         same view [as the respondent] that in  the  absence  of  supporting
         evidence, particularly documentation, I do not find the  burden  of
         proof to have been discharged  by  the  Appellant  in  establishing
         continuous residence, albeit unlawfully, for at least 20 years.   I
         do however address this issue further below".

 3. He stated, however, this at paragraph 41:

         "Although it may be challenging for  the  Appellant  on  return  to
         Nigeria, she came at a much younger age  to  this  country  without
         having any support arranged in advance.  She did so as a very young
         adult, at the age of 19 years, and would return as  a  much  mature
         lady to Nigeria.  She  still  has  clear  cultural  ties  with  the
         country, and it would not be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect
         her to have to re-establish herself in her country of nationality".

 4. As a result of the conflict in the findings I found an error of law. At
    the Error of Law hearing, however, Mr  Deller  submitted  that  he  had
    found on the file a documentation  relating  to  the  2010  application
    which would appear to  support  the  appellant's  application  of  long
    residence.  Indeed, there were documents relating to the early part  of
    her residence in the United Kingdom.   I  observed  that  it  would  be
    unusual for an appellant to risk leaving the  United  Kingdom  only  to
    return but that this of course was not impossible.   In  the  event  Mr
    Deller requested that I held the decision until  he  could  investigate
    whether    the    decision    of    the     respondent     might     be
    amended/withdrawn/remade.  This would  be  undertaken  by  19  November
    2018.

 5. The matter was, in the event, not resolved. The Secretary of State  was
    instructed to  produce  evidence  on  file  in  relation  to  the  2010
    application made by the appellant regarding her long residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. The Secretary of State produced the  documentation  that  was  supplied
    with the 2010 application which included one BT bill from 1994 and  one
    from 1995 (each relating to the same address but with different account
    numbers),  two  wage  slips  from  'Allied  Tehnology'  (sic)  a  house
    agreement dated 15th January 1995, Healthcare Initial  wage  slips  for
    May, June and November 1996 two wage slips from Profile dated 31st  May
    1996 and 31st September 1996, a  BLM  Financial  Consultancy  Ltd  rent
    receipt dated 2nd March 1998, a Primary Healthcare College  Certificate
    for health care assistant dated 20th May 2001 and  an  Affinity  Health
    care certificate dated 6th August 2002, a letter from Dr A C Gera dated
    22nd December 2010 confirming that the records dated back  to  December
    2001, a letter dated 21st December  20-10  from  the  Christ  Apostolic
    Church, personal letter from Olubunmi Ayoola dated 13th February  2011,
    a letter from Teresa Pearce MP dated 8th August 2011, a letter  from  J
    Idowu, of AJ Printz dated 24th February  2011,  a  letter  from  Pastor
    Akinola Olukoya of the Mountain of Fire and Miracles  Ministries  Int'l
    United Kingdom dated 2nd November 2011, Halifax  Bank  statements  from
    November 2008, P60, from 2008, passport application  payment  from  the
    Nigerian Immigration Service dated 12th May 2011, lost properly slip.

 7. The remaining documentation post-dated 2001  but  include  wage  slips,
    electoral and medical documentation spanning  2002  to  2010.   Further
    submissions were also made on that documentation by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

 8. The matter was not re-listed until 2nd May 2019 when it was heard by  a
    Tribunal panel.

 9. The appellant claimed that she had first entered the country  in  1993,
    illegally, and she made a long-residency application on 3  August  2010
    (based on paragraph 276B - 14 years residence) but that was refused  on
    28 January 2011.

10. In the current application the appellant did not contend that she had a
    partner or any other relatives in the UK.  The appellant was  found  by
    the Secretary of State not to have satisfied the Rules in that she  had
    remained in the country for  twenty  years  or  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to her return.  The Secretary of  State  asserted
    that the appellant had failed to provide any evidence  in  relation  to
    her claim by which it was asserted she had resided in the  country  for
    at least twenty years.  Owing to the production of  the  evidence  from
    the previous application that was not entirely  correct,  however,  the
    appellant had been unable to provide sufficient evidence of her  period
    of residence particularly in relation to the claimed  early  period  of
    residence in this country.

11. It was noted that the appellant had spent the majority of her  life  in
    Nigeria and she would not have lost all social  and  cultural  ties  to
    that home country.

12. The appellant was instructed to provide further evidence, but we relied
    on an appeal bundle pages 1 to 14 which included a witness statement of
    the appellant dated 11 May, some correspondence and letters of  support
    and medical correspondence.

13. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing the appellant gave  oral  testimony,
    in particular she asserted that she had registered with the NHS in 2001
    and  had,  with  her  human  rights  application  in   2010,   provided
    documentation which had not been returned by the Home  Office  and  she
    had not retained copies herself.  She stated that when she asked  about
    bank statements that she had sent those which she had at  the  time  of
    her 2010 application to the Home Office but thought she might  be  able
    to get further financial papers.  In 1998  she  had  been  living  with
    people by way of a favour for her and had attended a church in  Peckham
    and named a pastor but had not invited him to attend  and  he  was  not
    aware that she was attending the hearing.  She also said that  she  had
    known other people since 1998.  She had been paid on a cash  basis  and
    lived at various addresses between 1993 and 1999.  She stated that  she
    entered the UK at the age of 19 in  February  1993  and  a  friend  had
    assisted her to leave Nigeria.  As a consequence of her miscarriage  in
    2006 her partner had left her, and she had  a  troubled  mental  state.
    She would not be able to return to Nigeria because she  had  no  living
    relatives and would have no income.  In 2011  she  had  been  expecting
    twins and her babies did not  survive.   Her  husband  left  her.   Her
    parents had both been killed in a  car  accident  in  Nigeria  and  her
    brother was given to a stepmother, but she has not seen him  since  the
    age of 17.  She also contradicted herself by stating that she had  come
    to the country with the help of a stranger.

14. For the resumed hearing  on  2nd  May  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State
    produced a bundle of  evidence  with  submissions.   The  evidence  was
    documentation supplied by the appellant with her 2010 application.

15. At the resumed hearing, Mr Melvin questioned the appellant.  She had no
    live witnesses.  She was asked how the BT bills dating from 1995 had an
    0207 prefix which was not introduced until 2000 and  she  replied  that
    she did not know.  She had been sent these bills by someone  living  at
    the house.  She was also asked about the wage slips dating from  Allied
    Tehnology dating from 1994.  The two wage slips dating  from  June  and
    September both cited 'wk 22'.  The appellant did not know  but  thought
    there may have been an  error  in  production  or  photocopying.    She
    confirmed that she did not have evidence from  HMRC  to  show  she  was
    working in March or June 1994 saying that it was a long time ago.   She
    had not approached HMRC because she was scared.  Although  asked  about
    previous  legal  representation  she  stated  that  latterly  she   had
    represented herself. She stated that she did not ask the solicitors  to
    approach HMRC.  She thought Healthcare Initial were based in  Stockwell
    and she could not remember when Allied Technology closed down. She  had
    no NI number because she could not work. She did not know how  she  was
    employed and although the wage slip recorded that she was paid by  BACs
    into a bank account she had no bank  account  in  1994.   She  had  not
    produced evidence of a bank account in 1998.

16. In her oral evidence she repeated that she had no place to return to in
    Nigeria and no family.  At the time she left her brother was  12  years
    old but she did not know what happened to him and she  had  no  contact
    numbers.  She is now 45 years old and her friends and supporters of the
    church are like family to her in the United Kingdom.

17. In submissions Mr Melvin  pointed  out  that  the  appellant  had  been
    assisted by solicitors previously and they could  have  approached  the
    HMRC. She had no tax records no National Insurance Number and  no  bank
    account or records. The letter from the surgery was two years short  of
    the required period. She had no family life and a private life of  over
    17 years.

Analysis

 1. We were concerned that the documentation was  insufficient  to  support
    the appellant's claim of residence in the United Kingdom from 1995.  We
    do not accept that only official documentation can  evidence  residence
    in the United Kingdom and note that  a  variety  of  documentation  was
    provided including letters of support from friends.   The  analysis  is
    essentially based on the appellant's private life.  She made no mention
    of family in the United Kingdom with whom she has a relationship  going
    beyond the normal emotional ties.

 2. We do acknowledge that she has established a private life but  for  the
    purposes of the immigration rules  the  appellant  has  to  fulfil  the
    following:

         '276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i)      does not fall for refusal under  any  of  the  grounds  in
         Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and  S-LTR.3.1.  to  S-LTR.4.5.  in
         Appendix FM; and

         (ii)     has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on  the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and

         (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or....

         (vi)     subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years  or  above,
         has  lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than   20   years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles  to  the  applicant's  integration  into  the
         country to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.'

 3. We carefully analysed the documentation and  note  in  particular  that
    there is a letter on file  from  a  Dr  Gera  who  confirmed  that  the
    appellant's GP records with the Glyndon Medical Centre  dated  back  to
    December 2001. A further letter from the Glyndon Medical  Centre  dated
    15th February 2018 recorded that  the  appellant  had  been  previously
    registered at the Lister Health Centre Peckham since January 2001.

 4. Unfortunately, there were two letters from the Christ Apostolic  Church
    dated 21st December 2010 from Pastor Olalere one  of  which  identified
    that the appellant had been here for  14  years  and  the  other  which
    appeared identical but did not mention the 14 years.  He did not attend
    as a witness before the Tribunal and thus we place little weight on the
    document because of the confusion.

 5. The appellant stated in her witness statement that she  was  unable  to
    register  with  any  government  agency  until  2000  when  she  became
    seriously  ill  and  had  to  attend  hospital,  sadly,  because  of  a
    miscarriage. The appellant was registered with a GP  practice  in  2001
    but the hospital records date from 2008. A  letter  from  South  London
    Healthcare  NHS  Queen  Elizabeth  Hospital  dated  5th  November  2011
    confirmed that she had two previous second trimester  miscarriages  and
    that she had gynaecological complications (multiple fibroids).  We note
    that the appellant maintained that she had mental health  problems  but
    felt unable to attend 'hospital for further treatment' because  of  her
    immigration status. We find that the  documentation  supplied  supports
    her residence on a continuous basis in the  United  Kingdom  from  just
    prior to 2001.

 6. There is a signed letter on file from Olubunmi Ayoola,  whose  passport
    details were supplied, and who confirmed that the  appellant  had  been
    known to the witness for 12 years. That letter was dated  7th  February
    2011, thus since 1999.  We are not persuaded that the witness statement
    of Mr Ayoola, a member of the church, can simply be ignored because  he
    was not present, and it is not an official  document.  That  said,  the
    weight to be given to the statement  is  reduced  because  he  did  not
    attend to give oral evidence.  A further letter  from  Mrs  Olufunke  A
    Twelogbade dated 22nd June  2018  confirmed  that  she  had  known  the
    appellant whilst in the  United  Kingdom  since  1998.   She,  however,
    supplied her American citizen passport details with  a  United  Kingdom
    Leave to Remain stamp until 15th October 1994, although it would appear
    she was given leave to enter on 22nd  January  1995  at  Gatwick.   The
    letter referred  to  her  British  passport,  but  none  was  attached.
    Unfortunately none of the witnesses  attended  and  thus  very  limited
    weight can be placed on these letters.

 7. There was the BLM Financial Consultancy Limited rent  receipt  and  the
    receipt had the address of the company.  Mr  Melvin  encouraged  us  to
    reject any documentation which did not record an address  and  although
    this document did have an  address  it  had  very  limited  details  to
    underpin its reliability and no original was produced.

 8. Thus, there were two documents (the rent  receipt  from  BLM  Financial
    Consultancy and the statement of Mr Ayoola) which placed the  appellant
    in the United Kingdom in 1999 but in view of the limited weight we  can
    attach to those documents we are not persuaded that she has been in the
    United Kingdom since 1999.

 9. Although separately these documents  may  not  be  sufficient,  on  the
    balance of probabilities, to demonstrate the  appellant's  presence  in
    the United Kingdom for the required length of time,  we  find  that  on
    balance, and in the context of the GP's letter which places her in  the
    United Kingdom just prior to 2001 it is likely that she was present  in
    the United Kingdom from 2000 onwards.  We cannot find  her  present  in
    the United Kingdom prior to that date.  She has not lived in the UK for
    twenty years but most likely from December 2000.

10. In view of her immigration status, and despite the application for  the
    Nigerian passport we think it unlikely that she would leave the  United
    Kingdom  without  immigration  documents.   We  also  acknowledge   her
    evidence that she could not register with a government agency  such  as
    HMRC because she was not legal and thus, she did not  have  a  national
    insurance number and was paid in cash.

11. ZH (Bangladesh) [2009] EWCA Civ 8 addressed in some part  the  question
    of those who fail to produce records and held that it was  relevant  to
    consider the reason and at paragraph 16 Sedley LJ held

         'The use of a false identity, which was admitted by the  appellant,
         was held against him. But no account was taken, as it seems  to  me
         it needed to be taken, of the reason he gave for using it: that  he
         was afraid of being detected as  an  illegal  immigrant.   That  of
         course compounds the illegality of his presence here, but it  is  a
         different reason from the more sinister reason for  using  a  false
         identity, which is to commit frauds'.

12. This length of residence however does  not  entitle  the  appellant  to
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE (iv) of the  Immigration  Rules  because
    she must have been residence in the United Kingdom for 20 years by  the
    date of her application.

13. We turn to consideration of Paragraph 276ADE  (vi)  and  whether  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the applicant's return and  find
    that she has not so demonstrated.  The  test  is  a  stringent  one,  R
    (Agyarko)  [2017]  UKSC  11,  and  we  have  undertaken  an  evaluative
    assessment. Although it may be challenging for her to return because of
    the length of time in the United Kingdom and her  engagement  with  the
    church we are not persuaded that  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    return are so demonstrated.  We do  accept  that  she  has  experienced
    health  difficulties  in  the  form  of  gynaecological  problems   and
    complained of ongoing health difficulties but there was no evidence  of
    a lack of medical facilities in Nigeria. She has some qualifications in
    healthcare as demonstrated by the certificates  produced  and  has  had
    working   experience   in   this   country.   She   has    demonstrated
    resourcefulness in coming to the United Kingdom following  difficulties
    in Nigeria.  She maintained that she had a brother in Nigeria with whom
    she had lost contact.  We note that she has been able  to  forge  close
    friendships in the United Kingdom but it was unfortunate  that  no  one
    could attend to support her at court.

14. Agyarko confirms that that the test  of  insurmountable  obstacles  (or
    very significant obstacles)  does  not  mean  that  the  obstacles  are
    literally impossible to surmount but mere practical difficulties do not
    suffice.  A  bare  assertion  of  insurmountable   obstacles   is   not
    sufficient. Failure to support any such assertion  that  the  appellant
    would face insurmountable obstacles is a significant omission, R (Kaur)
    [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1423  and  that  proposition  holds  good  for  very
    significant obstacles test.

15. The appellant had lived in Nigeria until the age of 19 years and had at
    the date of the application been in the United Kingdom for 17 years  on
    our findings.

16. We apply the five-stage process in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL  27  which
    is set out as follows

         (1)      Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)      If so, will such interference have  consequences  of  such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?

         (3)      If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)      If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
         society in the interests of national security, public safety or the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder
         or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)       If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate   to   the
         legitimate public end sought to be achieved?

17. We conclude that the appellant has been here now since  2000  and  thus
    has established a private life with which removal will interfere.   The
    threshold for interference is low and thus we conclude that  Article  8
    is engaged. The applicant on the face of the matter cannot comply  with
    the immigration rules and thus the interference is in  accordance  with
    the law. The interference is clearly for the protection of  rights  and
    freedoms of others in the form of orderly immigration control.

18. The burden of proof is on the Secretary  of  State  to  show  that  the
    interference is proportionate and  we  have  adopted  a  balance  sheet
    approach as recommended in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC  60  in  relation  to
    deportation and in cases more widely in AS v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 417.

19. R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 confirmed that the  test  is  one  of
    proportionality and set out

         "56      The  European  court's  use  of  the  phrase  "exceptional
         circumstances" in this context  was  considered  by  the  Court  of
         Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2014] 1 WLR 544. Lord Dyson MR, giving the judgment of the  court,
         said, at para 42:

             "In our view, that is not to say that a test of exceptionality
             is being applied.  Rather  it  is  that,  in  approaching  the
             question of whether removal is  a  proportionate  interference
             with an individual's article 8 rights, the scales are  heavily
             weighted  in  favour  of  deportation   and   something   very
             compelling  (which  will  be  'exceptional')  is  required  to
             outweigh the public interest in removal."

         Cases are not, therefore, to  be  approached  by  searching  for  a
         unique or  unusual  feature,  and  in  its  absence  rejecting  the
         application without further examination. Rather, as Lord  Dyson  MR
         made clear, the test is one of proportionality.  The  reference  to
         exceptional circumstances in the European case law means  that,  in
         cases involving precarious family life, "something very  compelling
         ... is required  to  outweigh  the  public  interest",  applying  a
         proportionality test. The Court of Appeal went  on  to  apply  that
         approach  to  the  interpretation  of  the  Rules  concerning   the
         deportation of foreign criminals, where the  same  phrase  appears;
         and their approach was approved by this court, in that context,  in
         Ali.

         57 That approach is also appropriate when a court  or  tribunal  is
         considering whether a refusal of leave to remain is compatible with
         article 8 in the context of precarious family life. Ultimately,  it
         has  to  decide  whether  the  refusal  is  proportionate  in   the
         particular case before it, balancing the  strength  of  the  public
         interest in the removal of  the  person  in  question  against  the
         impact on private and family life. In  doing  so,  it  should  give
         appropriate weight to the Secretary of State's policy, expressed in
         the Rules  and  the  Instructions,  that  the  public  interest  in
         immigration  control  can  be  outweighed,  when   considering   an
         application for leave to remain brought by a person in  the  UK  in
         breach of immigration laws, only where  there  are  "insurmountable
         obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as defined. It must  also
         consider all factors relevant to the  specific  case  in  question,
         including, where relevant, the matters  discussed  in  paras  51-52
         above. The critical issue will generally  be  whether,  giving  due
         weight to the strength of the public interest in the removal of the
         person in the case before it, the article 8 claim  is  sufficiently
         strong  to  outweigh  it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with
         precarious family life,  a  very  strong  or  compelling  claim  is
         required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control."

20. When making our decision we are obliged to place weight on the position
    of the Secretary  of  State  and  the  findings  with  respect  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  We have set out that the  appellant  cannot  comply
    with those rules and we note here that a near  miss  in  terms  of  the
    length of residence does not assist the appellant.

21. We are also obliged to comply with  Section  117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and for clarity we set this out

         '117A Application of this Part

         (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.

         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)      In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
         the question of whether an interference with a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         ...'

22. We acknowledge that the appellant can speak English,  but  we  are  not
    aware that  she  is  independent  financially  although  there  was  no
    evidence of her receiving public funds. That said,  Forman  (ss117  A-C
    considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) confirmed that the  facts  that
    someone can speak English and self-sufficient are neutral  factors.  In
    this instance the appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom  illegally
    for the entirety of her residence.

23. The test as set out in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 still applies and as
    held

         "the ultimate question for the appellate immigration  authority  is
         whether the refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances
         where the life of the family cannot reasonably be  expected  to  be
         enjoyed  elsewhere,  taking  full  account  of  all  considerations
         weighing in favour of the refusal, prejudices the  family  life  of
         the applicant in a manner  sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a
         breach of the fundamental right protected by article 8."

24. Although this refers to family life it can equally be extended  to  the
    considerations governing private life.

25. We had no medical evidence of significant mental  health  difficulties.
    We do not seek to undermine the strength of her  private  life  because
    she has been here for many years and clearly has connections  with  the
    church, but no one attended the court on behalf of  the  appellant  and
    she attended alone. The appellant was also emphatic that she had no one
    in Nigeria and had lost contact with her brother.

26. We find that having taken all  factors  into  account,  including   the
    failure of the appellant to comply with the Immigration Rules to  which
    we must accord weight, her relatively young age at present as being  46
    years, that she has no family life in this country, although sadly  her
    partner left her when she could not have a  child,  and  her  knowingly
    illegal presence in the United Kingdom from the outset and the lack  of
    explanation or demonstration of any unjustifiably  harsh  circumstances
    on return, must count against her.  These factors effectively  outweigh
    the factors in favour of the appellant.

27. In view of our reasoning we thus find that the decision to  refuse  the
    application for leave to remain is a proportionate decision in relation
    to Article 8 and we dismiss the appeal.

    Decision

    Appeal Dismissed



    Signed Helen Rimington  Date 31st May 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


    FEE ORDER

    We make no fee order in view of the complicated procedural  history  of
    the matter.



    Signed Helen Rimington  Date 31st May 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



