
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05402/2017

                                                       HU/05403/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2018                           |On 10 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    [a b]
                                 halima [b]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION -NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BANGLADESH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Read, Counsel instructed by David Gray Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Bangladesh  whose  dates  of  birth
    respectively are recorded at 10 April 2002 and 25 February  1999.  They
    made application to come to the United Kingdom in order that they might
    join their mother who has indefinite leave to remain. The basis of  the
    original application was that she, the Sponsor, had sole responsibility
    of the Appellants.

 2. Adverse decisions were made by the Respondent. The Appellants appealed.
    Their appeals were heard on 9 January 2018 by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal S P J Buchanan sitting at North Shields.

 3. There had been  an  earlier  application  and  appeal  which  had  been
    dismissed by Judge Fisher. Judge Buchanan had regard to the guidance in
    Devaseelan but considered himself bound by the earlier findings.

 4. At the hearing, now under consideration, evidence was also received  in
    addition to that of the Sponsor from Mr Habibur Rahman  whose  evidence
    was to the effect  that  the  Sponsor  lived  with  him;  that  he  had
    occasions visited Bangladesh; and that on  those  occasions  had  taken
    clothing and money for the benefit of the Sponsor's  children.  Further
    his evidence was that the Sponsor's eldest son acted on  the  Sponsor's
    instructions vis a vis the Appellants. Judge Buchanan then went at some
    length to explain why he was dismissing the appeals.

 5. Not content with that decision, by  Notice  dated  29  March  2018  the
    Appellants made application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal which on 21 June 2018 was refused by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal O'Keeffe. A further  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal,  Notice  being  given  on  12  July  2018.  The  grounds  are
    adequately summarised within the permission  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chalkley who on 6 August 2018 granted permission in these terms:

         "1.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to make any  findings
             on the evidence of Mr Habibur Rahman  recorded  at  paragraphs
             5.14 to 5.17 of the  determination.  I  believe  that  he  has
             misapplied  Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra  -
             Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * UKIAT 00702 in that he was not
             bound by the findings of an earlier First-tier Tribunal  Judge
             in relation to evidence which he himself had heard although he
             appears to believe that he was.

         2.   It appears to me that the appellants have been denied  a  fair
             hearing by the First-tier Tribunal".

 6. The grant of  permission  is  unusual  because  the  Judge  considering
    whether or not permission should be  granted  is  concerned  only  with
    whether there is an arguable case. In  this  case  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge has firmly "pinned his colours to the mast".

 7. At the outset however, Mr Read and Mr Diwnycz agreed that in  fact  his
    function, that is to say Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley's function,  was
    to identify only that which was arguable. That said,  after  discussion
    with both representatives, by consent it was agreed that Judge Buchanan
    had erred for the very reasons identified by Judge Chalkley so that  it
    is not necessary for me to say more.

 8. Having agreed that there is an error of law which I, for the  avoidance
    of doubt agree exists for the reasons stated, the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside.

 9. It is for me then to decide whether I should  remake  the  decision  or
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. I agree with Judge Chalkley that the Appellant's  have  been  denied  a
    fair hearing it follows that the proper course is to start again,  that
    is in any event the course that was urged upon me by Mr Diwnycz.  There
    are observations properly made by Judge  Buchanan  concerning  evidence
    that might more readily have been adduced on an  earlier  occasion  but
    the extent to which that is relevant, or material will be a matter  for
    the First-tier Tribunal at the remitted hearing. For the  avoidance  of
    doubt, I am not pointing the First-tier Tribunal in any direction,  the
    reason for the observations is only to explain why I did not feel  that
    it was appropriate for  me  to  remake  the  case  here  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of  law.  The
appeals are remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  (with  no
findings of fact preserved) before any  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
other than Judges Fisher or S P J Buchanan or O'Keeffe.

A Sylheti interpreter will be required. The time estimate  for  the  appeals
will be 4 hours.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 20 December 2018

D G Zucker

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker









