
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05597/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th January 2019                          |On 15th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between


                              mr Muhammad bilal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel, Ilford Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 17th January 1981.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history, having first arrived in
    the UK on 21st September 2006 with a student  visa.   On  18th  October
    2016 the Appellant applied in time for indefinite leave  to  remain  on
    the grounds of  ten  years'  continuous  residence  in  the  UK.   That
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 9th February 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Mulholland sitting at Taylor house on 2nd  October  2018.
    In a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  16th  November  2018  the
    Appellant's appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

 3. The Secretary of State on 16th November 2018 lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended firstly the  judge  had
    made a material misdirection of law in that the judge materially  erred
    by absolving the Appellant of any blame  for  the  discrepancies  which
    amounted to over �11,000 in his self-employed income both to  UKVI  and
    HMRC, instead accepting the Appellant's account that his accountant was
    to blame for the failure to correctly declare his  income  for  several
    tax years.

 4. Secondly, it was contended that the judge had failed to give reasons or
    any adequate reasons for findings on  material  matters  in  particular
    that the judge had failed to provide any adequate  reasons  to  support
    the findings at paragraph 23 of  the  determination  that  "I  find  it
    perfectly feasible that he would not have noticed this until  2015  the
    error in his tax returns".  Considering  this  included  a  failure  to
    declare any self-employed income at all as well as under-declaring  his
    income by several thousand  pounds  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    consider such a finding to be sustainable.

 5. On 5th December 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle granted permission
    to appeal.  Judge Doyle noted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
    not take guidance from two  authorities  Samant  v  SSHD  [2007]  UKAIT
    URR/6546 and Khan v SSHD [2018] UKUT 00384 (IAC).

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Biggs.  Mr Biggs has also  provided  to  me  a  most  useful
    skeleton argument in support  of  the  Appellant's  opposition  to  the
    appeal.  I have considered the skeleton  argument.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Bramble.

Case Law

 7. I have taken note, in particular the guidance given in the authority of
    R (on the application of Khan) v the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department (Dishonesty, tax return, paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 00384
    (IAC).  This is a decision of Mr Justice Martin Spencer.   Considerable
    guidance is to be found in the headnote to that decision:

         "(i) Where there has been  a  significant  difference  between  the
              income claimed in a previous application for leave to  remain
              and the income declared to HMRC, the Secretary  of  State  is
              entitled to draw an inference that  the  Applicant  has  been
              deceitful or dishonest and therefore he should be refused ILR
              within paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules.   Such  an
              inference could be  expected  where  there  is  no  plausible
              explanation for the discrepancy.


         (ii) Where an  Applicant  has  presented  evidence  to  show  that,
              despite the  prima  facie  inference,  he  was  not  in  fact
              dishonest but only careless, then the Secretary of State must
              decide whether the explanation and evidence is sufficient, in
              her  view,  to  displace  the  prima   facie   inference   of
              deceit/dishonesty.


         (iii)    In approaching that fact-finding task,  the  Secretary  of
              State should remind herself that, although  the  standard  of
              proof is the 'balance  of  probability',  a  finding  that  a
              person has been deceitful and dishonest in  relation  to  his
              tax affairs with the consequence that he is denied settlement
              in this country  is  a  very  serious  finding  with  serious
              consequences.


         (iv) For an Applicant simply to blame his or her accountant for  an
              'error' in relation to the historical tax return will not  be
              the end of the matter, given  that  the  accountant  will  or
              should have asked the tax payer to confirm  that  the  return
              was accurate and to have signed the tax return.   Furthermore
              the Applicant will have known of his or her earnings and will
              have expected to pay tax thereon.  If the Applicant does  not
              take steps within a reasonable time to remedy the  situation,
              the Secretary of State may be entitled to conclude that  this
              failure justifies a conclusion that there has been deceit  or
              dishonesty.


         (v)  When considering whether or not the Applicant is dishonest  or
              merely careless the Secretary of State  should  consider  the
              following matters, inter alia, as well as the extent to which
              they are evidenced (as opposed to asserted):


              i.  Whether the explanation for the error by  the  accountant
                  is plausible;


              ii. Whether the documentation which can be assumed  to  exist
                  (for example, correspondence between the Applicant and his
                  accountant at  the  time  of  the  tax  return)  has  been
                  disclosed or there is a plausible explanation for  why  it
                  is missing;


              iii.    Why the Applicant did not realise that an  error  had
                  been made because his liability to pay tax was  less  than
                  he should have expected;


              iv. Whether, at any stage, the Applicant has taken  steps  to
                  remedy the situation and, if so,  when  those  steps  were
                  taken and the explanation for any significant delay."


Submissions/Discussion

 8. Mr Bramble relies on the Grounds of Appeal  and  on  the  authority  of
    Khan.  He submits the two grounds are self-explanatory and  effectively
    roll into each other.  He submits that the judge has failed to approach
    the case in accordance with the guidance given in the  headnote  (cited
    above) of Khan.  He specifically takes me  to  paragraph  (iv)  of  the
    headnote pointing out that the judge must take account of  the  process
    that was being undertaken and to paragraph (v) (submitting that in this
    case why did the Appellant not realise that  an  error  had  been  made
    because his tax liability was considerably less than he expected.)   He
    takes me to paragraph 19 of Judge Mulholland's decision  and  the  fact
    that  it  is  accepted  therein  that  the  Applicant  bears   personal
    responsibility for his tax returns.  It is Mr Bramble's submission that
    the judge has not properly  engaged  with  the  circumstances  and  the
    approach to be adopted as set out in Khan  and  that  the  decision  is
    lacking in findings.

 9. He also questions whether the judge has properly assessed the timelines
    in this matter pointing out that it is recited at paragraph 20 that  it
    was not until 2015 that the Appellant took any action  with  regard  to
    the erroneous tax returns he had previously submitted.  He submits that
    on a reading of paragraphs  20  to  23  of  the  judge's  decision  the
    appropriate approach has not been  followed  and  that  the  judge  has
    failed to give reasons for reaching his conclusions.

10. Mr Biggs in response submits  that  if  it  is  found  that  the  first
    submission of the Secretary of  State  is  not  well-founded  then  the
    second limb of the Secretary of State's attack falls away.  He  submits
    that the judge has adequately  addressed  the  law  and  given  legally
    adequate reasons for her findings at paragraph 23.  He points out:-

      i) That none of the authorities referred to by the Secretary of  State
         concern statutory appeals and did not  in  any  event  need  to  be
         referred to expressly by the judge.  In any event, irrespective  of
         this, he submits that the judge's approach and reasoning  has  been
         consistent with the authorities cited and that  overall  the  judge
         applied  the  correct  approach  to  the  issues  before  her.   By
         considering and  deciding  whether  in  the  light  of  Mr  Bilal's
         evidence it could be concluded that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
         proven that he had acted dishonestly.  He submits that the  judge's
         reasoning is plainly adequate because the  parties  can  be  in  no
         doubt why the judge allowed the appeal.  He submits that given  the
         judge's reasonings to be found at paragraphs 15 to 23 there  is  no
         substance in the Secretary of State's assertion  that  the  judge's
         statement that "I find it perfectly feasible that he would not have
         noticed this until 2015" is a finding that is not based on fact.


     ii) He submits that the whole thrust of this case turns on  whether  or
         not there has been any dishonest intent and the Tribunal  needs  to
         apply the evidence accordingly and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge has done this and applied that approach.


11. Mr Biggs addresses the  authority  of  Khan  and  that  the  judge  has
    accepted the appellant's explanation which has  been  supported  by  an
    expert accountant's report  and  that  that  is  the  model  that  Khan
    indicates needs to be followed.  Khan looks, he  submits,  at  how  the
    Upper Tribunal should address  "Wednesbury  challenges"  and  therefore
    there is no reason to expressly refer to these principles.  He  accepts
    that you cannot just simply blame the  accountants  and  that  Khan  is
    authority for this and that the judge has done  so.   He  submits  that
    there is no material error of law and asked me to dismiss the appeal.

12. Mr Bramble agrees that a principle is established in Khan  that  it  is
    not possible to rely on an Appellant's mistake in order to put  forward
    an argument of dishonesty but he takes me to paragraph 34 of Khan:

         "Where an issue arises as to whether an error in relation to a  tax
         return has been dishonest or  merely  careless,  the  Secretary  of
         State would be not merely entitled  but  obliged  to  consider  the
         evidence in each  direction  and,  in  her  decision,  justify  her
         conclusion by reference to that evidence.


         ...


         Thus, whilst it would normally be the case that an Applicant  would
         soon become aware of the error because of his unexpected lack of  a
         liability to pay tax, if the Applicant could show that  he  was  so
         distracted by other matters - here the serious illness of  a  child
         undergoing life saving brain  surgery  with  subsequent  treatment,
         rehabilitation and chemotherapy - then the Secretary of State would
         have to consider very carefully whether that did in fact  afford  a
         good reason for the Applicant's failure to appreciate that his  tax
         liability  was  less  than  expected  and  therefore   notify   the
         authorities sooner than he had done so."


    Consequently, Mr Bramble emphasises that there is a  responsibility  on
    the Appellant to put forward reasons as to why he has not responded  to
    the error sooner.

13. Mr Biggs submits that he has in fact done so and  that  as  there  were
    substantial discrepancies the  judge  went  on  to  assess  Mr  Bilal's
    innocent explanation.   He  submits  that  the  judge  gave  clear  and
    detailed reasons as to why this explanation was accepted and that  this
    was not a case where Mr Bilal had simply  blamed  his  accountant.   He
    submits that he had provided detailed evidence which  was  corroborated
    by contemporaneous  documents  explaining  that  he  provided  accurate
    documents to his accountants before  they  prepared  the  relevant  tax
    returns and addressing the background as to why he did not become aware
    of the incorrect declaration sooner.  Further, Mr  Biggs  takes  me  to
    paragraph 16 of the judge's findings which note that Mr Bilal had  also
    put forward credible evidence from accountants which explained  how  an
    innocent error could have arisen.

14. Briefly in response Mr Bramble submits that his  challenge  is  not  so
    much with paragraph 19 of the judge's decision  which  relates  to  the
    Appellant's start up business in  self-employment  but  the  manner  in
    which the judge was addressed in  paragraph  14  the  Appellant's  PAYE
    period and the period generally between 2011 and 2013.  He submits that
    the  failure  to  address  those  issues  is   substantial   and   that
    insufficient reason has been given.

15. Mr Biggs points out to me that he  considers  that  this  argument  put
    forward by Mr Bramble constitutes a completely new ground and one  that
    is not pleaded.  Mr Bramble merely disagrees with that analysis.

The Law

16.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

17. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

18. This is one of an ever increasing number of cases  that  appear  to  be
    coming before the Immigration Tribunal  where  reliance  is  placed  on
    paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules  to  refuse  applications  of
    this nature.

    Paragraph 322(5) states:

         "Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave  to  enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused -


         322(5)   the undesirability of permitting the person  concerned  to
                remain in the United Kingdom in the  light  of  his  conduct
                (including convictions which do not  fall  within  paragraph
                322(1C), character or  associations  or  the  fact  that  he
                represents a threat to national security.".


19. Mr Justice Martin Spencer had set out the guidelines to be followed  in
    this sort of case.  The question arises as  to  whether  or  not  those
    guidelines have effectively been followed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge even though the authority of Khan  is  not  recited  by  him  and
    whether the judge has given sufficient reasons  for  showing  that  the
    Appellant has given an explanation as to why he did not  note  that  he
    was making a false declaration as to his tax liability earlier.

20. I am satisfied that the judge has addressed this matter properly.   The
    starting point is that historically the  Appellant  has  a  justifiable
    Article 8 claim for protected private and family life.  The judge  then
    addressed the appropriate questions  of  fact  and  submitted  that  Mr
    Bilal's removal  would,  without  the  allegation  that  was  made,  be
    disproportionate.  Consequently, the question to be addressed  was  why
    he would not obtain indefinite leave to remain, given the allegation of
    dishonesty and the conclusion that on the basis of that allegation  his
    presence in the UK was undesirable pursuant to paragraph 322(5).  I  am
    satisfied that in addressing the question that therefore was before the
    judge the judge did apply what is put to me as  being  "the  evidential
    pendulum" that had been held to apply when general Grounds  of  Refusal
    are relied  upon.   The  judge  had  to  decide  whether  there  was  a
    discrepancy in income declared to HMRC and to the  Secretary  of  State
    which  was  sufficient  to  discharge  the  evidential  burden  on  the
    Respondent to advance evidence of  sufficiently  reprehensible  conduct
    that could justify the conclusion that he  was  undesirable,  which  in
    this context required evidence of dishonesty.

21. It was therefore necessary  for  the  judge  to  consider  whether  the
    Respondent  had  proven  dishonesty,  having  regard  to  the  innocent
    explanation provided and  importantly  the  evidence  provided.   I  am
    satisfied that a full and  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision shows that she did adopt this approach.

22. This is not a case where the Appellant simply blames his accountant and
    as I have referred to above and is put to me  by  Mr  Biggs,  Mr  Bilal
    provided detailed evidence corroborated  by  contemporaneous  documents
    explaining that he had provided accurate documents to  his  accountants
    before they prepared  the  relevant  tax  returns  and  addressing  the
    background as  to  why  he  did  not  become  aware  of  the  incorrect
    declaration sooner.  All these were factors that were considered by the
    judge.

23. There is nothing perverse in the decision.  The judge has carried out a
    proper analysis and approach.  The judge  has  made  reasoned  findings
    which, on a proper interpretation of the law, she was entitled to.   In
    essence the submissions of the Secretary of State ultimately amount  to
    a mere disagreement in the weight given to evidence by the judge.   The
    judge heard the facts and has made findings that she was  entitled  to.
    In such circumstances the decision discloses no material error  of  law
    and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  discloses  no  material
    error of law and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

25. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 11 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 11 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

