
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05661/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 November 2017                           |On 16 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                             miss sai laxmi rai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesuram (Counsel) instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Miss Sai Laxmi Rai,  the  daughter  of  a  former
    Gurkha soldier, and a citizen of Nepal, born on 27 December 1985.   She
    applied for settlement in the United Kingdom  in  July  2015  and  that
    application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on 11 August  of
    that year.  She appealed and  that  appeal  was  dealt  with  by  Judge
    Geraint Jones Q.C. in the First-tier Tribunal on 5  January  2017;  his
    determination being promulgated on 9 January 2017.

2.   The Judge refused the appellant's appeal and a  number  of  grounds  of
    appeal were submitted challenging that determination.  For instance, it
    is said in the grounds of appeal that the Judge misdirected himself  as
    to what the proper threshold for family life was and he failed properly
    to deal with the jurisprudence in Ghising and Gurung.  In  addition  we
    have the benefit now of the case of Jitendra Rai, which in fairness  to
    him was not promulgated when he dealt with the matter. That case  seems
    to us to deal with matters which may be thought to go to some extent to
    the root of the issue in this case.  The Judge found that there  was  a
    modest degree of family life but it is difficult to know just what that
    means.

3.   We do not think it is necessary for us to go  through  in  detail  what
    the various issues were with this determination. Suffice it to say that
    Mr Duffy, for the respondent, and Mr  Jesuram,  who  appeared  for  the
    appellant, both agreed that there were a number of difficulties arising
    with this determination.  We are in agreement with that.  We find  that
    it is unsustainable for the reasons set out in the  grounds  of  appeal
    which we do not rehearse here.  It was agreed that in view of the  fact
    there really has been no proper consideration of  this  appeal  at  all
    that it  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before  a
    different Judge and that it be reheard.

4.   We understand that there is some medical evidence in  relation  to  the
    sponsor's condition which was not before the First-tier Tribunal.  Some
    reference was made to his health in the papers before that Tribunal but
    not in any detail.  That is a matter which can no doubt be addressed in
    due course before the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   We are grateful to Mr Duffy for his fair approach to  this  appeal.  We
    set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal with  no
    findings of fact maintained.


Notice of Decision

The appeal against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  allowed.
The case is remitted to that Tribunal to be heard  by  a  Judge  other  than
Judge Jones QC

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge John P McClure   15 January 2018

                                                             & LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)




