
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05575/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd September 2018                         |On 18th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     FM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar of Counsel, instructed by Karis
Solicitors Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the decision of  the  Tribunal,  to  which  both  members  have
    contributed.  The Appellant appeals against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Pedro  promulgated  on  3  April  2017,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his  human  rights
    claim dated 11 February 2016 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Albania, born on 19 December  1981,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom illegally in 2001.  He claimed asylum,
    which was refused and his appeal against that  refusal  was  dismissed.
    The Appellant retuned to Albania in 2004 and remained there until 2010,
    living in his family home which he resided in prior to  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. The Appellant married his now ex-wife in Albania in 2001 and they had a
    son, [R], on 17 September 2005.  The marriage was dissolved in  Albania
    on 25 January 2012.

 4. The Appellant re-entered the United Kingdom illegally in 2010.  His ex-
    wife and son entered the United Kingdom illegally in around August 2012
    but did not live with the Appellant in this country.   The  Appellant's
    ex-wife married a Latvian national on 22 March  2013  and  they  had  a
    child on 8 May 2014.  They live together  as  a  family  unit  of  four
    people.

 5. The Respondent refused the application on 11 February  2016  the  basis
    that the Appellant could not meet any of the requirements of a grant of
    leave to remain under the private and family  life  provisions  in  the
    Immigration Rules  and  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  to
    warrant a grant of leave to remain outside of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Respondent considered the Appellant's relationship  with  his  son,
    but took into account the time spent away from him prior to his arrival
    in the United Kingdom and in any event considered that the relationship
    could be maintained via modern means of technology.

 6. Judge Pedro dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  3  April
    2017 on all grounds.  It was accepted before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the Appellant could not  meet  any  of  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules for a grant of leave to remain and in the alternative
    relied upon Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.   In
    relation to family  life,  it  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    established family life with his son whom he did not live with but  saw
    on an almost daily  basis.   The  issue  was  whether  the  Appellant's
    removal would be a disproportionate interference with that family life.



 7. The First-tier Tribunal began by assessing the best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's son and found as follows:

         "12. The best interests of a child  are  to  be  with  his  or  her
         parents.  The appellant is required  to  return  to  Albania.   The
         respondent does not of course currently require [R]  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom, as he has extant leave to remain.  I am  told  that
         [R] is happily part of a family unit that exists  independently  of
         the appellant.  [R] has resided at all times with his mother  since
         their unlawful entry into the United Kingdom  in  August  2012  and
         currently resides in a  stable  and  happy  family  unit  with  his
         mother, his step-father and  his  half-sibling.   Indeed,  [L]  has
         confirmed in her statement that she met her current  spouse  ([R]'s
         step-father) in late 2012, which was very shortly after her arrival
         in the United Kingdom  with  [R].   They  married  in  March  2013.
         Therefore, [R] has known and  had  a  good  relationship  with  his
         stepfather within a family unit since shortly after arriving in the
         United Kingdom, almost 5 years ago.  That family unit has now  been
         added to by the  birth  of  [R]'s  half-sibling.   Indeed,  in  the
         unsigned statement that has been produced and which I am  asked  to
         accept as the stepfather's statement, the stepfather says  that  he
         treats [R] as his son and that [R] gets on very well with his half-
         sibling.  It follows that whilst [R] will obviously be disappointed
         and saddened by the appellant's return to Albania, his family  life
         in a close and stable family unit with his mother,  stepfather  and
         half-sibling  will  continue  without  interruption,  as  will  his
         education and all aspects of his social and private life  save  for
         his current contact with the Appellant.  In such  circumstances,  I
         am satisfied that the best interests of [R] are to remain with  his
         current family unit in the United Kingdom."


 8.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  went  on  to  find  that  the   Appellant's
    relationship with his son could be maintained through modern methods of
    communication and that would be more than the Appellant had done  prior
    to his son coming to the United  Kingdom  in  2012.   In  Albania,  the
    Appellant did not live with his wife or son for the first five years of
    his life and then left for the United Kingdom in 2010 and only later re-
    established any contact in 2012 once his ex-wife and son came here.  It
    was also found that visits could take place.

 9. The factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 were then taken into account, in particular that the Appellant
    had a history of blatant disregard for UK laws and immigration control,
    having entered illegally twice, abusing the asylum system  by  claiming
    in a false nationality and has never had any leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant has also been convicted  of  an  offence
    relating to the possession of a false document in the  United  Kingdom.
    At the same time, the Appellant had his  own  property  and  family  in
    Albania.  The First-tier Tribunal took into account that the  Appellant
    spoke English but there was no evidence of his undertaking  any  lawful
    employment and his son is not a qualifying child.  In  conclusion,  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  be
    proportionate.

The appeal

10. The Appellant appeals on  two  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to engage with or determine the Appellant's reliance in
    his appeal on Article 24(3) of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and
    Freedoms ("CFFR") (a child's right to maintain on  a  regular  basis  a
    personal relationship and direct contact with both parents).  Secondly,
    that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  its  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's son in respect of  his  relationship  with
    the Appellant.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge McWilliam on 12 December 2017
    on all grounds, albeit express reference was only made  to  the  second
    ground in the reasons given.

12. Prior to the hearing before us on 3  September  2018,  directions  were
    issued to the parties to make written submissions on the  first  ground
    of appeal as to the basis on which CFFR is said to apply on  the  facts
    of this case.  In the  course  of  those  submissions,  the  Respondent
    provided evidence of the Appellant's ex-wife and son's  status  in  the
    United Kingdom as being here with discretionary leave to remain on  the
    basis of exceptional circumstances valid to 23  December  2017,  rather
    than with the benefit of an EEA Residence Card.

13. At the oral hearing, Ms Iengar was asked to  confirm  how  EU  law  was
    engaged in this case given that the Appellant's son has at best only  a
    derivative right based on his relationship with his step-father (an EEA
    national).  She could only put the Appellant's case at its highest that
    his son was a child  in  an  EU  family  but  could  not  identify  any
    provision of the TFEU  treaty  engaged  on  the  facts  of  this  case.
    Reliance was placed  on  regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 to show that EU law  was  engaged,  but
    accepted that the Appellant's son had no substantive rights as  a  non-
    EEA national, only rights as a family  member  derived  from  Directive
    2004/38/EC and the Appellant  himself  was  not  the  family  (or  even
    extended family) member (as  defined  in  articles  2  and  3  of  that
    Directive of an EEA national.

14. As to the second  ground  of  appeal,  Ms  Iengar  submitted  that  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal were contradictory in  relation  to
    family life, with a finding both that the Appellant  had  almost  daily
    contact with his son but that it was in the child's best  interests  to
    remain within his separate family unit with his mother.  The First-tier
    Tribunal gave no consideration  to  the  son's  relationship  with  his
    father or the effect of  the  Appellant's  removal  on  him  which  was
    evidenced in the Appellant's ex-wife's statement.  The oral submissions
    on the second ground of appeal that there was  an  error  in  the  fact
    finding of the First-tier Tribunal in paragraphs 9, 10 and  10  of  the
    decision.

15. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Jarvis submitted for clarity  that  the
    Appellant's ex-wife had originally applied for an EEA Residence Card on
    the basis of her marriage to an EEA  national  in  2013  but  that  was
    refused on the basis that it was a sham marriage, a decision which  was
    upheld on appeal.  A subsequent  application  on  the  same  basis  was
    refused in 2018 and an  appeal  is  listed  against  that  refusal  for
    November 2018.  The Appellant's ex-wife and son were in the alternative
    granted discretionary leave to remain on the  basis  of  the  ex-wife's
    care for a British Citizen child in the United Kingdom.  In  any  event
    it was submitted that EU law is  not  engaged  in  this  case  and  not
    applicable to either the Appellant or his son such that the EU  Charter
    of Fundamental Rights is not relevant.

16. As to the second ground of appeal, Mr Jarvis submitted that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had made a lawful assessment of the best interests of the
    child and also in making the proportionality assessment  with  adequate
    reasons given for dismissing the appeal.

Findings and reasons

 1. In relation to the first ground of appeal, whilst it is correct for the
    Appellant to say that the First-tier Tribunal failed to engage with  or
    determine the issue before it as to the applicability of Article  24(3)
    of the CFFR, that is not a material error of law in this case  for  the
    following reasons.

 2. The appeal concerns an Albanian  national  challenging  a  decision  to
    refuse his application for leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds.
    His circumstances do not in any way engage EU law and there  is  no  EU
    decision in relation to him.

 3. The Appellant claims that the CFFR is applicable because  the  decision
    under challenge in this appeal affects a family member (the Appellant's
    son) whose residence in the United Kingdom remains as a result of Union
    law as he is the family member of an EEA national under regulation 7 of
    the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.    The
    Appellant has failed to establish the latter given the Appellant's  son
    had in fact been in the United  Kingdom  with  discretionary  leave  to
    remain and his claim to be the family member of  an  EEA  national  had
    been rejected.

 4. In any event, the CFFR is only applicable  in  circumstances  in  which
    substantive EU law rights are engaged and even on the Appellant's  case
    taken at its highest, they are not.  The Appellant's son  has  (if  the
    marriage and relationship are accepted which it has not been  to  date)
    only a derivative right of residence and no substantive EU  law  rights
    in his own right.  The Appellant can not  himself  derive  any  EU  law
    rights through his son in these circumstances.  As such,  even  if  the
    First-tier Tribunal had expressly considered the  Appellant's  reliance
    on Article 24(3) of the  CFFR,  it  could  not  have  found  it  to  be
    applicable to the facts of this case and could not therefore have  made
    any material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

 5. In relation to the second ground of appeal, although it would have been
    preferable  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  expressly  include   an
    additional finding on whether it was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's son for the Appellant  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    (thereby maintaining the regular face-to-face contact they had) and not
    just whether it  was  in  his  best  interests  to  remain  within  his
    immediate family unit; the  relationship  was  sufficiently  considered
    with no inconsistent findings and the outcome of the appeal  could  not
    have been materially different in any event.

 6.  In  paragraph  13  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,   detailed
    consideration was given to the history of Appellant's relationship with
    his son, or more specifically, his lack of relationship with him  prior
    to 2012 and as to how the relationship could be maintained even if  the
    Appellant were removed.  If, even in light  of  this,  it  was  in  the
    Appellant's son's best interests for the Appellant  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom,  that  is  not  determinative  of  the  proportionality
    assessment or the appeal.

 7. The Appellant's son is not a qualifying  child  and  therefore  section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  can  not
    assist  the  Appellant.   The  other  factors  in  section  117B   were
    considered in detail in paragraphs 14 and 15 of the First-tier Tribunal
    decision showing a  significant  public  interest  in  the  Appellant's
    removal in light of his very  poor  immigration  history  and  criminal
    conviction.  In addition, Appellant's  continuing  links  with  Albania
    were taken into account.  Overall, even if it was  in  the  Appellant's
    son's best interests for the Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom,
    on the facts of this case  that  could  not  outweigh  the  significant
    public  interest  in  removal  such  that  there   would   not   be   a
    disproportionate interference with his right to respect for private and
    family life under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date     12th November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

