
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/05199/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 December 2019                     | On 20 December 2019                |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                            mr Muhammad Akbar Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik, Counsel, instructed by Sabz Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, challenges the decision of  Judge
    Holt of the First-tier Tribunal sent on 28  July  2019  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 21 November  2018
    based on private and family life.

2.   In the refusal  decision  letter  the  respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    although it was accepted that by virtue  of  his  relationship  with  a
    British citizen  spouse,  he  met  the  eligibility  requirements  (see
    paragraph 9) of Section E-LTRP of Appendix FM.  The respondent accepted
    that his partner is suffering from  a  number  of  medical  conditions,
    including recurrent depressive disorder,  chronic  pain,  vomiting  and
    headaches and that she  also  has  previously  suffered  from  (breast)
    cancer.  The respondent concluded nevertheless that despite  statements
    provided stating how he cared for  his  wife  by  doing  house  chores,
    grocery shopping and taking his wife to medical appointments, etc., she
    could obtain alternative care provisions if she chose to remain in  the
    UK.  Earlier the respondent had stated that as his wife had  previously
    resided in Pakistan she will  have  retained  knowledge  of  life  both
    socially and culturally in Pakistan and it was reasonable to expect her
    to accompany him to Pakistan.

3.   At the hearing before the judge there was no appearance  on  behalf  of
    the respondent.  The judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant.  The
    judge's ROP  indicates  that  the  questioning  was  very  short.   The
    appellant's wife attended in a wheelchair "looking very frail".

4.   In his decision the judge spent considerable time  questioning  whether
    the appellant's claim to be a carer for his wife was genuine, observing
    that the medical letters describing him as a carer appeared to be based
    on information given by the sponsor.  At  paragraphs  17  and  18,  the
    judge stated:

    "17. What is striking in  this  case  is  that  there  is  no  evidence
         whatsoever of a personal relationship  between  the  parties  other
         than the claim that the appellant  is,  in  effect,  the  sponsor's
         carer. The totality of the evidence in the witness statements,  the
         oral evidence and documents provide no scrap of anything other than
         the uncorroborated evidence of appellant allegedly caring  for  the
         sponsor. The only evidence of his being her carer is on  the  basis
         of assertions made by the appellant  and  sponsor  in  relation  to
         information that  they  have  given  to  doctors  and,  apparently,
         benefits agencies. I have been provided with a few  select  letters
         from the sponsor's medical records  where  the  appellant  attended
         medical appointments with the sponsor. I find that  this  is  self-
         serving evidence. Against this background, it is strange  that  the
         appellant left the UK and went to Saudi Arabia within about a month
         of arriving in the UK and that he was out of the  UK  for  about  7
         weeks in  March/April  2016.  If  she  was  as  ill,  disabled  and
         depressed as the medical records indicate, then this  would  simply
         have not been viable.


    18.  I am wary of speculating and  state  that  I  am  unsure  what  is
         actually going on here  between  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor.
         However, I am not remotely satisfied that the sponsor is reliant on
         the appellant as claimed. There was no evidence regarding how  this
         profoundly depressed, disabled and  thus  very  vulnerable  sponsor
         coped with the prolonged absences of the appellant  abroad.  It  is
         regrettable that the respondent made errors in the  refusal  letter
         and  also  failed  to  attend  the  hearing  to  cross-examine  the
         appellant and sponsor and to make submissions."

5.   At paragraph 19 the judge also concluded that there  was  "no  evidence
    whatsoever to  explain  why  they  cannot  live  together  in  Pakistan
    although it is implied that life there would  be  more  challenging  as
    there are less facilities for disabled people  and  the  sponsor  would
    inevitably lose her state benefits. I am quite sure there are  Pakistan
    citizens who use wheelchairs".  The judge stated that "she  seems  able
    to live independently at home, albeit reliant on medication ...".

6.   The  appellant's  grounds  are  discursively  composed  but  submit  in
    essence that:

    (1)  the judge  failed  to  grapple  with  the  issue  of  whether  the
         appellant had valid leave when he applied for leave to remain on 31
         August 2017;


    (2)  failed to give proper consideration to whether it  was  reasonable
         to expect the appellant's  spouse  to  accompany  him  to  Pakistan
         despite her medical circumstances;


    (3)  wrongly went behind the respondent's acceptance that the appellant
         met the eligibility requirements as a partner; and


    (4)  wrongly attached  negative  weight  to  the  appellant's  absences
         abroad for short periods  of  time  in  the  context  of  assessing
         whether he was in fact acting as his spouse's carer.

7.   I did not take submissions from the  parties  as  both  representatives
    were in agreement with  my  provisional  indication  that  the  judge's
    decision should be set aside.

8.   I am persuaded that the judge materially erred in law.  There  are  two
    main errors.  First of all, the  judge  based  his  assessment  of  the
    appellant's Article 8 circumstances on his findings that the  appellant
    and his partner did not have a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.
    That was not something  disputed  by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal
    decision and, whilst in principle it is open to a judge  to  go  behind
    concessions of fact made by the respondent, if he does so, a judge must
    ensure that the proceedings are conducted fairly, giving the  appellant
    and witnesses proper opportunity to address the newly perceived issues.
     Palpably the judge failed to take such precautions.  As already noted,
    the ROP records  very  minimal  questioning,  none  of  which  put  the
    appellant on notice that the genuine nature of his relationship was now
    at issue.

9.   Second, the judge wholly failed to address the appellant's  contentions
    that he did qualify under the Rules under the suitability  requirements
    because (on his argument) he was not an overstayer.  The  judge  wholly
    disregarded this point and failed when assessing the  case  both  under
    the Rules and outside the Rules, to make a ruling  on  it,  despite  it
    being specifically raised in paragraphs 7-8 of the appellant's  grounds
    of appeal.

10.  For the above reasons the judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
    the judge's decision and preserve no findings made in it.

11.  In the circumstances of this case, I see no  alternative  to  the  case
    being remitted to the FtT for a full re-hearing.

12.  I pointed out to Mr  Karnik  and  Mr  Tan  that  although  the  judge's
    decision has been set aside and no findings  preserved,  the  appellant
    must be understood to now be put on notice by the judge's decision that
    there is a live issue as to the genuine and subsisting  nature  of  his
    relationship with his spouse.  Whilst I  make  no  specific  directions
    (because it may be the respondent will maintain the  same  approach  to
    that  taken  in  the  refusal  decision  as  regards  the   eligibility
    requirements), the  appellant's  representatives  should  give  careful
    consideration  to  obtaining  an  independent  report  on  whether  the
    appellant is in fact a primary carer of his spouse and whether  she  in
    fact needs his specific care. How she managed when he went out  of  the
    UK previously will be one obvious question needing exploration.

13.  To conclude:

    The decision of the judge is set aside for material error of law;


    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Holt).

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 17 December 2019
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



