
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/05513/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 May 2017                        |        On 20 June 2017               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                   MD K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brown  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 28 August 2015 to refuse  him  leave
    to remain on the basis of his private and family life.

2.   In a further Rule 24 response dated 24  May  2017  and  notwithstanding
    the contents of the earlier response from the respondent of 4 May,  the
    respondent now did not wish to oppose the appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal. In order to avoid  putting  the  parties  to  any
    additional costs, the respondent invited the Tribunal to determine  the
    appeal with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing.

3.   Mr Whitwell accepted that the judge erred in law  in  his  decision  at
    paragraphs 27 to 29 in considering the appellant's human rights  appeal
    as at the date the respondent made her decision.  I  find  that  whilst
    the judge may have  decided  that  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's
    decision the appellant could not  comply  with  the  Immigration  Rules
    276ADE, the judge failed to assess  the  appellant's  evidence  in  the
    wider context of Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.

4.   Consequently I find that the  judge  erred  in  law  in  requiring  the
    appellant to make a fresh application for leave to remain now that  the
    appellant and Ms A are legally married.

5.   Accordingly I set aside  the  determination  in  order  for  it  to  be
    remade.

6.   The appeal is remitted to Taylor House for rehearing  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than Judge T Brown.

Directions

7.   Time estimate - two hours.

8.   Witnesses - 2, the appellant and his wife.

9    The appellant will  require  an  interpreter  in  the  Bengali  Sylheti
    dialect.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date: 19 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
