
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/05119/2015
     HU/05120/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5 October 2017                     |On 10 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Kamal Sing Gurung
                            Mr Keshab Sing Gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimants:     Mr J Khalid of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the parties as follows; to "the  Secretary  of  State"
    who is the appellant in this matter and to the Claimants.  This  is  an
    appeal by the Secretary of State in respect of a Decision  and  Reasons
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge  R  Sullivan  ("FTT")  promulgated  on  25
    January 2017 in which the FTT allowed  the  appeals  of  the  Claimants
    under Article 8.  The Claimants are aged 30 and 31.  They  applied  for
    entry clearance as adult dependents of their father, who was  a  former
    Gurkha soldier and settled in the UK. At the FTT appeal it  was  argued
    that the Secretary of State's policy in 2009 applied  or  reliance  was
    placed on Ghising & others (Gurkhas/BOCS:historic wrong:weight)  [2013]
    UKUT 00567 (IAC) , and that Article 8 was engaged outside of the Rules.
     The appeal was on human rights grounds.

2.   In the grounds it was contended that the FTT erred in  law  by  finding
    that there was family life which engaged Article 8  which  contradicted
    its  findings that there was no dependency above and beyond the  normal
    family ties. Secondly,  it  was  contended  that   the  FTT  failed  to
    consider Section 117 Nationality Immigration & Asylum  Act  2002  ("the
    2002 Act") in the Article 8 assessment.

3.     Permission was granted on both grounds.

4.   I heard  submissions which are set out in  the  record  of  proceedings
    and considered the Decision and Reasons. The  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    quite clear in making specific findings that failed to show evidence of
    dependency above and beyond the normal family ties  following  Kugathas
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31  [20, 21 & 27].  The FTT found  that  there  was  an
    independent  family household as between the Claimants and their sister
    who was working as a doctor in Nepal [22]. The FTT  was  not  satisfied
    that the Claimants were unable to work whereas their sister was working
    as a doctor and did not accept that she made no financial  contribution
    [25]. The FTT found no evidence of any day to day  decisions  taken  by
    the sponsor on behalf of and as claimed by the Claimants [27].  The FTT
    found  that  there  was  frequent  contact  and  the   family   enjoyed
    affectionate relationships [27]. The  FTT  qualified  this  finding  by
    stating that the various texts  between the Claimants and  the  sponsor
    failed to demonstrate any emotional   dependency  or  reliance  on  the
    sponsor in everyday life. The FTT found that there was "some" financial
    dependency on the sponsor [25]. In  addition  the  FTT  also  made  the
    finding  that the visits failed to establish  any element of dependency
    above and beyond the normal family ties [20].  The family life as found
    by the FTT to engage Article 8 was based on finance,  frequent  contact
    and  enjoyment  of  affectionate  relationships  [28].  The  FTT   then
    considered proportionality concluding that the Secretary of  State  had
    not identified any other public interest factors and  that  significant
    weight was to be placed in the historic injustice following Ghising.

5.   The FTT has made findings on the different aspects of family  life  and
      concluded that Article 8 is engaged on the  basis  of  some  financial
      dependency, the level of contact, interest  and   affection  [28].  In
      Vikas and Manesh Singh (2015) EWCA Civ 630 the CA said  there  was  no
      legal or factual presumption as to the existence or absence of  family
      life under Article 8 in the case of adult children. Kugathas  did  not
      include any requirement of exceptionality.  It  all  depended  on  the
      facts. The love and affection between an adult and his  parents  would
      not itself, justify family life. A young adult still living  with  his
      parents will normally have a family life to be respected under Article
      8 and a child enjoying family life with his parents did  not  suddenly
      cease to have family life at the moment he turned  18.  On  the  other
      hand, a young adult living independently of his parents might not have
      a family life for the purposes of article 8.

6.     I am satisfied that the conclusion reached that Article 8 is  engaged
      cannot be supported  by  the  FTT's  findings  in  the  light  of  the
      contradictory findings made in particular that the Claimants  live  in
      an independent  household with their sister.  I reject the submissions
      made  by  Mr   Khalid  that   seen  in  the  round  the  decision   is
      sustainable.  I fully accept that the FTT did make findings in respect
      of each aspect of family life,  but those findings failed to establish
      a "protected family life" given the  contradictory  findings  and  the
      absence of any reference to anything to show   that  the  family  life
      established at [28] was above and beyond the normal ties.

7.     Further more I  am  satisfied  that  the  FTT  erred  in  failing  to
    consider section 117 of the  2002  Act  which  is  a  requirement  when
    looking at proportionality under Article 8 ECHR outside of  the  Rules.
    I accept that there may have been evidence of language and finance  but
    the FTT was required to consider it.   The  FTT's  consideration  under
    section 117 was inadequate and amounts to an error in law.

8.   Accordingly I find an error of law that is material to the decision.  I
    allow the Secretary of State's appeal.  The decision and reasons is set
    aside.  The Claimant's appeals are dismissed.  I rely on  the  findings
    made by the FTT and the absence of findings showing something more than
    the normal family ties.

Notice of Decision

9.   The Claimants appeal are  dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 6.10.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date   6.10.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
