
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05096/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:                            |                                     |
|Field House, London                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 1 February 2019                  |On: 13 February 2019                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MOHAMMED [T]
                          (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Kunha (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr W Shea  (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal,
brought with the permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  from  a
decision of  the  First-tier Tribunal  (the  tribunal)  which  it  made  on
19 July 2018, to allow the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
State's decision of 9 February 2018 refusing to grant him leave to  remain
in the United Kingdom (UK) on the basis of family life under Article 8  of
the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

2.    I have not made any anonymity order in this case.   The  tribunal  did
not do so and, although the claimant was represented before me,  I  was  not
invited to do so.

3.    Put simply and briefly, the background circumstances are  as  follows:
The claimant is a national of Pakistan and he was born on  1 January 1991.
He came to the UK, as a student, in 2011.  He subsequently  entered  into  a
relationship with one [SP], a female British citizen  resident  in  the  UK,
and the two have cohabitated since July 2013.  She is the mother  of  three
children and of those, the claimant is the father of the youngest two.   The
eldest (and the one  whom  the  claimant  has  not  fathered)  was  born  on
8 February 2010.   The  younger  two  were  born  on  17 July 2014  and
3 August 2017 respectively.  The evidence is that all  five  persons  live
together as a family unit.  During the  course  of  a  previous  immigration
application  the  claimant  submitted  a   TOEIC   certificate   which   was
subsequently found to have been obtained  with  the  use  of  a  proxy  test
taker.  So, there was deception on the claimant's part. I do not think  even
now he accepts that but the allegations have  been  tested  now  before  two
differently constituted tribunals and on each occasion that matter has  been
resolved against him.

4.    Prior to the birth of his second child the claimant applied for  leave
to remain in the UK on the basis of family life.   The  Secretary  of  State
refused that application and the claimant appealed.  But on 21 June 2016, a
tribunal dismissed his appeal under  Article 8  of  the  ECHR  outside  the
rules.   The  claimant  went  on  to   make   a   similar   application   on
17 January 2017 which the Secretary of State refused on 9 February 2018 and
which he, again, appealed.  This  time,  though,  as  noted  above,  he  was
successful.

5.    The hearing which led to the tribunal's decision of 19 July 2018 took
place on 5 July 2018.  The claimant gave oral evidence as did Ms [P].  Both
parties were represented.  The tribunal, in its  written  reasons,  reminded
itself of the existence  of  the  previous  tribunal's  decision  and  that,
following the  well  known  case  of  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKAIT 00702,  the
previous findings represented its own starting  point.   It  then  concluded
that there was nothing before it to enable it to depart  from  the  previous
finding that the claimant had, as alleged, used a  proxy  test  taker.   The
consequence of that was that his application could  not  succeed  under  the
Immigration Rules because he fell foul of  what  are  referred  to  as  the
"suitability  requirements".   So,  that  led  to  a  consideration  of  the
situation outside the rules under article 8 of the ECHR and that,  in  turn,
led to an evaluation as to  the  relevance  of  the  children.   As  to  the
eldest, the tribunal found evidence suggesting significant  contact  between
that child and the natural father to be unreliable  and  unpersuasive.   But
the tribunal accepted that there was "likely to  be  some  contact"  between
the two.  It thought that that child's  best  interests  would  lie  in  her
remaining with her UK based  mother.   As  to  the  two  children  whom  the
claimant had fathered, the tribunal considered it would  be  in  their  best
interests  to  be  raised  by  both  of  their   parents.    The   tribunal,
uncontroversial I think, went on to conclude that Article 8 of the ECHR was
engaged and so it then went on to consider the  proportionality  of  removal
of the claimant bearing in mind the particular situation  of  the  children.
As to all of that it said this:

         "35.      In  considering  the   legitimate   public   aims   under
         Article 8(2) in assessing proportionality, I apply the  provisions
         of s 117B of the 2002 Act (steps 4 and 5).  As to proportionality,
         reading across my findings of fact as set  out  above,  I  find  as
         follows:

             I   S 117B(1) (the public interest in immigration control) is
             in the public interest.  The Appellant's  immigration  history
             is very poor.  He has been without leave since 2014,  even  if
             it were accepted that his leave to remain application in  2012
             was not secured by using deception, which it is not.  He  has,
             in effect, been without  leave  since  2012  because  he  used
             deception to secure leave which was granted to 4 January 2014.
              When asked why he had not returned  when  his  student  leave
             expired, he stated that he came to the UK because he wanted to
             study and the UK had been recommended as a good place to study
             and later 'the family came'.  However, there  was  nothing  to
             prevent him from returning to Pakistan at the time and  making
             an out of country application to  return  to  the  UK  as  the
             spouse of Mrs [P].

             II  As to the economic wellbeing of the UK, it must  be  shown
             that the Appellant is  financially  independent  and  that  he
             speaks English (s 117B(3)).  Although he gave his evidence in
             Urdu, it was clear that the Appellant was able  to  understand
             much of what  was  said  during  the  hearing.   He  has  also
             provided  evidence  of  recently  obtained  English   language
             certificates.  I accept, on the balance of probabilities, that
             the Appellant is sufficiently proficient in spoken English  to
             be able to integrate into society.

             III  There  is  no  evidence  before  me,  however,  that  the
             Appellant is financially independent.  As stated above,  there
             was no recent documentary evidence that Mrs [P] was employed.

             IV   However,  even  if   the   Appellant   were   financially
             independent and  could  speak  English  sufficiently  well  to
             integrate into society, I bear in  mind  the  guidance  in  AM
             (s 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC), at headnote 3, that an
             appellant 'can gain no positive right to a grant of leave from
             either s117B(2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  fluency  in
             English, or the strength of his financial resources'.

             V   As regards S 117B(4) and (5), the Appellant's relationship
             with Mrs [P] began when the Appellant's presence in the UK was
             at worst unlawful and at best precarious (see the  finding  of
             Judge Watson at [47], which was not challenged before me).  I
             can therefore give little weight to it.

             VI  As to the provisions of S117B (6), the  Appellant  has  a
             genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his  two
             British national children.  As the Appellant  is  living  with
             Mrs [P] and [Z] and [A], and he is their biological father, I
             find on the balance of  probabilities  that  he  does  have  a
             genuine and subsisting relationship with them.

             VII Is it unreasonable to expect the children to leave the UK?
              The Court of Appeal in MA stated that powerful reasons  would
             need to be established to it would be reasonable to expect the
             children to leave the UK.  Miss Hashmi referred me to SF and
             others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania  [2017]  UKUT 00120
             (IAC),  but  urged  me  also  to   take   into   account   the
             Family Migration:  Appendix FM Section 1.0b guidance, at p 35
             (the Guidance).  However, there is little within the  Guidance
             at p 35 which would assist the Appellant.

             VIII      SF highlighted that it was the Respondent's  policy,
             when considering whether it was reasonable to expect a British
             citizen child to leave the UK, that it would '... usually  be
             appropriate to grant leave to the parent or primary carer,  to
             enable them to remain in the UK with the child, provided  that
             there is satisfactory evidence of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship.   It  may  however  be  appropriate  to
             refuse to grant leave where  the  conduct  of  the  parent  or
             primary carer gives rise to considerations of such  weight  as
             to justify separation, if the child could otherwise stay  with
             another parent or alternative primary carer in the  UK  or  in
             the EU'.  The circumstances that may result in a  refusal  are
             criminality  falling  below  the   thresholds   set   out   in
             paragraph 398 of  the  Immigration Rules,  or  a  very  poor
             immigration history.

             IX  In the Appellant's case, it is stated in the RL  that  due
             to the Appellant's use of a fraudulent certificate  to  obtain
             leave to remain,  this  is  sufficiently  weighty  to  justify
             separation from his child.

             X   I find that the  Appellant  has  (i)  a  poor  immigration
             history (he has used deception to gain  leave  in  the  past);
             (ii) although he has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
             with his children, there was no reliable evidence  to  suggest
             that he played such an active part in  their  upbringing  that
             they would miss him more than  would  otherwise  be  expected;
             (iii)  he and his partner have always known that his presence
             in the UK was at best precarious and at  worst  unlawful  when
             they met; (iv) they both knew that he would not be  permitted
             to stay in  the  UK  unless  he  met  the  provisions  of  the
             Immigration Rules; (v)  The Appellant's attitude from his oral
             evidence was that he was not prepared to leave the UK, even if
             the decision went against  him,  because  he  had  decided  to
             settle in the UK because the laws were good here.

             XI  However, it is clear from MT & ET (child's best interests;
             ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC),  that  the
             offences must be more than 'run of the mill' (in the  case  of
             MT, who received a community order for  the  use  of  a  false
             document to obtain employment).  The Appellant was not in fact
             prosecuted for use of a false  English  language  certificate.
             The immigration history must also be very poor.  MT  had  been
             in the UK unlawfully for a considerable period  of  time,  and
             had made an asylum claim which was  found  to  be  false,  and
             pursued various legal means of staying in the UK and this  was
             not thought to be sufficient to constitute a 'powerful' reason
             for it to be found reasonable to expect a qualifying child  to
             leave the UK.  However undeserving the  Appellant  may  be,  I
             find that the use of a TOIEC certificate and  his  immigration
             history cumulatively is not sufficient for it to be reasonable
             to expect three British national children  to  leave  the  UK,
             particularly as (i) Yashfa is now 8 years of age and at school
             and (ii) she has some connection to her biological father, who
             remains in the UK, and it is more likely that she will see him
             if she remains in the UK than if she leaves.

         36.      It follows from the above that I allow  the  appeal  under
         Article 8"

6.    The Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal followed.  It is perhaps not inaccurate to suggest  that  to
some extent the author of the grounds used a  rather  scatter-gun  approach.
But the central contentions were to the effect that the tribunal had  failed
to  adequately  explain  why  it  was  departing  from  the   findings   and
conclusions of  the  previous  tribunal  and  had  failed  to  identify  any
"exceptional circumstances" such as to enable it  to  justify  allowing  the
appeal.  A grant of permission followed and the  granting  judge  relevantly
said this:

         "2.      The judge has referred to the decision in Devaseelan.   It
         is arguable however that the judge has given  insufficient  reasons
         for departing from the findings made when the  appellant's  earlier
         appeal was dismissed.  It is also arguable that the judge has  made
         inconsistent findings of fact and failed to give sufficient  weight
         to  the  public  interest  considerations  in  the  assessment   of
         proportionality."

7.    Permission to appeal having been granted, the matter was listed for  a
hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that  consideration  could
be given to the question of whether or not the tribunal  had  erred  in  law
and, if so, what should flow from that.  Representation at that hearing  was
as indicated above and I am grateful to each representative.  I  have  taken
into account what both of them have had to say in reaching my decision.

8.     The  first  thing  to  say  is  that  the  tribunal's   decision   of
19 July 2018 is careful, thorough and comprehensive.  That  does  not,  of
itself, mean that it is free from legal error  but  that  does  represent  a
good start.  Nevertheless, it is necessary for me  to  consider  the  points
made in  the  written  grounds,  the  oral  submissions  and  the  grant  of
permission.

9.    As to that, the primary point appeared to be what was  said  to  be  a
failure on the  part  of  the  tribunal  to  explain  why  it  was  reaching
conclusions which  differed  from  those  which  had  been  reached  by  the
previous tribunal.  In fact, though, a careful  reading  of  both  decisions
reveals  that,  as  to  factual  findings,  there  was  really  no  material
disagreement at all.  The second tribunal, like the  first  tribunal,  found
that the claimant had used a proxy  test  taker.   The  first  tribunal  had
decided with respect to the eldest child that she "has  no  regular  contact
with her father".  That in my view scarcely differs if it differs  all  from
the second tribunal's conclusions to the effect that claims which  had  been
made regarding contact were discrepant and unreliable.  The second  tribunal
did nevertheless make the limited finding that there was likely to  be  some
contact between father and daughter.  That conclusion itself  is  criticised
at one point but, to my mind, it simply represents the application of  logic
and common sense.  Further, it  is  not  of  itself  inconsistent  with  the
first tribunal's finding.  I am not really very sure that the situation  of
the eldest child was a primary consideration in the  mind  of  the  tribunal
when it decided to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds  but,  whether  it
was or not, I detect no error on the part of that tribunal in the  way  that
approached and resolved that issue.

10.   The tribunal did ultimately, of course, reach a  different  conclusion
on Article 8 to that of the  previous  tribunal.   The  factual  background
before the second  tribunal,  of  course,  was  different  in  an  important
material respect in that there was an additional child of the  family.   The
previous tribunal did consider that the two children who had  by  that  time
been born could be expected to leave the UK and return to Pakistan.  But  on
the basis of the different factual situation now obtaining  it  was,  in  my
judgment, clearly open to the tribunal to reach  a  different  view  on  the
material before it.  It did that and it was entitled to do that.

11.   The tribunal  is  criticised  for  failing  to  identify  "exceptional
circumstances" such as to enable it to allow the appeal.  But  what  it  did
was consider matters through the prism of section 117B of the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  As to section 117B(6) it concluded  that
the claimant had a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his
own two children and that it was not reasonable to expect those children  to
leave the UK.  Having reached that view it was not required to  cast  around
for anything else which it might have thought to have been exceptional.

12.   I am not sure why it was  thought  by  the  granting  judge  that  the
tribunal had made inconsistent findings of fact.  I have not  been  able  to
detect any for myself and I was not taken to any by Ms Kunha.   As  to  the
public interest considerations it seems to me to be entirely clear that  the
tribunal took such matters seriously and  took  them  into  account  in  its
overall assessment.  It did, for example, note  what  it  described  as  the
claimant's very poor immigration history.  But it was entitled to  conclude,
as it did, that such considerations were outweighed by the matters  relating
to the children.

13.   In the circumstances I have not been able to detect any error  of  law
in this  tribunal's  careful  decision.   That  decision  shall,  therefore,
stand.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.  Accordingly, that decision shall stand.


Signed:     Date: 11 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.  No such direction was  made  by  the  First-
tier Tribunal and none was applied for before me.


Signed:     Date: 11 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

