

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05384/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 October 2017                         |On 23 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                           MR MUHAMMAD ADEEL MIRZA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyes ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 16  January  2017,  in
    which she dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal  of  his
    application for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and none has
    been requested before me. I do not make one therefore.


Background

 3. The appellant entered the UK on 12 September 2004 with entry  clearance
    as a student valid to 31 January 2009. He was granted further leave  as
    a student until 31 October 2009. He applied for further leave to remain
    as a Tier 1 (post  study  work)  migrant  but  this  was  refused;  his
    application was reconsidered but maintained with a right of appeal.  He
    withdrew his notice of appeal against that decision. On 8 April 2010 he
    made an application for an EEA residence card as the unmarried  partner
    of a Slovakian national. A residence card was issued on  5  July  2010,
    valid to 5 July 2015.  On 28 April 2015 he applied for indefinite leave
    to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  10  years'  lawful  residence.   That
    application was refused and gave rise to the appeal which was dismissed
    by the FTTJ.


 4. The FTTJ noted that the decision was challenged on human rights grounds
    only [19]. The FTTJ nonetheless considered whether  the  appellant  met
    the Immigration Rules, for the purpose of assessing the proportionality
    of the interference with his protected rights [20]. She  found  he  did
    not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  insofar  as  his
    family and private life were concerned: his partner was not settled  in
    the UK and there were no very significant obstacles to his  integration
    on  return  (paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)).   Notwithstanding,   the   FTTJ
    considered the  position  pursuant  to  the  Article  8  jurisprudence,
    outside the Rules. She found Article 8 was engaged in  respect  of  his
    private  life.  She  bore  in  mind  s117A-s117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act").  She  found  the
    appellant had not demonstrated he had a right to  reside,  pursuant  to
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
    regulations"), subsequent to 2012. She declined to make a finding as to
    entitlement to a residence card under the EEA regulations as  a  result
    of the  appellant's  claimed  current  relationship  with  another  EEA
    national. The FTTJ found there were no compelling  circumstances  which
    warranted the grant of leave outside the Rules and  that  the  decision
    was justified and proportionate to the public interest.

Submissions

 5. The parties confirmed there was no cross-appeal by the respondent  with
    regard to  the  finding  of  the  FTTJ  that  the  respondent  had  not
    demonstrated that the appellant had earlier used deception  in  support
    of a previous application for leave to remain (paragraph 322(2) of  the
    Immigration Rules). That finding stands therefore.


 6. I summarise as follows the appellant's grounds for permission to appeal
    to this tribunal and Mr Karim's oral submissions:

        a. The judge had misapplied the test in the  context  of  assessing
           whether  there  was  a  durable  relationship  under   the   EEA
           regulations. She had considered whether or not there had been  a
           subsisting relationship; this was not appropriate in the context
           of the regulations; the tests and the Immigration Rules and  EEA
           regulations were different. The test applied by the FTTJ  had  a
           higher threshold: there was no requirement for cohabitation.
        b. As regards the  assessment  of  long  residence,  the  FTTJ  had
           rightly set out the  respondent's  policy  at  [29];  the  final
           paragraph required the respondent to apply discretion as regards
           time spent in the UK; the appellant had been granted a residence
           card; that period should have counted towards the calculation of
           long  residence  under  the  Rules.  The  FTTJ  had  failed   to
           appreciate that by August 2014 the appellant had  been  lawfully
           resident in the UK for 10 years. The  appeal  should  have  been
           allowed on that ground.
        c. It was not clear on what basis the appellant's friend's evidence
           had been rejected;  there  was  inadequate  reasoning  on  this.
           Similarly the tenancy agreements were prima  facie  evidence  of
           cohabitation, when taken with the other  evidence,  beyond  2012
           (if cohabitation were required).  No  findings  were  made  with
           regard to those.  They  demonstrated  the  couple  had  a  clear
           intention to live together at the date of signature.
        d. Whilst it may not have been argued before the FTTJ, as a  matter
           of law, if the FTTJ accepted the  appellant  had  been  lawfully
           resident  until  2012,  the  appellant  had  acquired  permanent
           residence status pursuant to the EEA regulations (i.e. 5 years).
           This had not been considered by the FTTJ. It was irrelevant that
           this was not an appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations.  This  was
           relevant to the issue of proportionality; if the appellant  were
           entitled  to  permanent  residence,  it  could  not  have   been
           proportionate to remove him. While it was accepted the appellant
           could not rely on human rights in an EEA appeal,  there  was  no
           authority that the reverse did not apply.
        e. The FTTJ  should  have  considered  whether  the  appellant  was
           entitled to  a  residence  card  as  a  result  of  his  current
           relationship  with  another  EEA  national.  Contrary   to   the
           assertion of the respondent, this was not a new matter;  it  was
           an issue akin the arrival of  a  baby  post-decision.  While  it
           would be a matter of discretion for the respondent  whether  the
           appellant was granted a residence card  as  an  extended  family
           member on the basis of his new relationship, the FTTJ could have
           made a positive finding to enable the respondent to exercise her
           discretion. The FTTJ should have  considered  this  despite  the
           absence of a s120 notice.


 7. For the respondent, Ms Pal relied on the rule 24 reply:  the  FTTJ  had
    directed herself properly. She had been aware  of  the  different  test
    under the EEA regulations and addressed it at [31]. The  use  of  words
    did not denote a higher standard than that in the EEA  regulations.  It
    was open to the FTTJ to assess the relationship  on  same  basis  as  a
    British national's unmarried relationship and to consider whether there
    was  a  genuine  relationship.  The  FTTJ  was  entitled  to  find  the
    significant inconsistencies in the appellant's  account  could  not  be
    saved by the evidence of the witness. In any event, given  the  finding
    that the relationship had ended in August 2014 and rekindled later, the
    appeal was bound to fail in any event.  The  FTTJ  had  given  adequate
    reasons as to why the appellant could not succeed on the basis  of  his
    new relationship; furthermore, the appellant's claimed current  partner
    had not attended to give oral evidence. The appellant could  not  raise
    new matters in the appeal (s85(5)  of  the  2002  Act).  The  FTTJ  was
    correct in finding she  had  no  jurisdiction  to  decide  whether  the
    appellant was entitled to a residence card on  the  basis  of  his  new
    relationship.


 8. Ms Pal additionally made the point that the appellant had not raised in
    his application for permission to appeal to this  tribunal  the  ground
    that the FTTJ had failed, in error, to consider whether  the  appellant
    was eligible for permanent residence under the EEA regulations. Nor had
    the grounds been amended to include this challenge.

 9. Mr Karim replied in response to the latter point that it was clear from
    the original grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  tribunal  that  the
    claim was based on the extent to which the EEA regulations were engaged
    in the context of the long residence application.

Discussion

10. Insofar as the long residence claim was concerned, the FTTJ's  starting
    point was the respondent's concession that the  appellant  had  resided
    continuously and lawfully in the UK between 12 September  2004  and  28
    March 2010. The respondent's position was that the  appellant  had  not
    demonstrated he was an extended family member of an  EEA  national  for
    the subsequent period. The FTTJ stated that this was  "because  she  is
    not satisfied that the Appellant and  [the  EEA  national]  were  in  a
    subsisting relationship". This is an accurate reflection of the reasons
    for refusal which refer to the appellant having  failed  "to  establish
    that [he] lived with his former partner in  a  subsisting  relationship
    between July 2010 and August 2014, as claimed" (page 3 of  the  reasons
    for decision appendix to the decision letter).


11. The issue to be decided by the FTTJ was whether the appellant  and  his
    former partner were in a durable relationship (within  the  meaning  of
    regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations). The burden is on the appellant
    to demonstrate such a relationship existed and  the  use  of  the  word
    "subsisting" is no more than a lay description of  the  nature  of  the
    relationship at the material time; the FTTJ might also  have  used  the
    words "ongoing" of "existing".  She was attempting to establish whether
    the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor  was  extant  at
    the relevant dates. I am unable to accept the submission that  the  use
    of the word "subsisting" connotes a higher  threshold  than  "durable".
    Indeed the reverse is true. The fact it  is  used  in  the  Immigration
    Rules in the context of establishing whether a relationship  exists  is
    of no material relevance  to  consideration  of  whether  there  was  a
    durable  relationship  at  the  material  time,  pursuant  to  the  EEA
    Regulations.


12. Mr Karim  submitted  there  was  no  requirement  for  cohabitation  to
    establish a "durable  relationship".   He  did  not  refer  me  to  any
    authorities to support this proposition.

13. In YB (EEA reg 17(4) - proper approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT  00062
    the Tribunal held inter alia that,  in  deciding  whether  to  issue  a
    residence card to an extended family member of an  EEA  national  under
    reg 17(4) the decision-maker should adopt a three-stage approach so  as
    to: (a) first determine whether the person concerned  qualifies  as  an
    extended family member under reg 8 (in that case, to determine  whether
    the appellant was "in a durable relationship"); (b) next, have  regard,
    as rules  of  thumb  only,  to  the  criteria  set  out  in  comparable
    provisions of the Immigration  Rules.  This  was  to  ensure  the  like
    treatment of extended family members of EEA and British  nationals  and
    so ensure compliance  with  the  general  principle  of  Community  law
    prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of  nationality.  This  means
    that, for reg 17(4) purposes, the comparable immigration  rules  cannot
    be used to define who are extended family members, but only to  furnish
    rules of thumb as to what requirements they should normally be expected
    to meet. The fact that a person meets or does not meet the requirements
    of the relevant immigration rules cannot be treated as determinative of
    the question of whether a  residence  card  should  or  should  not  be
    issued; and (c) ensure there has been an extensive examination  of  the
    personal circumstances of the applicant/appellant. It may  be  that  in
    many cases such an examination will have been made  in  the  course  of
    assessing the applicant's position vis a vis the immigration rules. But
    in principle the third stage is distinct, since the duty imposed by the
    Directive to  undertake  "an  extensive  examination  of  the  personal
    circumstances..." necessitates a  balancing  of  the  relevant  factors
    counting for and against the issuing of such a  card.   The  comparable
    Immigration Rules are set out in Appendix FM; paragraph GEN.1.2  states
    that a partner includes a person who has been living together with  the
    applicant in a relationship akin to a marriage or civil partnership for
    at least two years prior to the date of application unless the contents
    otherwise requires.  Appendix FM paragraphs E-ECP.2.6 and 2.10  require
    that the relationship of an  applicant  and  a  partner  must  also  be
    genuine and subsisting and that  they  must  intend  to  live  together
    permanently in the United Kingdom.


14. Whether or not the parties were cohabiting at the material time  is  an
    issue which could demonstrate the nature of a relationship between  the
    applicant and their partner. In the light of YB, the FTTJ was  entitled
    to  consider  whether  or  not  the  appellant  and  his  sponsor  were
    cohabiting at material times as part of  her  fact-finding  process  to
    determine whether they were in a durable relationship.

15. I do not accept the submission that the existence of a  residence  card
    in favour of the appellant, without more, was sufficient to demonstrate
    he had been in a durable relationship for the period of  its  validity.
    It was for  the  appellant  to  demonstrate  that  he  was  in  such  a
    relationship for the relevant period and the FTTJ was entitled to  take
    into account other factors than the mere  existence  of  the  residence
    card which had been issued on the basis of the appellant's situation at
    the date of application. Indeed the appellant's own case was  that  his
    relationship with the EEA national had broken down before the expiry of
    the residence card.

16. The FTTJ identified at length various inconsistencies in  the  evidence
    relating to the nature and extent of the appellant's relationship  with
    the sponsor. She states "The contradictions in the evidence before  me,
    that I have referred to above, are such that that [sic] I consider that
    they should be given more weight than  the  witness  evidence  of  [the
    appellant's friend], a long time friend of the  Appellant".   It  is  a
    matter for the FTTJ how much weight she gives to the evidence  and  she
    has given good reasons why she was not persuaded to accept that of  the
    appellant's friend. While it was submitted the inference  is  that  the
    FTTJ had found the appellant's friend was lying, I do not agree.  Faced
    with  contradictory  evidence,  the  FTTJ  was  entitled,  and   indeed
    required, to draw conclusions and she did so on reasonable grounds.   I
    reject therefore the submission that it was not clear on what basis the
    appellant's friend's evidence had been rejected.

17. The FTTJ notes there are "a  considerable  number  of  documents"  [36]
    identifying the appellant and sponsor  as  living  at  4  Horner  Court
    between 2007 and 2010. She finds therefore that they did  so  and  that
    they were in a "subsisting relationship" at the time the EEA  residence
    card was issued.  However, she notes the paucity  of  evidence  placing
    the appellant at the subsequent property: 9 Templeton Court. She refers
    to the existence of documents in the  sponsor's  name  but  only  three
    documents identifying the appellant as living there:  the  two  tenancy
    agreements covering the period August 2012 to August 2014 and a  letter
    dated 9 October  2012.  The  FTTJ  was  entitled  to  draw  an  adverse
    inference from this disparity and the "paucity of evidence to place the
    Appellant at 9 Templeton Court from August 2012  onwards".  Given  also
    that the appellant had used a different address for correspondence (his
    witness statement, paragraph 13), the FTTJ was entitled  to  treat  the
    existence of the two tenancy agreements with circumspection and she did
    so.  The FTTJ's reasoning for giving little weight to the  two  tenancy
    agreements and the letter of 9 October 2012 is adequate and sustainable
    on the evidence when taken as a  whole.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    tenancy agreements were prima facie evidence of an intention to  reside
    together but the FTTJ was entitled to consider those agreements in  the
    round with the remaining evidence, including the absence of  any  other
    documents (apart from one) to place the appellant at the premises.

18. As to whether the FTTJ erred in law in failing to  recognise  that  the
    appellant qualified under the long residence provisions in August 2014,
    having entered the UK in September 2004, this cannot be an error of law
    because there is no finding to support it. The FTTJ found at [39]  that
    she was not persuaded the appellant and sponsor resided  together  from
    August 2012  onwards.   She  identified  concerns  about  the  evidence
    regarding the appellant's and sponsor's relationship from  that  period
    onwards, including the  date  of  the  parties'  Islamic  divorce.  She
    further concludes at [44] that she is not persuaded the  appellant  and
    sponsor lived together from  August  2014  until  February  2015.   She
    confirmed at [61] her finding that the appellant had  not  demonstrated
    he had a right to reside under the  EEA  regulations  from  2012.   For
    these reasons, her finding that the appellant  had  not  shown  he  had
    resided  lawfully  for  a  continuous  period  of  10  years  [46]   is
    sustainable on the evidence.

19. Mr Karim submitted that, as a matter of law, the FTTJ, having  accepted
    the appellant had been lawfully resident until August 2012, should have
    decided  that  he  had  acquired  permanent  residence  under  the  EEA
    Regulations, i.e. he had lived in the UK  for  five  years.   Mr  Karim
    conceded that this point may not have  been  argued  before  the  FTTJ.
    However, this was not an appeal against an  EEA  decision  refusing  to
    grant a document certifying permanent residence, so  the  FTTJ  had  no
    jurisdiction to decide whether such a document  should  have  been  (or
    should be) issued (NB and JN  (right  of  permanent  residence)  France
    [2007] UKAIT 00039).  Whilst the FTTJ was required to consider  whether
    the residence of the  appellant  had  been  lawful  to  enable  her  to
    consider whether he had acquired 10 years' lawful residence, it was not
    also incumbent on the FTTJ to make a finding as to whether he qualified
    for permanent residence under the EEA Regulations. That was outwith the
    jurisdiction of the FTTJ, given that this was not an appeal  under  the
    EEA Regulations. In any event, as this issue  of  entitlement  was  not
    cited in either of the grounds of appeal (see below) to the  First-tier
    Tribunal or argued before the FTTJ, there was no requirement on her  to
    address it.

20. Mr Karim also submitted the FTTJ should have  addressed  the  issue  of
    whether or not the appellant qualified for a residence card  under  the
    EEA Regulations on the basis of his current relationship  with  an  EEA
    national.  The appellant lodged two grounds of appeal in the First-tier
    Tribunal; the first was lodged by Khans solicitors and the second,  the
    following day, by Law Lane Solicitors. The latter appear to  have  been
    lodged to address the decision under paragraph  322(2),  on  which  the
    earlier grounds  were  silent.  The  latter  solicitors  represent  the
    appellant in this appeal.  In neither document is it averred  that  the
    appellant could rely on  his  current  relationship  with  another  EEA
    national or that this was an issue to be decided by  the  Tribunal.  As
    the FTTJ noted at [47], it  was  claimed  the  appellant  and  his  new
    partner had been in cohabiting since February 2016. This was  a  period
    of less than a year and it is therefore unlikely that  she  would  have
    found it to be a durable relationship even if she  had  considered  the
    issue.   Her failure to do so could not therefore amount to a  material
    error of law.  Furthermore, as Mr Karim rightly  accepted,  a  decision
    whether to issue a residence card  on  the  basis  of  extended  family
    membership requires the respondent to exercise her discretion  pursuant
    to regulation 8(5).

Decision

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law and the decision is preserved.


22. This appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                             Date 20 October 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

