

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05550/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 July 2017                              |On 14 July 2017               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               ARSALAN ASHRAF
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: in person.
For the Respondent: Mrs Petterson - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Devlin who in a comprehensive and detailed decision promulgated  on
        29 September 2016 dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
        refusal of his leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  human
        rights grounds.





Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 17 September  1991.
        He entered the United Kingdom on 18 August  2006,  lawfully,  as  a
        student. Such leave was extended to 28 February 2009 but thereafter
        two applications for extensions of  leave  in  2009  in  2010  were
        refused and an application for leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of
        family and private life was refused on 20  April  2013,  which  was
        reconsidered, but on 8 September 2014 maintained with  a  right  of
        appeal.


     3. On 7 October 2015, the appellant was served  with  a  notice  of  a
        decision to make a deportation order and detained. The  appellant's
        human rights claim was refused in a decision dated 3 September 2015
        it being the respondents view that deportation was conducive to the
        public good and the appellant  was  not  entitled  to  any  of  the
        exceptions to deportation contained in paragraph 399 or 399A of the
        Immigration Rules.



     4. The Judge noted the nature of the appellant's offending  which  led
        to his conviction and set  out  at  [24]  to  [28]  the  sentencing
        remarks of Her Honour Judge Manley when sentencing the appellant on
        3 July 2015. The Sentencing Judge noted that the appellant  pleaded
        guilty at the case management stage to two  offences  of  assisting
        unlawful immigration to an EU member state by  taking  examinations
        on multiple occasions for other people. At  [25  -  28]  the  Judge
        writes:


         "25.      The  judge  observed  that  "[the  Appellants]  offending
             [undermined] public confidence in the Visa  system;  and  that
             "[whilst he was] low down the scale is compared with those who
             [organised] this illegal activity... It will be impossible  to
             carry out such activity [without people like him]".


         26.  The judge accepted that the appellant was "naive  young  man",
             and noted that the character references showed  "a  thoroughly
             otherwise decent young man, hard-working  with  many  positive
             attributes". She described it as "a tragedy that  as  a  young
             man who [had] not been in trouble before the police, [he  had]
             clearly brought shame on [himself] and [his] family".


         27.  However, the judge reminded herself that "previously character
             and personal circumstances are  fairly  limited  value,  cases
             have to be sentenced on a deterrent basis". She found that the
             offences were so serious that a sentence of immediate  custody
             was "inevitable". She notes the fact that "[the Appellant was]
             not helping people in difficulty, [but doing] the tests... For
             financial gain" as an "aggravating factor".


         28.  The judge described the sentence of 10 months imprisonment  as
             "mercifully short then one which she could have...  Passed  on
             someone older and perhaps  more  criminally  experienced  [the
             Appellant was]"."


     5. The Judge was referred to a decision of a  differently  constituted
        First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 31 October 2014 which allowed an
        appeal by  the  appellant's  brother  against  a  decision  by  the
        respondent, dated 12 June 2014, to refuse his application for leave
        to remain on private life grounds. That appeal was allowed and  the
        findings referred to at [31 -  32]  which  the  appellant  in  this
        appeal sought to adopt as his reasoning for why he  should  succeed
        in this appeal.


     6. The Judge considered the written and oral evidence  before  setting
        out the correct legal self-direction  in  relation  to  appropriate
        legal provisions, applicable at that time. The Judge's findings and
        reasons commence from [81] of the decision  under  challenge  which
        can be summarised in the following terms:


   i. The appellant is not a British citizen and has been convicted  in  the
      United Kingdom of an offence. He falls within section  117D(2)(a)  and
      (b). The question is whether he falls within section 117D(2)(c) [82].
  ii. The appellant does not fall within section 117D(2)(c)(i) since he  has
      not been sentenced to a period imprisonment of at least 12 months  and
      nor is there any suggestion that he is a "persistent offender" [83].
 iii. The question is whether the appellant has been convicted of an offence
      that has caused serious harm [84].
  iv. Both parties conceded that the appellant  had  been  convicted  of  an
      offence that had caused serious harm [85].
   v. The Judge therefore found the appellant was a  "foreign  criminal"  as
      defined by section 117D(2)(a), (b) or (c) of the 2002 Act [91].
  vi. In relation to the Immigration Rules, the Judge  found  the  appellant
      does not fall within paragraph 399(a) as he does not claim to  have  a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  child  under  the
      age of 18 [93].
 vii. The appellant claims to have a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
      with a partner who is in the UK, a British citizen, and who settled in
      the UK  [94].   Even  if  the  named  individual  is  the  appellant's
      "partner" and they have genuine subsisting relationship, the  evidence
      is they did not become 'boyfriend' and 'girlfriend' until January 2014
      [96]. As the appellant's leave to remain expired on 9 October 2009 did
      not have settled status when he entered into that  relationship  [98].
      The relationship was not formed as a time the  appellant  was  in  the
      United Kingdom lawfully and his immigration status was not  precarious
      for the purposes of paragraph 399(b)(i) [99].
viii. As the appellant does not meet the requirements of 399(b)(i)  he  does
      not fall within 399(b) making it not necessary to consider whether  he
      meets the requirements of subparagraphs (ii) or (iii) [100].
  ix. The appellant was only lawfully in the UK between 18 August 2006 and 9
      October 2009, three years and two months, [103].
   x. As the appellant  cannot  satisfy  399A(a)  it  is  not  necessary  to
      consider the requirements of (b) and (c). The appellant does not  fall
      within paragraph 399A [107 - 108].
  xi. In relation to paragraph 398, i.e. whether there are  very  compelling
      circumstances over and above those described in 399 and 399A, such  an
      assessment must be preceded by ascertaining the extent  to  which  the
      factors identified in those paragraphs apply [109].
 xii. The appellant entered the United Kingdom when he was aged 14 years and
      10 months and has spent his entire childhood and a significant part of
      his minority outside the United Kingdom [111 - 112].
xiii. The appellant has spent just under half his minority and  all  of  his
      adult life in the United Kingdom [114]. This equates  to  9  years  10
      months; approximately 40% of his life [5]. Only three  years  and  two
      months  of  that  period  constitute  lawful  residence  although  the
      appellant was a  minor  throughout  that  period  [116].  All  of  the
      appellant's adult life in the  United  Kingdom  has  been  spent  here
      unlawfully [117].
 xiv. The Judge accepts the appellant failed to regularise  his  immigration
      status over a period of three years  and  the  commission  by  him  of
      criminal offences can be characterised as demonstrating a want of  due
      regard for the law as well as the legal system of the  United  Kingdom
      which may be relevant in determining whether the appellant is socially
      and culturally integrated into  the  UK,  but  was  not  found  to  be
      determinative, on the facts [120]. The appellant has a level of social
      and cultural integration into the United Kingdom [121].
  xv. The appellant speaks English fluently and has obtained  qualifications
      in English. His family and many relatives live here.  His  personality
      and mannerisms and tastes to some extent reflect the Western lifestyle
      he has enjoyed [122] although the Judge states "it is important not to
      overstate the evidence of social and cultural  integration  before  me
      "[123].
 xvi. There  is  relatively  little  evidence  from  persons  who  know  the
      appellant or his circumstances  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  his
      immediate family members [124] the appellant did not  lead  any  close
      friends  or  acquaintances  before  the  Judge  nor  did  he   produce
      affidavits,  statements,  or  letters  from  such  person  or  produce
      independent evidence of community  activities  over  and  above  those
      alluded to by an Imam who referred to  the  appellant  being  a  great
      support in helping them raise money for the construction of  a  mosque
      and dedicating many hours to it [126 - 127].
xvii. Documentary evidence of the  appellant's  educational  attainments  in
      the United Kingdom is "somewhat sparse"  [128].  At  [130]  the  Judge
      writes "It  seems  clear  from  the  Record  of  Interview,  that  the
      Appellant's academic career in the United Kingdom cannot  properly  be
      described as "illustrious" and indeed, it is difficult to be satisfied
      as to what his intentions really were".
xviii. Little evidence was before the Judge as  to  how  the  appellant  had
      occupied himself since 2010 [131].
 xix. Whilst the Judge was  satisfied  there  was  a  level  of  social  and
      cultural integration in the United Kingdom, the evidence  was  neither
      comprehensive nor particularly compelling which  is  relevant  to  the
      weight given to this aspect of the claim. The Judge considered he  was
      bound to have regard to the appellants  disregard  for  the  laws  and
      legal system within the United Kingdom [132].
  xx. In considering whether there were very significant  obstacles  to  the
      appellant's  integration  into  Pakistan,  the   Judge   treated   the
      determination of the appellant's brother  as  his  starting  point  as
      there was an overlap in the evidence between the two appeals and it is
      stated they arise out of the same factual matrix [135 - 136].
 xxi.  The  hearing  of  the  appellant's  brother's  appeal  predates   the
      conviction and also the arrest of the appellant  and  his  brother  on
      assisting unlawful immigration by taking English  language  tests  for
      other people and the appellant's interview with immigration officers 3
      March 2015, during the course  of  which  evidence  emerged  that  the
      appellant's brother had also sat English language tests on  behalf  of
      the other people, had done so for much longer than the appellant,  and
      had suggested the appellant might make some money by  sitting  English
      language tests on behalf of other people [138 - 141]. The Judge  notes
      the appellant's brother  was  interviewed  but  gave  a  "no  comment"
      response to questions asked as a result of which he was  bailed  to  a
      future date [142]. The Judge notes the brother  has  been  charged  in
      respect of the said matters [143].  The Judge noted the  matters  were
      relevant as they go directly to the credibility of the  appellant  and
      his brother and other facts that had not been brought to the attention
      of the First-tier Tribunal Judge considering the brother's appeal [145
      - 146].
xxii. The Judge notes a number of concerns in relation  to  the  appellant's
      brother's appeal on matters arising from the evidence at [147 - 156].
xxiii. In relation to the number of  tests  the  appellant  sat,  the  Judge
      expressed concerns about the credibility of the appellant's  claim  in
      relation to the number of tests he  sat  [160  -  172]  leading  to  a
      conclusion at [173] that "the impression I have  formed  is  that  the
      Appellant was trying to minimise his wrongdoing,  and  effectively  to
      rewrite history".
xxiv. The  Judge  found  the  finding  of  the  First-tier  considering  the
      brothers appeal in relation to family connections within Pakistan  was
      largely predicated on the evidence of the appellant, his brother,  and
      his father [176] and that there was no truly independence evidence  to
      show the appellant's grandparent's home had been sold or that  he  had
      no close family living in Pakistan [178].
 xxv. The Judge concluded he was not bound to treat issues  as  having  been
      settled by the decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge as the  Judge
      was not satisfied the previous  judge  would  have  reached  the  same
      findings on the basis that he did had he been aware  of  the  evidence
      now being considered [179 - 180].
xxvi. The original judge clearly took on trust much  of  what  he  had  been
      told by the appellant, his brother and his father [181].
xxvii. The appellant had not produced  any  truly  independent  evidence  to
      show that the address shown in  his,  his  brothers  or  his  father's
      passport, has been sold, or that the persons by whom it  is  currently
      occupied are unrelated to the appellant and his family [185].
xxviii. The appellant has not produced  any  independent  evidence  to  show
      that he has no close  relatives  in  Pakistan  or  that  it  would  be
      impractical to produce such evidence. There was nothing to suggest  it
      would be impractical for the appellant to  locate  family  members  or
      produce affidavits, statements, or letters, to confirm  the  state  of
      their relationship with the appellant and his family [186].
xxix. The appellant's claim in his CV that he could speak Urdu and  Punjabi,
      which he later admitted was false as his Urdu  and  Punjabi  was  very
      limited, was found not to be conducive  to  a  finding  regarding  his
      generally credible [193].
 xxx. All persons  who  provide  references  for  the  appellant's  father's
      application, appear to be of Pakistani descent as is  the  appellant's
      girlfriend [199].
xxxi. The Judge was not prepared  to  assume  that  the  appellant  will  be
      required to return to Pakistan alone [204].
xxxii. The Judge found he was not satisfied in [205] that:

   a. The appellant is practically unable to speak, and  does  not  read  or
      write Urdu or Punjabi;
   b. He has no familiarity with Pakistani culture;
   c. The appellant has only visited Pakistan on three  occasions  in  2005,
      and spent 38 days of his entire life there;
   d. He would be returning to Pakistan alone, with without his family;
   e. Neither he nor his family own any property in Pakistan;
   f. He has no close relatives to whom he could reasonably be  expected  to
      turn to for support, in Pakistan.


xxxiii.  The Judge  accepted  relocation  would  occasion  hardship  to  the
      appellant and that his lifestyle will  be  very  different  from  that
      which he has been familiar with in Dubai and the United  Kingdom,  but
      the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  these   conditions,   whether   taken
      individually or cumulatively, would constitute  significant  obstacles
      to integration in Pakistan [206].
xxxiv. The Judge was not satisfied the appellant's religion or the  security
      situation in Pakistan would constitute such obstacles.  There  was  no
      sufficient evidential basis to conclude otherwise [206-7].
xxxv.  There  are  no  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   appellant's
      integration into Pakistan [208].
xxxvi. In relation to the question  whether  the  appellant  has  a  genuine
      subsisting relationship with a qualified partner, it is  accepted  the
      lady concerned is a British citizen and settled in the United  Kingdom
      who gave oral evidence  to  the  Judge  [212  and  215].  The  witness
      described herself and the  appellant  as  "boyfriend  and  girlfriend"
      [216]. There is no formal engagement and no steps to  show  they  have
      taken steps towards marriage [218]. The lady concerned is 19 years  of
      age and lives at home with her parents [219]. The lady  concerned  had
      not  informed  her  father  of  the  relationship  knowing  he   would
      disapprove [221]. The Judge found this witness honest and sincere  but
      found she is unlikely to defy her parents if they called upon  her  to
      end the relationship [225].
xxxvii. At [228] the Judge finds "looking at all the evidence in the  round,
      I find that I cannot be satisfied that  there  exists  that  level  of
      commitment between the Appellant and Miss Rehman,  that  characterises
      what might properly be described as  a  "partnership"  or  "a  genuine
      relationship". Nor am I satisfied that the relationship is  a  durable
      one".
xxxviii. No signs of emotional dependency were identified by the  Judge  and
      it was also found there was no  financial  dependency,  leading  to  a
      conclusion that there was no question of undue harshness [231].
xxxix. The Judge concluded that none of the factors  in  paragraph  339  and
      339A of the Rules applied leading to consideration  of  whether  there
      were any very compelling circumstances over and above  those  factors.
      [232].
  xl. The Judge considered the sentencing remarks together with Pre-sentence
      Report assessing the appellant as low risk of harm  and  reconviction,
      and the appellant's evidence regarding the remorse he  feels  for  his
      actions which was corroborated by his brother [234 - [252].  The Judge
      however notes at [258] "looking at  everything  in  the  round,  I  am
      satisfied that, not only did the Appellant to  seek  to  minimise  his
      wrongdoing in his latest statement, he  told  deliberate  lies  in  an
      attempt to do so".
 xli. Thus, the  Judge  found  himself  unable  to  be  satisfied  that  the
      appellant was "very remorseful", had matured since  his  offending  or
      learned from his behaviour as submitted in the skeleton argument,  nor
      that he presents a low risk of reoffending [259 - 260].
xlii. The impact upon society as a whole of the appellant's offending was  a
      point forcibly made by the Sentencing Judge which was found  to  weigh
      heavily against the appellant. At [226] the Judge concluded  that  the
      appellant  had  failed  to  prove  there  were  any  very   compelling
      circumstances over and above those identified  in  paragraph  399  and
      399A, sufficient to outweigh the public  interest  in  deportation  in
      this case.


     7. The Judge, at [267], found: "I remind myself that the part  of  the
        Immigration Rules dealing with deportation forms a  complete  code.
        In any event, I am satisfied that there are no considerations  that
        have not been dealt with in my consideration under the Rules, that,
        might tell in the Appellant's favour".


     8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a  number  of  grounds
        which was initially refused by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal. Following a renewed application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
        permission to appeal was granted by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
        Chapman limited to [5] of the application for permission to  appeal
        which is in the following terms:


             "5.  However, in light of the judgment in  Hesham  Ali  [2016]
                  UKSC 60, which post dates the decision of  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal Judge, it is arguable that  the  Judge  erred  in
                  failing to make an assessment of  the  proportionality  of
                  the Appellants  deportation,  in  light  of  the  test  in
                  Jeunesse v Netherlands vis whether a fair balance has been
                  struck between the interests of the Appellant and those of
                  the community. Whilst  no  compelling  circumstances  were
                  identified  or  addressed  by  the  Judge  and  ultimately
                  consideration of the  proportionality  of  the  Appellants
                  deportation may not make any material  difference  to  the
                  outcome,  I  consider  that  fairness  requires  that  the
                  Appellant to be permitted to have his case considered with
                  regard to Article 8 of ECHR."



Error of law


     9. The appellant, who appeared in person, applied for the  hearing  to
        be  adjourned  to  enable  him  to  instruct  new  solicitors.  The
        appellant had been represented before the First-tier  Tribunal  but
        was not currently assisted.


    10. The appellant claimed that he had seen  a  new  representative  two
        weeks prior to the hearing who claimed  not  have  enough  time  to
        provide representation as the appellant did not have his file  with
        him at the meeting. When asked when he did gather  his  papers  and
        took them to the proposed new representative the appellant  claimed
        it was some 8 to 10 days ago and that the representative  asked  if
        the appellant could get the date of hearing adjourned so they could
        check if they were able to provide cover on a resumed hearing date.

    11. The appellant, in response to questioning, confirmed the solicitors
        were not acting for him and that they had only said that if he  can
        sort out a date they might be able to act for him. In  response  to
        questioning the appellant confirmed there was no evidence from  the
        firm of solicitors corroborating this claim i.e. no letter from any
        proposed representative.

    12.  The  appellant  was  asked  why  he  delayed  seeking  alternative
        solicitors, as permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal had  been
        granted on 2 April 2017, to he claimed  that  he  tried  to  obtain
        assistance but could not afford it and that when  he  went  to  the
        Citizens  Advice  Bureau  they  advised  him  to   obtain   private
        representation. The appellant stated his family were unable to help
        with the costs of instructing a solicitor at that time but  claimed
        they were now able to help. When asked how much money was  involved
        appellant indicated he  had  been  quoted  about  �5,000  although,
        again, provided no evidence to corroborate this claim.

    13. The appellant was asked why, in light of  the  adverse  credibility
        findings  made  by  the  Judge  including  those  relating  to  the
        appellant's alleged lying in his evidence and the dishonest  nature
        of the criminal offences he should  be  believed,  in  response  to
        which the appellant only claimed that  he  had  not  done  anything
        since, but provided no satisfactory assurance that any weight could
        be placed upon the claim.

    14. The application for an adjournment was refused as the interests  of
        justice and fairness did not require the same to  be  granted.  The
        appellant  appears  to  have   delayed   in   seeking   alternative
        representation, if indeed he has done so in light of  the  lack  of
        evidence of a solicitor willing to represent him.

    15. It was not accepted that there is  any  element  of  complexity  in
        relation to the issues to be considered at the Error of Law hearing
        in light of the limited nature of the grant and the reading of  the
        determination as a whole, which admits only one conclusion  on  the
        facts which is that the Judge has made no error of law material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal.

    16. When the appellant was asked what elements of  his  case  were  not
        considered by the Judge he claimed that his family did not live  in
        Pakistan and that he would not be able to survive in  that  country
        if he was removed there, but there are issues already considered.

    17. The difficulty for the appellant is simply this, that although  the
        Judge followed the structured approach  he  was  required  to  take
        prior to the handing down of the judgment in Hesham Ali,  in  which
        it was accepted the Immigration Rules form a complete code for  the
        purposes of deportation appeals,  the  Judge  also  considered  the
        matter outside the Rules in the final sentence of [267] 'that there
        were no considerations that have not  been  dealt  with  under  the
        Rules that might tell in the Appellant's favour'. This statement is
        factually correct.

    18. The Immigration Rules set out the Secretary  of  States  policy  in
        relation to how article 8 should be interpreted/applied in relation
        to a challenge to  a  deportation  decision.  It  is  accepted  the
        Supreme Court found that the jurisdiction  of  the  Tribunal  is  a
        human rights jurisdiction in which the structured approach set  out
        in the decision in Razgar should be followed, which will include  a
        consideration of the merits of  the  claim  under  the  Immigration
        Rules when considering whether it is unlawful decision and as  part
        of the proportionality exercise.

    19. The matters the appellant claimed to place reliance on  before  the
        Upper Tribunal are precisely those matters placed before the  Judge
        upon which findings have been made. The findings  under  the  Rules
        are preserved findings as there is no grant of permission to appeal
        against the same. I find no arguable legal error  material  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal has been made out for even if it was
        accepted the structure of the decision should have been  different,
        in light of the later decision of the Supreme  Court,  this  is  an
        issue of form over substance as the Judge  clearly  considered  not
        only the requirements of the  Rules  but  also  whether  there  was
        anything  outside  the  Rules  that  warranted  a  finding  in  the
        appellant's favour, i.e. that despite having  found  the  appellant
        failed under the Rules the decision could  still  be  found  to  be
        disproportionate.

    20.  It  must  be  remembered  that  part  of   the   public   interest
        consideration within  a  proportionality  assessment  includes  the
        nature of the offending. The Judge found the appellant was  seeking
        to minimise  his  culpability  and  indeed  being  dishonest  about
        certain aspects of his evidence. Although the sentence may not seem
        a substantial sentence when compared to other offences it must also
        be remembered that this is a case in which there  is  an  extremely
        strong public interest deterrent element.

    21. There has been much written in the  printed  press  and  showed  on
        television, as one of the  Panorama  programs,  about  the  use  of
        proxies to take  English  language  tests  on  behalf  of  migrants
        applying for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  to  try  and
        enable such persons, who may  not  have  the  required  command  of
        English, to appear as  if  they  are  able  to  meet  the  required
        standard. There are a number of cases both in  the  Upper  Tribunal
        and Court of Appeal relating to the use  of  a  proxy  to  take  an
        English language test following indication of an invalid test as  a
        result of computerised and other  checks  undertaken  by  ETS.  The
        appellants was a proxy paid to take such tests on behalf of others.

    22. An offence of this nature can completely undermine the  credibility
        of an important element of the United Kingdom's immigration system,
        namely the imposition of minimum standards of ability to speak read
        and write English which has been identified as an important element
        enabling a person to integrate into society within the UK. Had  the
        appellant not been caught and had  those  tests  in  which  he  was
        involved not been identified, individuals  may  have  succeeded  in
        obtaining settlement based upon their fraudulent activities.  Those
        who consider attempting  to  defraud  the  Secretary  of  State  or
        organisations  appointed  on  her  behalf  to  establish  that  the
        necessary criteria have been shown to  have  been  satisfied,  must
        appreciate that such action shall not be tolerated and  that  those
        who are caught acting in such a manner are likely  to  be  deported
        from the United Kingdom unless very strong  reasons  are  shown  to
        exist that establish  that  such  a  decision  is,  on  the  facts,
        disproportionate. No  such  facts  have  been  shown  to  exist  in
        relation to this matter indicating that the finding that the appeal
        should be dismissed, i.e. that the decision is proportionate to the
        legitimate aim relied upon is, in reality, the only  decision  that
        is likely to be made on the facts. Accordingly, no useful  purpose,
        in accordance with the overriding objectives, would be achieved  in
        adjourning the matter to a later date.

    23. I conclude by finding the appellant has failed  to  establish  that
        the Judge has  made  any  arguable  legal  error  material  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal.

Decision

    24. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.
        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 13 July 2017












