
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05198/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th November 2018                         |On 28th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                             barry adewale lawal
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Babarinde, legal representative, Hatten Wyatt
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Carroll promulgated on 13 August 2018, in which the Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse to revoke his deportation  order  (dated
    24 August 2009) dated 17 March 2017 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, who was given his date of birth
    both as 24 August  1968  and  24  August  1967.   He  has  asserted  in
    different applications to have entered the United Kingdom  in  1989  or
    2007, but there is no record of entry on either date, or at  all.   The
    Appellant accepts that he has never had any lawful leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  He first came to attention of the  authorities  in
    2005 when he applied for indefinite leave to remain, which was  refused
    on 23 November 2005.  He made  a  further  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain on the basis of 14 years long residence on  2  February
    2006 and the following day was arrested on suspicion of forgery.  On 31
    March 2006 he was sentenced to 12 months'  imprisonment  by  the  Inner
    London Crown Court  for  possession  of  a  false  instrument  and  was
    subsequently served with a notice of intention to  make  a  deportation
    order.  His appeal against the intention to deport him was dismissed on
    8 February 2007 following which he  stopped  complying  with  his  bail
    conditions and absconded.  A Deportation Order was made  on  24  August
    2009.

 3. Prior to the appeal, the Appellant had made a further  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  long  residence  which  was
    refused on 28 July 2008.  On 11 December 2008 the  Appellant  submitted
    an application for an EEA residence card under an alias as  the  family
    member of an EEA national which was  ultimately  refused  on  23  March
    2010.

 4. On 2 March 2016, the Appellant applied for further leave to  remain  on
    the basis of his relationship  with  a  British  Citizen  partner,  her
    daughter and on the basis that he had resided in the United Kingdom for
    over 20 years.  That application was refused on 8 June 2016 but further
    to judicial review proceedings, there was agreement for  withdrawal  of
    decisions made by the Respondent in 2016 and the Appellant was given an
    opportunity to submit further representations for a fresh  decision  to
    be made.  It is that decision dated 17 March 2017 which is the  subject
    of these appeal proceedings.

 5. The Respondent refused the application  the  basis,  in  summary,  that
    although it was accepted that  the  Appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  with  his  partner  and  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with two children, one of  whom  is  a
    British Citizen, it was not accepted that it  would  either  be  unduly
    harsh for the family to relocate to Nigeria  with  the  Appellant,  nor
    unduly harsh for the Appellant's family members to remain in the United
    Kingdom  without  him.   The   decision   letter   contained   detailed
    consideration of the  best  interests  of  the  children  and  detailed
    consideration  of  the  Appellant's   partner's   medical   conditions.
    However,  the  Appellant's  circumstances  did  not  meet  any  of  the
    exceptions set out in paragraph 399 of the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
    basis of family life nor paragraph 399A in relation  to  private  life,
    the latter because he had never been lawfully resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Further, there  were  no  very  compelling  circumstances  to
    outweigh the very significant public interest  in  deportation  on  the
    facts of the Appellant's case and the decision  letter  makes  detailed
    reference to the Appellant's  immigration  and  criminal  history.   In
    accordance with paragraph 390 and following of the  Immigration  Rules,
    the Respondent refused to revoke  the  deportation  order  against  the
    Appellant.

 6. The Appellant's appeal was originally heard by Judge  Andonian  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal who in a decision promulgated on  8  January  2018,
    allowed the appeal.  However, that decision was set aside by Mr Justice
    Nicklin sitting as  a  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 15 March 2018 and the matter remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

 7. Judge Carroll dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  13
    August 2018 on  all  grounds  having  refused  an  application  for  an
    adjournment.  Essentially, although the  genuine  family  relationships
    between  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  and   children   (including
    stepchild) were accepted, the Appellant did  not  satisfy  any  of  the
    exceptions to deportation set out in either the  Immigration  Rules  or
    section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002;  nor
    were there any exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  such  as  to
    outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation  and  there   was   no
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's right to respect for
    private and  family  life  protected  by  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

The appeal

 8. The Appellant appeals primarily on the basis that the Appellant did not
    receive a fair hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  first,  because
    an application for an adjournment to allow the Appellant's  partner  to
    give oral evidence was refused (medical  evidence  for  conditions  and
    complications in pregnancy was available to show  her  non-attendance),
    and, secondly, because the  Respondent  was  permitted  to  produce  an
    additional file of evidence on the morning of the hearing  contrary  to
    paragraph 13(1) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2005.

 9. The Appellant also appeals on the basis that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in relying on an/or placing undue emphasis on section 117C of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which does  not  apply  to
    deportations under section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration  Act  1971,  that
    his deportation is conducive to the public  good.   Further,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in fact in concluding that the Appellant  and
    his partner failed to mention that his stepdaughter was born in Nigeria
    in 2006 and lived there until 2012 when it was clear on the face of the
    documents relied upon by the Appellant that she was born in Nigeria.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge McCarthy on 13 September 2018
    on all grounds.  The reasons for the grant of permission focus  on  the
    first ground of appeal in relation to the refusal to adjourn, with  the
    comment that there was no need to consider the other grounds  which  on
    their own would probably be too weak to grant permission to appeal  but
    in the circumstances gave  further  concerns  as  to  the  fairness  of
    proceedings and therefore permission was not restricted.

11. At the oral hearing before me, Mr Babarinde relied on  the  grounds  of
    appeal in full.  At the first hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    written statements were submitted and  substantive  oral  evidence  was
    given by the Appellant and his partner.  The first decision was however
    set aside for a de novo hearing, and it was submitted that  before  the
    second hearing there was no opportunity for  further  written  or  oral
    evidence.  Mr Babarinde claimed that an application for adjournment  of
    the hearing on the basis that the  Appellant's  partner  was  unfit  to
    attend to give evidence, was made in good time  prior  to  the  hearing
    (although in fact made only three working days prior  to  the  relisted
    hearing) and no updated written statements  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant were prepared because it was assumed that the application for
    adjournment would be  granted.   When  it  was  refused,  the  original
    written  statements  from  the  first  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were relied upon.  Mr Babarinde also referred to  difficulties
    in the solicitors being able to see the Appellant's  partner  prior  to
    the First-tier Tribunal due to health concerns and her pregnancy.

12. In relation to the claimed factual error, it was submitted on behalf of
    the  Appellant  that  there  was  no  attempt  to  mislead  either  the
    Respondent or the First-tier Tribunal.  There had been no dispute  that
    the Appellant's stepchild was born  in  Nigeria  and  at  the  date  of
    application she had not been naturalised as a British  Citizen.   These
    were matters all known to the  Respondent  at  the  relevant  time  and
    referred to in the refusal letter.

13. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Melvin  submitted  that  there  was  no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   In
    particular,  it  was  not  open  to  the   Appellant   or   his   legal
    representatives to rely on an  assumption  that  adjournment  would  be
    granted.  There had been ample time for  evidence  to  be  obtained  in
    preparation for  the  de  novo  hearing.   In  any  event,  there  were
    significant  adverse  credibility  findings  against   the   Appellant,
    including on numerous matters (including for  example  the  absence  of
    evidence about the Appellant's three children in Nigeria with his first
    wife) on which his current partner  would  not  be  able  to  shed  any
    additional light, nor was there  any  procedural  unfairness  from  her
    being unable to give oral evidence on such matters.

14. The Respondent's position was also that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    adequately and lawfully considered the best interests of  the  children
    involved and included sufficient findings and reasons  to  comply  with
    the recent decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53.

Findings and reasons

 1. I deal first with the ground of appeal in relation to  the  application
    for an adjournment.  The reasons for the application  and  its  refusal
    are set out in paragraphs 10 and 11 of the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which states as follows:

         "10.  The appellant's representative made  an  application  for  an
         adjournment of the  hearing  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's
         partner was not  fit  to  attend  the  hearing  in  order  to  give
         evidence, as a result of high blood pressure and the imminent birth
         of her third child.  I consider the evidence submitted  in  support
         of the application, including  correspondence  from  Kings  College
         Hospital dated 5 April 2018,  18  July  2018  and  a  statement  of
         fitness for work dated 20 July 2018.


         11.  No indication was given as to  when  the  appellant's  partner
         would be able to attend the hearing to give  evidence  in  support.
         Having regard to the overriding objective set out in  the  Tribunal
         Procedure Rules and in view of the fact that she  had  submitted  a
         full witness statement (pages 4 and following  of  the  appellant's
         bundle), I  refused  the  application  for  an  adjournment,  being
         satisfied that there was sufficient evidence before me to  reach  a
         decision without the  necessity  for  the  appellant's  partner  to
         attend the hearing."


 2. In the grant of permission to appeal, Judge McCarthy comments  that  it
    is arguably inconsistent for the application for an adjournment  to  be
    refused on the basis that sufficient evidence  is  available  from  the
    Appellant's partner and go on to conclude that  there  was  a  lack  of
    evidence from her on key issues regarding whether it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect her and her children to relocate to  Nigeria  with  the
    appellant and by reference to paragraph 27 specifically.   The  grounds
    of appeal refer to adverse credibility findings made on  the  basis  of
    negative inferences from the failure  of  the  Appellant's  partner  to
    provide information, in particular at paragraphs 26, 29, 31 and  32  of
    the decision.

 3. It is necessary to set out more fully those paragraphs for the purposes
    of the assessment of whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  unfairly  drew
    adverse inferences from a lack of evidence due which was caused  or  at
    least contributed to the situation created by the  Tribunal  itself  in
    refusing to  adjourn  the  appeal  hearing.   The  relevant  paragraphs
    identified state, so far as relevant, as follows:

         "26.  I go on to  consider  the  appellant's  family  circumstances
         which are, of course, central to the 2016 application.  I note that
         in the 2007 Tribunal determination contained  in  the  respondent's
         bundle there is reference to 3 children by  the  appellant's  first
         wife.  They were said to be aged 13, 10 and six and 2007  and  were
         all born in Nigeria.   There  is  no  evidence  relating  to  these
         children, including as to their  whereabouts,  in  the  application
         giving rise to the decision under appeal.


         27.  It is accepted by the respondent that the appellant  is  in  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with [...] And that  she  is  a
         British national.  She was  born  in  Nigeria  in  1988.   For  the
         reasons given above, I have heard no evidence  from  her.   I  note
         that the appellant is in his witness statement  (paragraph  6)  and
         she has lived in the United Kingdom "since she was a minor".  In  a
         witness statement [she] says that, having been born in Nigeria, she
         came to the United Kingdom in July  2002  as  a  dependent  of  her
         stepmother when she was 14.  Both she and the appellant  failed  to
         mention that she must return to Nigeria at  some  point  on  before
         2006 because  that  is  where  she  gave  birth  to  the  appellant
         stepdaughter in 2006.  That child did not enter the UK until  2012.
         The appellant said that she had lived in Nigeria with  her  father.
         I touch very little weight to this aspect of his evidence and  find
         that the failure by the appellant and [his partner] to mention  the
         fact that the appellant stepdaughter was born in  Nigeria  in  2006
         and  lived  there  until  2012  further  damages  the   Appellant's
         credibility.


         ...


         29.  The respondent's bundle contains medical evidence relating  to
         [the Appellant's partner] ... I note also, in the  context  of  the
         impending birth, that the pregnancies recorded as being  a  planned
         pregnancy in hospital notes which are attached to a letter dated 19
         February 2018 from the appellant's representatives on the  Tribunal
         file.


         ...


         31.   In  considering  proportionality,  must  consider  the   best
         interests of the appellant  stepdaughter  and  his  daughter  as  a
         primary consideration.  It is, however, not the only  consideration
         can  be  outweighed  by   other   factors,   depending   upon   the
         circumstances.  Generally, when considering the best  interests  of
         children, it can be said that the best interests  are  to  live  in
         family unit with both parents.  There is no  evidence  to  indicate
         that either the children have any health or educational problems or
         that  appropriate  educational  medical  facilities  will  not   be
         available to them in Nigeria.  The appellant stepdaughter was  born
         in Nigeria and spent half life  there.   The  appellant's  daughter
         born in 2015 still very young and the parents will be the focus  of
         her life.  The appellant (and [his  partner])  have  both  spent  a
         substantial part of the lies  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  I  not
         satisfied that the appellant is credible as of the claim that he no
         longer has any meaningful links with Nigeria, not least in the fact
         that both he and [his partner] failed to mention the fact that  the
         appellant stepchild was born there in 2006.  It is clear also  from
         the evidence admitted in support of this appeal that the  appellant
         and [his partner] have friends who share their Nigerian heritage.


         32.  Clearly, I can make no findings in relation to  a  child  that
         is, as yet, and born.  However, the evidence before me.  Far  short
         of demonstrating that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant
         stepdaughter and daughter to live in Nigeria and that it  would  be
         unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK  without  the  appellant.
         Although I have no doubt that the appellant helps with the children
         that this is a great assistance  to  [his  partner]  while  she  is
         working, it is a matter for her  whether  or  not  she  chooses  to
         return to Nigeria with the appellant and the children to live there
         is a family unit.  If she chooses not to, she  will  have  to  make
         appropriate childcare arrangements  in  the  UK  and  there  is  no
         evidence to show that the impact  of  such  arrangements  upon  the
         children would be unduly harsh.  It is also not  argued  that  [the
         Appellant's partner] would be unable to access appropriate  medical
         care in Nigeria."


 4. Thereafter, the decision considers the  Appellant's  private  life  and
    then states the conclusion that for all of the reasons given and  those
    given by the Respondent, the provisions of the Immigration  Rules  have
    not been satisfied, nor have the provisions  of  section  117C  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  there  are   no
    exceptional or compelling circumstances to outweigh the public interest
    in deportation.

 5. When considering the fairness of the refusal to  adjourn  the  hearing,
    the background to the request and evidence available to the  First-tier
    Tribunal  is  relevant.   Following  the  initial  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision being set aside by the Upper Tribunal, the parties  were  sent
    notice on 15 June 2018 of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    listed for 25 July 2018.  Contrary to the submissions of Mr  Babarinde,
    an application for an adjournment was not sought "in good  time"  prior
    to  the  relisted  hearing.   The  Appellant's  solicitors  sought   an
    adjournment of that hearing on 20 July 2018, only  three  working  days
    prior to it, on the basis that the Appellant's partner was due to  give
    birth and was not fit to attend the hearing date to  give  evidence  in
    the appeal.

 6. There is and was no basis upon which the Appellant  or  his  solicitors
    could or should have assumed that  the  adjournment  request  would  be
    granted such that the hearing on 25 July 2018 would  not  proceed.   To
    the contrary, as professional advisers it was incumbent  upon  them  to
    properly prepare for the hearing  unless  and  until  it  was  in  fact
    adjourned by the First-tier Tribunal.  Such preparation  could  and  at
    least arguably should have included in this  case  an  updated  written
    statement from those to be called as witnesses in the appeal, including
    the  Appellant  and  of  particular  relevance  in  relation   to   the
    adjournment request, for the Appellant's partner.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal was correct to  note  that  there  was  a  full
    witness statement from the Appellant's partner,  running  to  5  pages,
    albeit prepared for the first hearing and dated 21 November 2017.  That
    statement set out the Appellant's partner's immigration history and her
    relationship with the Appellant and status of the children.   Reference
    is made in the written statement to all family  members  being  settled
    and integrated in the  United  Kingdom  with  no  remaining  family  in
    Nigeria.  It is said in relation to the Appellant's  stepdaughter  that
    it would not be fair or considerate to  remove  her  from  the  UK  and
    relocate back to Nigeria for the Appellant's sake.  More generally, the
    Appellant's  partner  states  that  she  needs  his  moral,   physical,
    spiritual, financial and loving support and the children need him as  a
    role model in the home.  The  Appellant's  written  statement  goes  no
    further than asserting that  his  deportation  would  have  an  adverse
    impact on his family and friends in the UK.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal's summary of the evidence before  it  from  the
    Appellant and his partner was accurate and there was no  factual  error
    in the references made to a lack of evidence on specific key issues and
    a lack of evidence from  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  as  to  the
    Appellant's stepdaughter being born in Nigeria and spending  the  first
    half of her life there.

 9. It is of course trite to recall that written statements are required to
    be filed as evidence with the intention and knowledge that the  matters
    contained therein will stand as evidence in chief from  the  particular
    witness.  Although it may be necessary to ask additional  supplementary
    questions, it is not envisaged  as  a  matter  of  usual  procedure  or
    practice for significant further detail or evidence to be given  orally
    in chief when a written statement has been prepared and submitted.  The
    suggestion by Mr Babarinde in oral submissions that the refusal  of  an
    adjournment, preventing oral evidence from the Appellant's partner,  in
    some way restricted the evidence that she  was  able  to  give  on  key
    issues such as whether it would be unduly harsh for family  members  to
    relocate to Nigeria with the Appellant or  unduly  harsh  for  them  to
    remain in the United Kingdom without him  is  without  any  foundation.
    Such matters could  and  should  have  been  included  in  her  written
    statement as evidence in chief.  There was more than ample  opportunity
    following the Upper Tribunal's decision promulgated on 15 March 2018 to
    remit the appeal for a de novo hearing and following the listing of the
    appeal on 15 June 2018 for  a  further  or  updated  and  full  written
    statement to be prepared from the Applicant's partner.  Contrary to the
    suggestion by Mr Babarinde, the process of giving oral evidence is  not
    an opportunity for a witness to be examined or cross-examined to elicit
    key information in support of an appeal which  has  not  hitherto  been
    referred to at all or in any detail.  I  do  not  find  any  procedural
    unfairness or any restriction on the Appellant to prepare his case  and
    produce evidence in support of it, including from his partner,  by  the
    refusal to adjourn the hearing  to  allow  his  partner  to  give  oral
    evidence.

10. In any event, the paragraphs  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    identified by the Appellant in the grounds of appeal and by  the  Judge
    in granting permission to appeal do not in fact expressly  contain  any
    adverse credibility findings from the lack of oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's  partner.   The  First-tier   Tribunal   makes   legitimate
    reference to the lack of any or any detailed evidence on key issues  in
    the case, some of which would not have been matters necessarily  within
    the Appellant's partner's knowledge, nor in fact  matters  which  could
    not in any event  have  been  either  covered  in  full  in  a  written
    statement from the Appellant's partner or the  combination  of  written
    and oral evidence from the Appellant himself.

11. For example, the reference to there being no evidence  in  relation  to
    the Appellant's eldest three children from his first wife who were  all
    born in Nigeria in paragraph 26 of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    cannot even arguably be unfair or in any way a result of the refusal to
    adjourn to allow the Appellant's partner to give oral  evidence.   This
    is a matter primarily for the Appellant to address and he failed to  do
    so.

12. The reference in  paragraph  27  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that neither the Appellant nor his partner refer expressly  in
    their evidence to the Appellant's partner having returned at some point
    to Nigeria where she gave birth  to  the  Appellant's  stepdaughter  in
    2006, nor that she did  not  enter  the  UK  until  2012  is  factually
    correct; although I accept that information could be gleaned from other
    documents before the First-tier Tribunal.  In any event,  the  evidence
    to which were little weight is given is  that  as  to  the  Appellant's
    partner's history in Nigeria and  the  adverse  credibility  inferences
    were open to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis  that  the  Appellant
    had not expressly dealt with his stepdaughter's  residence  in  Nigeria
    and what could be inferred as  at  least  some  familiarity  with  that
    country  as  a  result,  a  matter  potentially  relevant  to   whether
    relocation there would be unduly harsh.

13. There is nothing in paragraph 29 which makes any  specific  finding  at
    all and certainly no findings of adverse credibility nor any  reference
    to a lack of evidence from the Appellant's partner or otherwise.   This
    paragraph simply recites  the  medical  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's partner and the contents of this paragraph  therefore  bear
    no relevance to the grounds of appeal on fairness or  the  adjournment.
    Similarly, paragraph 31 contains assessment of the  best  interests  of
    the children which is uncontroversial and not factually disputed by the
    Appellant.  The only adverse credibility finding  contained  within  it
    that it  was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  no  longer  has  any
    meaningful links with Nigeria, in part  because  his  stepdaughter  was
    born there in 2006 and the family have friends  of  Nigerian  heritage.
    Again, that finding is sustainable on the evidence and the  appellant's
    partner's lack of oral evidence has no obvious bearing upon it in light
    of all the circumstances  such  as  to  give  rise  to  even  potential
    unfairness in the conclusions drawn.

14. In relation to paragraph 32 is a finding that the evidence  before  the
    First-tier, Tribunal falls very far  short  of  demonstrating  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the children to live in Nigeria nor  that  it
    would be unduly harsh them to remain in the UK without  the  Appellant.
    It is for the Appellant to establish his claim, which in part  is  that
    he satisfies one of  the  exceptions  set  out  in  paragraph  398  and
    following  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and/or  section  117C  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 or  that  there  are  very
    compelling or exceptional circumstances to outweigh the public interest
    in deportation (as one of the factors relevant  to  an  application  to
    revoke under paragraph 390 and following of the Immigration Rules).  On
    the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, he failed to do so.  It is
    impossible to see how there could be any suggestion that that situation
    would have  been  remedied  by  the  Appellant's  partner  giving  oral
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, particularly in  circumstances
    where there is no procedural expectation for detailed oral evidence  to
    be given to rectify the omission of detail in her own written statement
    and the lack of any  detailed  evidence  from  the  Appellant  himself,
    written or oral, on these key issues.  In all  of  these  circumstances
    there  is  no  procedural  unfairness  in  the  refusal  to  grant   an
    adjournment of the hearing and the first  ground  of  appeal  therefore
    fails.

15. The second ground of appeal, that there was unfairness in  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal because the Respondent was permitted  to
    produce an additional file of evidence on the morning  of  the  hearing
    was not developed orally before me at all.  There  is  nothing  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  suggest  that  there  was  any
    objection to the admission of these documents at the time, with  copies
    being provided and time allowed for both  representatives  to  consider
    the documents prior to the start at the hearing.   No  application  for
    adjournment was made for additional time to consider the same.  In  any
    event the  further  documents  related  to  the  Appellant's  2008  EEA
    application which was only relevant as one small part  of  the  adverse
    credibility  findings  to  show  that  the   Appellant   submitted   an
    application in a way designed to mislead the Respondent as to his  true
    identity and was not specifically relevant to the findings in  relation
    to whether or not the exceptions to deportation would be  satisfied  on
    the facts of this case.  This ground of appeal has no merit and is also
    dismissed.

16. The third ground of appeal,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    relying on section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 was also not developed before me orally.  In any event this ground
    of appeal also has no merit.  Section  117A(1)  expressly  states  that
    this part (the provisions in section 117A  to  117D)  applies  where  a
    court or tribunal is required to  determine  whether  a  decision  made
    under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for
    private and family life under Article 8 and as result would be unlawful
    under  section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.   That  expressly
    encompasses a decision made under section 3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 to deport the Appellant on the grounds that his deportation is
    conducive to the public good.  The sections came into force on 28  July
    2014, prior to the decision to refuse to revoke the  deportation  order
    and appeal of it to  the  Tribunal.   On  its  face  there  can  be  no
    suggestion that is not applicable to the present appeal.

17. The final ground of appeal in relation to the  birthplace  and  initial
    residence of the Appellant's stepdaughter has largely been  dealt  with
    in conjunction with the first ground of appeal  above.   Although  this
    information was available on the face of documents  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, there was  no  error  in  the  decision  recording  that
    neither the Appellant or his partner mentioned this  in  their  written
    and/or oral evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  any  event,
    even if there was a factual error  in  this  regard  it  could  not  be
    material to the outcome of  the  appeal  given  the  finding  that  the
    evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  felt  very  far  short  of
    demonstrating that any of the exceptions to  deportation  were  met  in
    this case.

18. For these reasons, I find no  error  of  law  on  any  of  the  grounds
    submitted in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which is therefore
    confirmed.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]             Date     19th November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

