
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05267/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2018                         |On 29th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 onyema [o]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rashid, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  2nd  August  1976.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history dating  back  to  August
    2004.  On 12th March 2015 the Appellant  submitted  a  new  application
    under the ten year family and private life route.  Following a  request
    in March 2016 for further information the Appellant's  application  was
    refused by a Notice of Refusal dated 13th March 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Aujla sitting at Taylor House on 18th September 2018.  In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 4th October 2018, the Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on human rights grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 4th October 2018
    and on  24th  October  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Ford noted that there were two Grounds  of
    Appeal:-

      a) as to the proportionality exercise in that it was argued that given
         the Appellant was having direct contact with his son under an order
         of the Family Court and that the child cannot be removed  from  the
         jurisdiction without further order.  It was contended the  Tribunal
         may have erred in finding that the Appellant's  removal  would  not
         have consequences of such gravity as to potentially engage  Article
         8.

      b) That the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  not  adequately  considered
         the best interests of the child.

 4. Judge Ford considered that both grounds were arguable.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Rashid.  Mr Rashid is  familiar  with  this  matter  having
    appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Tufan.

 6. It is confirmed to me that there is an error  in  paragraph  1  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision.   Therein  he  refers  to  the
    Appellant as being female and a citizen of Ghana.  That  is  clearly  a
    typographical error.  It  has  no  bearing  on  the  substance  of  the
    decision and I accept that it is an error that is not material and I am
    perfectly prepared to accept  the  submission  that  the  Appellant  is
    Nigerian and of course male.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. It is pointed out to me by Mr Tufan as a  preliminary  issue  that  the
    Appellant has a partner and child.  He acknowledges  that  there  is  a
    contention that the Appellant has a proxy marriage but goes no  further
    than accepting  that  contention.   Further  he  indicates  that  prior
    refusal was withdrawn by the  Secretary  of  State  for  representation
    reasons and that the child of the Appellant is a non-qualifying  child.
    However he does accept that there is a prohibitive steps order in place
    from the Civil  Courts  and  that  there  is  no  contact  between  the
    Appellant and his former partner.

 8. Mr Rashid starts by submitting that the initial question that the judge
    should have considered was whether it was in the child's best  interest
    to have contact with his father and as this question was  not  actually
    put there is no answer provided.  The only question  raised  is  to  be
    found at question 32 of the Appellant's interview and  that  no-one  is
    suggesting  that  the  child  should  be  removed  from   his   mother.
    Consequently he submits that the wrong question has been posed and that
    the  determination  is  subsequently  flawed.   He  submits  that   the
    Appellant being a non-qualifying child  and  aged  only  6  it  is  not
    appropriate for this issue to have been considered under  Section  117D
    and he refers me to the decision of Mr Justice McCloskey in JO (Section
    55 duty) [2014] UKUT 517 and the manner in which Section 55 impacts  in
    this case.  He submits that that is good  authority  for  stating  that
    where the best interests of a child clearly favour  a  certain  course,
    that  course  should  be  followed  unless  countervailing  reasons  of
    considerable force displace them even if a child  is  a  non-qualifying
    child that the judge has not followed this principle.

 9. He  acknowledges  that  at  paragraph  38  the  judge  has  given  some
    consideration to  the  child's  best  interest  but  submits  that  the
    consideration given is woefully inadequate and  can  be  considered  as
    nothing more than cursory, casual and superficial.  He submits that the
    judge had three bundles for him including a letter  of  17th  September
    2018 from the Appellant's contact supervisor pointing out that  contact
    has been going on for over twelve months and that  nowhere  within  the
    decision does there appear to be any consideration  of  this  document.
    He  points  out  that  there  is  reference  at  paragraph  40  to  the
    involvement of the Family Court and I am drawn by him to the  reference
    therein of the following sentence,

         "The child is not at such an age and the Appellant's involvement in
         his life is not so intense  that  his  sudden  departure  from  the
         United Kingdom and cessation of personal  contact  with  the  child
         would have drastic consequences for the child or  for  that  matter
         the Appellant himself."

10. Mr Rashid submits that the words "drastic consequences" are  not  words
    that are found in any case law and impose far too high a threshold.  He
    also reminds me that there being a prohibitive steps order in place  it
    would not be possible for the child to visit Nigeria.

11. He submits that it would have been appropriate for the question  to  be
    asked would it be in the child's best interest to stop  direct  contact
    and that bearing in mind  the  involvement  of  the  court  supervision
    officers and the conclusions they reach that the judge's findings which
    are he submits based on  no  material  fact,  conflict  with  the  view
    expressed by the supervising care officer.

12. Secondly, he turns to the issue of  private  life  reminding  that  the
    Appellant is now 42 and that he  left  Nigeria  when  he  was  15.   He
    submits that he has not been there  for  27  years  and  he  could  not
    reasonably establish himself.   Further  he  considers  the  judge  has
    failed to follow guidance given in UE (Nigeria) and Others [2010]  EWCA
    Civ 975 in that the Appellant is a qualified doctor and it is  open  to
    take into account the loss of public benefit when assessing the  public
    interest side of proportionality under Article 8 and that the judge has
    failed to do so.  He asked me to find that there are material errors of
    law and to remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing.

13. Mr Tufan takes me to  paragraph  40  and  indeed  to  other  paragraphs
    particularly paragraph 33.  He acknowledged that the guidance refers to
    exceptional circumstances that would  result  in  "unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences".  He equates the use of the word 'drastic' to  that.   He
    takes me to paragraphs 39 and 41 which  he  considers  shows  that  the
    judge knows what the test is and that the judge heard the evidence  and
    considered it and came to a reasoned decision.  He  submits  that  that
    decision was neither irrational nor exceeded any appropriate threshold.

14. As far as the Appellant's private life is concerned the  fact  that  he
    had not been to Nigeria since a teenager did not in  his  opinion  take
    anything any further.  He  points  out  that  the  Appellant's  medical
    qualification was based in Moldova and that the test expressed in UE is
    a high one.

The Law

15.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

17. I accept that the Appellant is a national  of  Nigeria  and  a  medical
    practitioner and that he entered the UK as a visitor  from  Moldova  on
    8th August 2004 sponsored by  his  sister  who  is  a  settled  British
    citizen.  In December 2004 he  applied  for  leave  as  a  postgraduate
    doctor which was refused.  Thereafter there were  further  applications
    and  refusals.   In  2010  he  met  his  partner  and  they  started  a
    relationship which led to the birth of a child on 8th April 2012.   The
    parties parted acrimoniously and the Family Courts made a contact order
    in respect of the child on 23rd December 2016.  It is  the  Appellant's
    contention that undertaking a fair balancing exercise of all the  facts
    as evidenced with a particular consideration to provisions  of  Section
    55, his removal would breach his (and his son's) fundamental  right  to
    family life.  He further contends that his  absence  from  Nigeria  for
    over 26  years  and  lack  of  any  family  there  would  present  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration into Nigerian society.

18. The question arises as to whether or not  the  judge  in  reaching  his
    decision has materially erred in law.  The  judge  has  made  findings.
    The question is; has he made sufficient findings?  It is not  an  issue
    as to whether or not another judge would come to a different  decision.
    The starting point is paragraph 38 of the  judge's  decision.   Therein
    the judge has  considered  the  matter  in  accordance  with  paragraph
    GEN.3.2 as to whether there were exceptional circumstances which  would
    render the Respondent's decision in breach of  Article  8  because  the
    refusal would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    Appellant or his son.  Thus the  judge  applies  the  correct  starting
    point for his test.  He has also emphasised that he has  included,  and
    taken  into  account,  the  documentary  evidence  placed  before   him
    including the reports from the supervising  contact  worker  and  other
    documents and the letter written by the Appellant's son and importantly
    he indicates that he has taken into account the documentation issued by
    the Family Court in respect of  the  child's  arrangements  leading  to
    supervise contact.

19. The judge has gone on thereafter to consider the issue as to whether or
    not  the  circumstances  were  so  exceptional  that  the  Respondent's
    decision  and  consequent  removal  of   the   Appellant   would   have
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the Appellant's son  or  for  that
    matter the Appellant himself.  Again the judge has applied the  correct
    test.  He has made  findings  at  paragraph  40.   I  acknowledge  that
    therein  the  judge  has  made  reference   to   the   words   "drastic
    consequences".  I do not find the use  of  those  words  constitutes  a
    material error of law for the reason that the judge has at paragraph 38
    set out the test and knows that that is the test that he has to follow.
     He has made findings based on the evidence that was before him and  he
    found  that  the  cessation  of  personal  contact   would   not   have
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for either of  them.   Unless  such  a
    conclusion is perverse providing the judge has carried out the reasoned
    analysis,  given  his   findings   and   importantly   considered   all
    documentation then that is a finding that he is entitled to make and it
    is not for the Upper Tribunal to set it aside.  In  this  instant  case
    the  judge  has  made  such  findings  and   has   carried   out   such
    consideration.  I thus do not find that there is any material error  of
    law in the decision of the judge.

20. The other submissions are ancillary but  equally  they  are  important.
    The judge has given due notice to the fact  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    doctor and whilst that is a consideration  that  does  not  negate  the
    finding and  conclusion  reached  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    Further the judge has found that it would not be unreasonable  for  the
    Appellant as a single man, albeit that he has been  away  from  Nigeria
    over 26 years, to reintegrate into Nigerian society.  He is a qualified
    professional man and as set out at paragraph 42 he  is  fully  familiar
    with the culture and language of the country and has the benefit of  an
    internationally recognised qualification.  The judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that he could easily establish himself in  Nigeria  after  his
    return.

21. It is important to note  that  the  judge  was  purely  addressing  the
    immigration issues and not the orders as they  currently  stand  within
    the Family Court.  They may well have some bearing  on  the  future  of
    this matter but on the submissions made before me and the findings made
    by the judge I am satisfied that  the  judge  has  considered  all  the
    evidence that was before him and made findings that he was entitled to.
     The fact that he does not specifically refer to  the  letter  of  17th
    September is in itself not fatal to his findings because he does  refer
    to all documentation.  This is the judge who has thoroughly  considered
    all the evidence and made reasoned findings.  As mentioned above it  is
    immaterial  that  another  judge  might  have  come  to   a   different
    conclusion.  What is important in this  case  is  the  judge  has  made
    reasoned findings which are not perverse and in which circumstances  he
    cannot be considered to have materially erred  in  law.   For  all  the
    above reasons the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
