
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05593/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard remotely from Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 June 2021                              |On 01 July 2021               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before


                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                 Adeniyi [A]
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                The hearing was conducted on Microsoft Teams



Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms M Chowdhury, Counsel, instructed by Daniel
                    Aramide Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the re-making  of  the  decision  in  this  case  following  my
    previous decision, promulgated on 24 March 2021,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in law and that its decision should  be  set  aside.
    That decision is appended to this re-making decision.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, made a human rights  claim  on  10
    January 2019 (by way of an application  for  entry  clearance)  on  the
    basis that he wished to re-join his British wife  (Ms  O-A)  and  three
    British children in the United Kingdom. The children were born in 2001,
    2006, and 2011.

 3. By a decision dated 13 March 2019, the  respondent  refused  the  human
    rights claim. With  reference  only  to  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
    Rules") relating to Article 8 ECHR, it was said that the appellant  had
    a very poor immigration history in respect of his previous residence in
    this country, that paragraphs 320(3) and 320(11) of the Rules  applied,
    and that the appellant therefore was unable  to  meet  the  suitability
    requirements under Appendix FM to the Rules. In addition, it  was  said
    that the financial requirements under the Appendix could not be met.

 4. The particulars of the paragraph 320(11) assertion were stated  to  be:
    that the appellant had entered United Kingdom illegally in  2004;  that
    he had absconded in early 2005; and that he had failed to  declare  his
    "adverse previous immigration history" when  making  the  human  rights
    claim (described as the  "current  visa  application").  No  additional
    consideration was given to Article 8 on a wider basis.

 5. On review by an Entry Clearance  Manager,  it  was  conceded  that  the
    financial requirements under Appendix FM had in  fact  been  satisfied.
    All other aspects of the original refusal were maintained.



Previous decisions of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant has  now  had  three  appeals  heard  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The first was heard and  dismissed  by  Judge  Clayton  by  a
    decision promulgated on 7 November 2014 (OA/14263/2013). The appeal had
    been against a refusal of human rights claim (by way of an  application
    for entry clearance). Judge Clayton recorded Ms O-A to have stated that
    she had been aware that the appellant had used aliases in  relation  to
    certain offences committed whilst he was in the United Kingdom prior to
    his last departure in 2009. At the end of paragraph 7 of her  decision,
    the judge recorded Ms O-A as having said that she  "thought"  that  the
    appellant had used another name for "his applications" and that he  had
    "claimed asylum in the name of Joel Magee". At paragraph 26, the  judge
    stated that the appellant had wished to "deceive the  authorities"  and
    keep important information  from  his  wife  relating  to  his  use  of
    aliases.  In  the  following  paragraph,  the   judge   described   the
    appellant's immigration history as "very poor" and that he gave  "false
    information on the visit Visa Application Form." The various identities
    said to have been used by the appellant were stated as  being:  "Ogbiji
    Omagbemi", "Joel Magee", "Joel Nagree", and "Damiloa Ola Adeniyi", with
    "various dates of birth" used as well.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationships  with  his  family
    members and found that it would be unreasonable for the children to  go
    and live in Nigeria, but concluded that the respondent's  decision  was
    proportionate  and  that  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Rules  had  been
    appropriately applied. Accordingly, she dismissed the appeal.  It  does
    not appear as though her decision was challenged.

 7. The next First-tier Tribunal decision was that of Judge  Foulkes-Jones,
    promulgated on 30 July 2018, which  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal of another human rights claim, essentially made  on
    the same basis as the first (HU/10441/2016). Again, the respondent  had
    relied  on  what  was  said  to  be  the  appellant's  highly   adverse
    immigration history  in  the  United  Kingdom,  including  the  use  of
    aliases. Paragraphs 320(3) and 320(11) of the Rules had been applied.

 8. Judge Foulkes-Jones made reference to the  decision  of  Judge  Clayton
    and, at paragraph 8 on page 9 (the paragraph numbering  had  gone  awry
    within the decision) she concluded that it was "clear  from  the  above
    [referring to what Judge Clayton had said] that the Appellant had  used
    deception in an application for entry  clearance,  leave  to  enter  or
    remain..." She  also  found  that  the  appellant  had  used  "multiple
    identities", although this appears to have been based  solely  on  what
    Judge Clayton had said previously.

 9. The judge noted  that  there  had  been  no  explanation  for  why  the
    appellant had used the identities of Ogbiji Omagbemi  and  Joel  Nagree
    (she believed this to be a different identity from that of Joel  Magee)
    and for why the latter had been  used  when  the  appellant  apparently
    claimed asylum in this country.

10. On the other side of the ledger, the judge found that the appellant had
    never in fact  entered  the  United  Kingdom  illegally;  that  he  had
    previously  disclosed  the  identity  of  Damilola  Ola  Adeniyi   (the
    appellant's birth name, which had subsequently  been  changed  by  Deed
    Poll or the equivalent under Nigerian law); that he had never  been  an
    absconder; and that he had provided sufficient evidence of identity and
    nationality (with reference to paragraph 320(3) of the Rules).

11.  The  judge  accepted,  as  had  Judge  Clayton,  that   the   familial
    relationships were all genuine and subsisting, that the maintenance and
    accommodation requirements under the Rules were satisfied.

12. Having conducted on overall balancing  exercise,  the  judge  concluded
    that the adverse  immigration  history  precluded  the  appellant  from
    satisfying the suitability requirement because paragraph 320(11) of the
    Rules applied. The respondent's decision was deemed to be proportionate
    and the appeal was dismissed. There was no successful challenge to  the
    judge's decision.

13. Finally, there is the decision of Judge Shore, in respect  of  which  I
    found there to be errors of law and have now set aside. In summary, and
    in light of properly-made concessions by Ms Everett at the  hearing,  I
    concluded that the judge had failed to take into account the favourable
    findings made by Judge Foulkes-Jones in her 2018 decision;  had  failed
    to provide reasons for finding that the evidence of the  appellant  and
    Ms O-A was vague; and had failed to engage with  specific  evidence  on
    the issue of aliases.



The issues

14. Having regard to the previous First-tier Tribunal decisions,  my  error
    of law decision, and the respondent's stated  position,  the  following
    matters are now not in dispute between the parties:

              a)  The  appellant  has  provided  adequate  evidence  of  his
                 identity and nationality: this aspect of the  Rules  is  no
                 longer in issue;




              b) The appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
                 with Ms  O-A  and  his  adult  child,  and  a  genuine  and
                 subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his   two   minor
                 children;


              c) The relevant financial requirements of Appendix FM  to  the
                 Rules satisfied, as is the  accommodation  requirement  and
                 all other elements of that Appendix;


              d)  The  appellant  has  never  entered  the  United   Kingdom
                 illegally;


              e) The appellant lawfully changed his name from  Damilola  Ola
                 Adeniyi to his current name, has properly  disclosed  this,
                 and has never used his birth name in a dishonest manner;


              f) The appellant has never been an  absconder  in  the  United
                 Kingdom;


              g) It would not be reasonable for  either  of  the  two  minor
                 children to go and live in Nigeria.

15. The following matters remain in dispute:

              a) the nature and extent of the use made by the  appellant  of
                 the  aliases  "Joel  Nagree"  (or  "Magee")   and   "Ogbiji
                 Omagbemi";




              b) Whether the respondent's decision is  disproportionate  and
                 therefore unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
                 1998.

16. In respect of the decisions of Judges Clayton  and  Foulkes-Jones,  the
    Devaseelan principles apply.

17. Paragraph 320(11) of the Rules has now become paragraph 9.8.2 of Part 9
    (HC 813) and I shall refer to the latter from now  on.  The  burden  of
    proof remains on the respondent to show that it applies. In  all  other
    respects the burden is on the appellant to make out his case.



The evidence

18. I have a bundle from the appellant, indexed and  paginated  1-55.  This
    consists of an updated witness statement from  him,  certain  documents
    relating to the appeal in the Upper Tribunal, and the bundle which  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

19. I have considered the respondent's bundle, which includes  the  refusal
    decision and the visa application form.

20. I am bound to say that the provision of certain other documents has not
    been satisfactory. The decision of Judge Clayton was only  provided  by
    the respondent at the  outset  of  the  hearing.  Judge  Foulkes-Jones'
    decision  had  been  provided  separately  at  an  earlier  stage   but
    nonetheless not within a consolidated bundle of  evidence.  Further,  I
    was also given a 2013 refusal of entry clearance at the hearing.

21. Parties need to prepare documents in a  clear  and  timely  fashion  in
    readiness for any particular hearing. When proceedings have reached the
    Upper Tribunal, it may well be that there are loose documents that have
    accumulated during the course  of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Whether or not there are specific directions  issued  by  the
    Upper Tribunal, consideration should in my view always be given to  the
    preparation of a consolidated bundle (if at all possible, agreed by the
    parties) of all relevant evidence. It does not matter if  some  of  the
    evidence in such a bundle is contested: the point is that it  will  all
    be contained in one place and this will  always  assist  the  efficient
    consideration of a case.

22. The respondent has not provided any evidence relating  to  any  alleged
    asylum claim made by the appellant in the  United  Kingdom  (using  any
    identity). Nor  has  she  provided  any  evidence  of  entry  clearance
    applications, or any GCID case notes  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
    immigration history. Although Mr Tufan somewhat opaquely hinted at  the
    existence of other evidence, no application was  made  to  adduce  any.
    Even if such an application had been made at  this  exceptionally  late
    stage in proceedings, it would have faced an uphill  struggle,  to  say
    the least.

23. Both the  appellant  and  Ms  O-A  gave  oral  evidence  remotely.  The
    appellant of course currently resides in Nigeria. At the outset of  the
    hearing I raised the issue of whether it was appropriate for him to  be
    giving evidence from outside the jurisdiction, in  light  of  potential
    concerns raised in, for example, Nare  evidence  by  electronic  means)
    Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 443 (IAC). On instructions, Ms Chowdhury  informed
    me that her  solicitors  had  never  encountered  any  difficulties  in
    respect of individuals giving evidence remotely from Nigeria. They were
    also aware that liaising with the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  in
    respect of ensuring that no objections  were  raised  by  the  Nigerian
    authorities, was a difficult and lengthy process.

24. Having considered the matter and satisfied myself that  he  was  giving
    evidence from his private residence in Lagos and that this case did not
    involve issues relating to international protection, I decided that  it
    was appropriate for me to hear evidence from the appellant.

25. A full note of  the  oral  evidence  is  contained  in  the  record  of
    proceedings. In summary, the appellant adopted his most recent  witness
    statement and that from 2019. The last time he saw his children was  in
    2016 or 2017 when they visited Nigeria. When asked by  Mr  Tufan  about
    his use of aliases, the appellant said that he had never claimed asylum
    in 2014, as he had left this country 2009 and had not been back  since.
    He accepted that he had used the names Joel Magee and  Ogbiji  Ogambemi
    in relation to driving matters in the past, but denied  using  them  in
    respect of any immigration applications. He told me that  he  had  used
    the driving licence of Mr Ogambemi for approximately four years in this
    country, but had only shown this to the  police  on  one  occasion,  in
    2005. He explained that there has been a misunderstanding in respect of
    the names "Nagree" and "Magee": they have always been one and the  same
    person and the correct spelling is "Magee". There had been two  driving
    matters in this country, the first in 2005 when  he  was  convicted  of
    going through an amber traffic light. He said that  he  had  then  been
    using his wife's car, although he then corrected that and said that  it
    was Mr Magee's car. The second incident related to a police check.  The
    appellant was adamant that he had never, as far as he  could  remember,
    claimed asylum in the United Kingdom, whether it was 2014 or 2004.

26. Ms O-A adopted her 2019 witness statement. She did not believe that her
    husband had claimed asylum in the United Kingdom. She denied stating at
    the 2014 appeal hearing that the appellant had in fact  claimed  asylum
    using the identity of Joel Magee. She confirmed that the appellant  had
    used her car and that of a friend whilst in  the  United  Kingdom.  She
    told me that she currently worked as a  specialist  nurse  at  Homerton
    Hospital dealing with sickle-cell thalassaemia and oncology.  She  felt
    overstretched and stressed, and  was  having  financial  troubles.  All
    three children were missing their father, particularly the youngest.



The parties' submissions

27. Mr Tufan submitted that there was insufficient evidence  to  go  behind
    the findings made by Judges Clayton and Foulkes-Jones. He relied on the
    appellant's answer to question 3 of the visa application form, where he
    denied ever having used other names. In fact, other names had been used
    in respect of at least the  driving  matters.  It  was  submitted  that
    paragraph 9.8.2 of the Rules did apply. On a wider Article 8 basis,  it
    was submitted that although there was family life with Ms O-A  and  the
    children,  the  refusal  of  human   rights   claim   was   nonetheless
    proportionate.

28. Ms Chowdhury submitted that the factual matters were relatively narrow,
    in light of the error of law decision in the matters set  out  therein.
    An adequate explanation had been provided on the use of the two  names.
    The appellant's answer to question  3  on  the  visa  application  form
    should be read in context of  his  likely  understanding  of  the  term
    "used". She suggested that this  would  have  referred  to  use  in  an
    immigration context and not in respect of driving matters involving the
    police. There was no reliable evidence from the respondent to show that
    the appellant had ever claimed asylum. The immigration history was  not
    "very poor" and  the  passage  of  time  was  now  relevant.  The  best
    interests of the two minor children were highly relevant.



Findings

29. I begin by stating my findings of fact  on  the  uncontentious  matters
    which referred to earlier in this decision.

30. I find that the appellant has provided sufficient evidence to establish
    his nationality and true identity. I find that he lawfully changed  his
    birth name to that he currently uses, that this was  disclosed  to  the
    respondent previously, and that he has never used his birth name in any
    dishonest  manner  whether  in  respect  of  this  dealings  with   the
    respondent or otherwise.

31. I find that the appellant has never  absconded  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The  finding  made  by  Judge  Foulkes-Jones  has  not   been
    undermined by any evidence provided  subsequently  by  the  respondent.
    Indeed, there is been no evidence from respondent  on  this  matter  at
    all.

32. On the same basis, I find that the  appellant  has  never  entered  the
    United Kingdom illegally.

33. I  find  that  the  appellant  has,  notwithstanding  the  geographical
    separation since his last departure from the United  Kingdom  in  2009,
    maintained a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife and  his
    eldest child, and a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
    his two younger children. I accept that he last saw them all on a face-
    to-face basis in 2016 or 2017 when they visited Nigeria. I accept  that
    there is frequent communication between them all. I have no doubt  that
    all three children miss their father and it is  more  likely  than  not
    that this applies particularly to the youngest, as stated by Ms O-A  in
    her oral evidence.

34. I also have no doubt that the link the separation will  have  placed  a
    significant strain on Ms O-A, both emotionally and financially.

35. I find that the financial and accommodation requirements under Appendix
    FM have been and continue to be met.

36. I now  turn  to  contentious  matters.  As  these  all  relate  to  the
    appellant's alleged adverse immigration history, and therefore in  turn
    the application of paragraph 9.8.2 of the Rules, the  legal  burden  of
    proof rests with the respondent. In  saying  that,  she  is  of  course
    entitled to rely on the application of the Devaseelan principles.

37. Did the appellant in fact claim asylum in the  United  Kingdom  in  any
    identity? This question involves consideration of  three  matters:  the
    findings of Judges Clayton and Foulkes-Jones; the evidence  before  me;
    and the lack of evidence from the respondent.

38. As far as I can see from the brief decision of Judge Clayton, there  is
    in fact no clear finding that an asylum claim had  ever  been  made.  I
    acknowledge that there is a  reference  to  Ms  O-A  having  apparently
    stated in her evidence that such a claim was made, but that is not  the
    same as a finding of fact. The references in paragraph 7 and 8 can only
    have related to second-hand information acquired by Ms O-A. The  record
    of the evidence says nothing about what the appellant himself  said  in
    any written evidence. There is no reference to any  evidence  about  an
    asylum claim having been provided by the respondent.

39. Turning to the decision of Judge Foulkes-Jones, there is  no  reference
    to the respondent having provided any evidence of an  asylum  claim  in
    those proceedings either. Nor can I see an  express  admission  by  the
    appellant that he had in fact claimed asylum.  It  is  clear  that  the
    judge's belief that an asylum claim had been made was based entirely on
    what had been set out in Judge Clayton's decision.  However,  if  Judge
    Clayton had not made a finding of fact that such a claim had been made,
    then the premise upon which Judge Foulkes-Jones proceeded would  appear
    to be flawed, or at least open to scrutiny now.

40. For the sake of completeness, the decision of Judge Shore has of course
    been set aside. He had relied on the decisions of  Judges  Clayton  and
    Foulkes-Jones. Given that neither  of  his  predecessors  had  made  an
    express finding of fact that the same claim had been made,  nothing  in
    his decision assists the respondent.

41. Both the appellant and Ms O-A have  denied  that  the  former  made  an
    asylum  claim  in  this   country.   I   treat   that   evidence   with
    circumspection, but do not discount it.

42. It is a simple fact that, notwithstanding the multiple appeals and  the
    length of time since Judge Shore's was promulgated  in  early  December
    2019, the respondent has failed  to  provide  any  evidence  as  to  an
    alleged asylum claim made by the appellant in the United Kingdom.

43. Taking all the circumstances into account, and applying the  Devaseelan
    principles, I find that it has not been shown by the respondent that an
    asylum claim was in fact made by the appellant in any identity. To  put
    it another way, the assertion that he did  is  predicated  entirely  on
    Judge Clayton's 2014 decision and, for the reasons set out above,  that
    premise is flawed and does not in fact represent a sustainable starting
    point.

44. The next question is whether the appellant used deception  when  making
    one or more applications for entry clearance or leave  to  remain  over
    the course of time (I shall deal with the question of  whether  he  was
    dishonest in respect of any dealings with other agencies of  the  state
    later in my decision). Again, this must be assessed in the  context  of
    the Devaseelan principles.

45. Judge Clayton found that he had (see paragraph  27  of  her  decision),
    although she made no reference to when the applications were made, what
    the "false information" was,  and  what,  if  any,  evidence  had  been
    provided and relied on to support that  finding.  This  last  point  is
    particularly striking, given the seriousness of a finding of  deception
    and that the burden of proof rested with the respondent.

46. Judge Foulkes-Jones relied on what Judge Clayton  had  said  and  found
    that there was no evidence to disturb that finding. To that extent, she
    did not make a free-standing finding  based  on  any  further  evidence
    adduced by the appellant. Once again, she did  not  set  out  when  the
    applications in question had been made, nor said  anything  about  what
    evidence, if any, had been relied on by her or Judge Clayton.

47. I have considered the evidence now before me. This  has  come  entirely
    from the appellant's side.  I  am  satisfied  that  there  has  been  a
    consistent denial by the appellant over the course of time that he ever
    employed deception (by virtue of using false  identities)  when  making
    any applications for entry clearance or any other form of leave. I base
    this on the oral evidence, the 2019 witness  statement,  and  the  most
    recent witness statement.

48. In essence, the explanation provided relates to  the  use  of  the  two
    names Joel Magee and Ogbiji Ogambemi, and I note that this had not been
    provided to Judge  Foulkes-Jones  in  2018.  I  treat  the  appellant's
    evidence with circumspection, given the Devaseelan principles  and  the
    other findings I make in respect of his use of aliases in the  driving-
    related matters (see below).

49. Ms O-A was not asked in cross-examination about any knowledge  she  had
    concerning alleged deception by her husband when making previous  entry
    clearance applications. Having read through  the  decisions  of  Judges
    Clayton and Foulkes-Jones, I cannot see any specific references to Ms O-
    A expressly stating that she in  fact  knew  that  deception  had  been
    practiced.

50. I adopt the stated finding of Judge Clayton, subsequently  followed  by
    Judge Foulkes-Jones, as a starting point. However, in light of  what  I
    have said in paragraphs 45-49, above, I regard that starting  point  as
    significantly undermined by the absence of any reasoning by  the  judge
    and/or any evidence provided by the respondent in support, whether then
    or at any time thereafter. Taking all relevant matters into account,  I
    find that the appellant did not in fact practise deception  in  one  or
    more entry clearance applications (or any other applications) prior  to
    that made on 10 January 2019.

51. With regards to  that  2019  application,  it  is  the  case  that  the
    appellant answered "no" to the question of whether he had  ever  "used,
    or be known by, any other  names".  As  a  matter  of  fact,  that  was
    incorrect, as the appellant has admitted to  using  the  names  of  two
    other individuals whilst in the United  Kingdom  and  has  changed  his
    birth name.

52. With some hesitation, I find that the respondent has not shown that the
    appellant was dishonest when he provided that incorrect answer.  I  say
    this for the following reasons.

53. First, it is common ground that the appellant  had  changed  his  birth
    name and had disclosed this to the respondent previously.  It  is  also
    accepted by the respondent that the appellant had never used his  birth
    name in a dishonest manner. It would  therefore  be  odd,  to  say  the
    least, if the appellant had dishonestly sought to conceal his change in
    name when completing the 2019 application form.

54. Second, it has not been disputed by the respondent that  the  appellant
    had, when making previous entry clearance applications,  disclosed  his
    use of aliases. Again, it would have been  entirely  self-defeating  to
    the latest application if he had deliberately sought to conceal the use
    of aliases when he had already told the respondent about them before.

55. Third, I appreciate that the question in the form does not restrict the
    use of other names to the  making  of  immigration  applications  only.
    Having said that, I see some force in Ms Chowdhury's submission that he
    might  have  regarded  the  question  as   being   directed   at   such
    applications, rather than to any  type  of  dealings  with  the  United
    Kingdom authorities (such as, for example, the police).

56. Fourth, I have already  found  that  the  appellant  did  not  practise
    deception in respect of previous immigration applications. Whilst in no
    way decisive, this lack of previous dishonesty is an indicator that  he
    would not now have sought to employ deception.

57. All of this is not to  say  that  the  appellant  is  innocent  of  any
    misconduct. I find that he used two aliases when  last  in  the  United
    Kingdom. I find that the two names were Ogbiji Ogambemi and Joel Magee.

58. I am prepared to accept that Joel Magee and Joel Nagree  were  one  and
    the same person, and that there had been a misspelling  the  name  some
    point in time which was then carried through into the decisions of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The respondent has not provided  any  evidence  to
    show that there were two separate people (actual or invented) with  the
    different spelling of the surnames and different dates of birth.

59. I find that the appellant in fact used the driving licence of a  friend
    called Ogbiji Ogambemi for a period of approximately four years  whilst
    in the United Kingdom. That  conduct  was,  of  itself,  dishonest  and
    reprehensible. I find that he  adopted  the  alias  in  relation  to  a
    driving matter which occurred in 2005 or 2006 when  he  was  prosecuted
    and convicted of going through an amber traffic light.  Although  there
    was some confusion as to the car he was driving on  that  occasion,  it
    makes little difference and I am prepared to accept that it was that of
    Mr Magee.

60. There is no evidence before me that the identity of Ogbiji Ogambemi was
    ever used for other purposes, such as obtaining  benefits,  employment,
    or other services to which the appellant was not entitled.

61. I find that the name of Joel Magee was probably used by  the  appellant
    on another occasion (I have not been provided with even an  approximate
    date) one which he was stopped by the  police  as  part  of  a  general
    vehicle check. Again, this was  an  example  of  poor  conduct  by  the
    appellant. I find that it was dishonest. As with the other alias, there
    is no evidence the  appellant  used  this  name  to  obtain  any  other
    advantage.

62. There is one final matter. The appellant has stated that he left United
    Kingdom in 2009. He has not provided any evidence to show that  he  was
    still lawfully in this country at that point in time. As far as  I  can
    see, he had last entered as a visitor and, in the absence  of  evidence
    to the contrary, I find that he must have been  an  overstayer  at  the
    point of departure. I am willing to find that he left voluntarily.  The
    respondent has not provided any evidence to show that he was removed.




Conclusions

63. There is plainly family life as between the appellant  and  his  family
    members in the United Kingdom. The respondent's refusal  of  his  human
    rights claim is plainly an interference  with  that  family  life.  The
    refusal is in accordance with the law and it pursues the legitimate aim
    of maintaining effective immigration control, which is itself an aspect
    of preserving the economic well-being of the United Kingdom.

64. The core issue here is that of proportionality.

65. I begin by making an  assessment  of  the  two  minor  children's  best
    interests. There is no dispute that it would be in their best interests
    to be reunited with their father,  albeit  that  number  of  visits  to
    Nigeria have taken place over the  years.  I  have  accepted  that  the
    children are missing their father. In particular, the youngest one  has
    felt separation most keenly: he has never been able to reside with  the
    appellant. In all the circumstances, I conclude that it is  plainly  in
    the children's best interests to live with both of their parents.  This
    is a primary consideration in the Article 8 balancing exercise.

66. It is common ground that the United Kingdom-based family unit cannot be
    expected to relocate to Nigeria. It would be unreasonable for  the  two
    minor children to go and this in turn would preclude the ability of  Ms
    O-A  to  leave  this  country.  This  has  the  effect  of   preventing
    reunification anywhere other than the United Kingdom.

67. I now turn to the Rules. I am of course not simply deciding whether  or
    not the appellant can satisfy the relevant Rules.  This  is  an  appeal
    based on Article 8. The Rules laid down by the respondent  reflect  her
    view as to where the balance lies between the public interest  and  the
    rights  of  individuals.  That  is  a  relevant  consideration.  If  an
    individual can show that they satisfy the  Rules,  it  is  very  likely
    indeed that their  appeal  will  succeed  on  Article  8  grounds.  The
    converse  does  not  apply,  however:  a  wider  point  proportionality
    exercise must be carried out even if the Rules are not met.

68. As at the date of the respondent's decision, paragraph 320(11)  of  the
    Rules read as follows:

           "Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter  the  United
           Kingdom should normally be refused

           ...

           (11)  where  the  applicant  has  previously  contrived   in   a
           significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

           (i) overstaying; or

           (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

           (iii) being an illegal entrant; or

           (iv) using deception in  an  application  for  entry  clearance,
           leave to enter or remain or in order to  obtain  documents  from
           the Secretary of State or a third party required in  support  of
           the application (whether successful or not); and

           there are other aggravating circumstances, such  as  absconding,
           not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions  or  bail
           conditions, using an assumed identity  or  multiple  identities,
           switching nationality,  making  frivolous  applications  or  not
           complying with the re-documentation process."

69. The equivalent discretionary ground for  refusal  is  now  set  out  in
    paragraph 9.8.2 of Part 9 of the Rules:

           "9.8.2. An application for entry clearance or permission to
           enter may be refused where:

           (a) the applicant has previously breached immigration laws; and

           (b) the application was made outside the relevant time period in
           paragraph 9.8.7; and

           (c) the applicant has previously contrived in a significant  way
           to frustrate the intention of the  rules,  or  there  are  other
           aggravating  circumstances  (in  addition  to  the   immigration
           breach), such as a failure to cooperate with the redocumentation
           process, such as using a false identity, or a failure to  comply
           with enforcement  processes,  such  as  failing  to  report,  or
           absconding."

                                                   (emphasis added)

    The mandatory ground under paragraph 9.8.1 does not apply here  because
    of the lengthy  period  spent  by  the  appellant  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.

70. On my findings, the appellant has previously breached immigration  laws
    by overstaying his last period of leave granted as a visitor.

71. Has he previously contrived in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate  the
    intention of the Rules?

72. I have found that he has not practised deception in respect of previous
    immigration applications. I have found that  he  has  not  entered  the
    United Kingdom illegally, nor has he been an absconder.

73. I have found that he was not dishonest when answering "no" to  question
    3 in the latest application form, although this matter does not  relate
    to previous applications.

74. Overall, I conclude that the appellant has not previously contrived  in
    a significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules.  The  Rules
    are the respondent's statement of practice  as  to  the  regulation  of
    immigration control. The matters which are adverse to  the  appellant's
    history relate not to immigration applications, enforcement action,  or
    other related matters, but rather to dealings with  other  agencies  of
    the state, specifically the police.

75. This brings me onto the alternative limb of paragraph 9.8.2  (the  word
    "or" is used in sub-paragraph (c)): are there aggravating circumstances
    here?

76.  The  current  guidance  published  by  the  respondent   is   entitled
    "Suitability: previous breach of UK  immigration  laws",  version  3.0,
    dated 23 April 2021.  Unfortunately,  I  was  not  provided  with  this
    document  by  either  party.  It  is  plainly  appropriate  for  me  to
    nonetheless consider it in the context of this case.

77. On page 11 of 20, there appears a non-exhaustive list of matters  which
    may be considered to constitute "aggravating circumstances":

            . absconding

           . not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail
           conditions

           . failing to meet the terms of removal directions after port
           refusal of leave to enter

           or illegal entry

           . previous working in breach on visitor conditions within short
           time of arrival in

           UK (indicating a deliberate intention to work)

           . receiving benefits, goods or services when not entitled

           . using an assumed identity or multiple identities

           . getting NHS care to which they are not entitled

           . attempting to prevent removal from the UK, arrest or detention
           by Home Office

           or police

           . escaping from Home Office detention

           . switching nationality

           . troublesome or frivolous applications

           . not meeting the terms of the re-documentation process

           . taking part, attempting to take part, or facilitating, in a
           sham marriage or

           marriage of convenience

           . harbouring an immigration offender

           . people smuggling or helping in people smuggling."

78. The only factor appearing in list which might apply to the appellant is
    the use of assumed or multiple identities. It  is  not  entirely  clear
    whether this factor must relate to immigration matters, as  opposed  to
    use for any other purpose. Three considerations  lead  me  to  conclude
    that the former is the better view.

79. First, whilst the word "or" is used in sub-paragraph (c)  of  paragraph
    9.8.2, the guidance clearly connects the  intention  to  frustrate  the
    Rules with aggravating  circumstances.  This  would  suggest  that  the
    latter should be connected to the former.

80. Second, whilst acknowledging that the list is non-exhaustive,  all  the
    other aggravating circumstances set out are immigration-related in  one
    form or another.

81. Third, the use of assumed or multiple identities is  often  related  to
    immigration matters.

82.  I  conclude  that  there  is  a  sufficient  connection  between   the
    appellant's use of aliases when interacting with  the  police  in  this
    country and the aggravating circumstance of using assumed  or  multiple
    identities. After all, whilst the conduct did not involve the making of
    immigration applications  in  other  identities,  it  did  prevent  the
    authorities of this country (in the form of the  police)  from  knowing
    the true identity of an individual who  was  at  that  time  a  foreign
    national with either limited leave or none at all. Whatever his  status
    was, the police and any other arm of the  state  were  entitled  to  be
    informed of the appellant's true identity.

83. I therefore conclude that the respondent has shown she is  entitled  to
    rely on paragraph 9.8.2 as a relevant consideration on her side of  the
    balance sheet in the overall Article 8 assessment. Having said that, in
    light of my findings of  fact  in  this  case,  the  strength  of  this
    consideration is rather more limited than it otherwise might be.

84. Further, the ground of refusal under paragraph 9.8.2 is  discretionary.
    Two things flow from that. First, whilst clearly its application  is  a
    relevant factor in the overall Article 8 balancing exercise,  it  might
    not carry the same weight as a mandatory ground of  refusal  under  the
    Rules. Second, the issue of discretion is  bound  up  with  my  overall
    evaluative assessment in accordance with the balancing exercise. I will
    return to this, below.

85. I note that the respondent has never relied on what  is  now  paragraph
    9.7.1 of Part  9  of  the  Rules  (relating  to  the  making  of  false
    representations and the non-disclosure of relevant  facts).  Thus,  the
    appellant's answer to question 3 of the visa application form could not
    have been a basis for refusing the human rights claim, even  if  I  had
    found that answer to be dishonest.

86. As mentioned earlier in my  decision,  it  is  agreed  that  the  other
    elements of Appendix FM to the Rules are met.

87. In more general terms, there is, by virtue of section  117B(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), a strong
    public interest in the maintenance of immigration control. Where, as in
    this case, an additional factor is placed into the equation (that being
    the aggravating circumstance referred to above), the public interest is
    only enhanced.

88. The appellant can speak very good English, as was demonstrated  in  the
    course of his oral  evidence.  Thus,  the  mandatory  consideration  in
    section 117B(2) of the 2002 Act remains of neutral value.

89. It is been accepted throughout these  proceedings  that  the  financial
    requirements under Appendix FM to the Rules have been met.  It  follows
    that the mandatory consideration in section 117B of the 2002  Act  adds
    nothing to the respondent's side of the balance sheet.

90. This appeal does not relate  to  private  life  under  Article  8.  The
    appellant's relationship with Ms  O-A  was  established  prior  to  him
    residing in the United Kingdom unlawfully. Further, their marriage took
    place in 2010 in Nigeria. In  these  circumstances,  I  do  not  regard
    section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act as requiring little weight to be placed
    on the relationship.

91. Section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act does not apply in the context  of  this
    case.

92. I take into account and place due weight  on  the  appellant's  driving
    conviction  in  2005  or  2006.  I  have  considered  this  factor   in
    conjunction with the appellant's use of an alias. I have also  balanced
    this against the nature of the offence itself (in effect,  jumping  and
    amber traffic light - there being no evidence from  the  respondent  to
    contradict the appellant's account) and the passage of time  since  the
    incident.

93. A factor weighing in the appellant's favour is the length of the period
    of separation from his wife and, in particular, his  children.  He  was
    last living with them as part of the family unit in 2009, now  some  11
    years ago. The middle child has only been able to live with his  father
    for, at most, three years of his life. The  youngest  child  has  never
    been able to live with his father. The eldest whilst now an adult,  was
    separated from his father during all of his teenage years. This lengthy
    period of separation  is  also  to  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the
    impossibility of re-establishing the family unit in  Nigeria,  for  the
    reasons I have set out above.

94. There are, however, three aspects to this factor which,  to  a  limited
    extent at least, mitigate what might  otherwise  be  thought  of  as  a
    decisive feature of the case. First, it was the appellant's failure  to
    have regularised his status in United Kingdom when  he  was  last  here
    which initiated the lengthy  separation.  Second,  there  have  been  a
    number of visits by Ms O-A and the children to Nigeria over the  course
    of time. Third, the appellant's use of aliases (to the  extent  I  have
    found this to have occurred) have  undoubtedly  made  his  attempts  to
    apply to re-join his family in this country over time  very  much  more
    difficult indeed, as evidenced by the previous decisions of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

95. Before bringing all of the relevant factors  together  and  stating  my
    overall conclusion on the balancing exercise, I  must  comment  to  the
    respondent's decision in this case. The basis on which the  application
    was refused on suitability grounds under the Rules is seriously flawed.
    It is clear that significant reliance was placed on the assertion  that
    the appellant entered the United  Kingdom  illegally,  having  given  a
    false name to immigration officers, and that he  absconded  in  January
    2005. Quite apart from a failure  to  have  provided  any  evidence  to
    support these assertions, Judge Foulkes-Jones had specifically found in
    her 2018 decision that neither were correct. It is of concern that  the
    author of the respondent's refusal decision appeared to be  unaware  of
    the previous First-tier Tribunal decision. This  is  not  to  say  that
    there were no other reasons for refusing the  application  (whether  or
    not be proved to be sustainable on appeal), but that is not really  the
    point.

96. In arriving at my conclusion on proportionality  I  bear  in  mind  the
    authoritative guidance provided by the Supreme Court in Agyarko  [2017]
    UKSC 11; [2017] 1 WLR 823, at paragraphs 59 and 60:

           "59. As was explained in para 8 above, the  case  of Huang was
           decided at a time when the Rules had not been revised to reflect
           the requirements of article 8. Instead, the Secretary  of  State
           operated arrangements under which effect was given to article  8
           outside the Rules. Lord  Bingham,  giving  the  opinion  of  the
           Committee, observed that the ultimate question for the appellate
           immigration authority was whether the refusal of leave to  enter
           or remain, in circumstances where the life of the  family  could
           not reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking  full
           account of all considerations weighing in favour of the refusal,
           prejudiced  the  family  life  of  the  applicant  in  a  manner
           sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of article 8. If  the
           answer to that question was affirmative, then  the  refusal  was
           unlawful. He added:

           "It is not necessary that the appellate  immigration  authority,
           directing itself along the lines indicated in this opinion, need
           ask in addition whether the case meets a test of exceptionality.
           The suggestion that it should is based on an observation of Lord
           Bingham in Razgar [ R (Razgar) v Secretary of State for the Home
           Department [2004] UKHL 27; [2004] 2 AC 368] , para 20. He was
           there expressing an expectation,  shared  with  the  Immigration
           Appeal Tribunal, that the number of claimants not covered by the
           rules and supplementary directions but entitled to succeed under
           article 8 would be a very small  minority.  That  is  still  his
           expectation. But he was not  purporting  to  lay  down  a  legal
           test." (para 20)

           60. It remains the position that the ultimate question is how  a
           fair balance should be struck between the competing  public  and
           individual interests involved, applying a proportionality  test.
           The Rules and Instructions in issue in the present case  do  not
           depart from that  position.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  not
           imposed a test  of  exceptionality,  in  the  sense  which  Lord
           Bingham had in mind: that is to say, a requirement that the case
           should exhibit some highly unusual feature, over and  above  the
           application of the test of proportionality. On the contrary, she
           has defined the word "exceptional",  as  already  explained,  as
           meaning  "circumstances  in  which  refusal  would   result   in
           unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  individual  such  that
           the refusal of the application would not be  proportionate".  So
           understood, the provision in the Instructions that leave can  be
           granted outside the Rules where exceptional circumstances  apply
           involves the application of the test of proportionality  to  the
           circumstances of the individual case, and cannot be regarded  as
           incompatible with article 8. That conclusion is fortified by the
           express statement in the Instructions  that  "exceptional"  does
           not mean "unusual" or "unique": see para 19 above."

97. With this in mind and having full  regard  to  the  importance  of  the
    public interest in  maintaining  effective  immigration  control,  both
    generally and in relation to the facts of this case, I  have  concluded
    that the respondent's decision has not struck a  fair  balance  between
    that public interest and  the  appellant's  family  life  rights  under
    Article 8.

98. In relation to the Rules, I have found that although paragraph 9.8.2 of
    Part 9  is  engaged,  the  particular  factual  matrix  on  which  that
    engagement is premised is limited to the use  of  the  aliases  in  the
    manner I have set out previously.  The  discretionary  aspect  of  this
    general  ground  of  refusal  forms  part  and  parcel  of  my  overall
    evaluative judgment under the balancing exercise.

99. Here, the best interests of the two minor children  are  a  significant
    factor in his favour. The lengthy period of time that the appellant has
    been out of the United Kingdom, and thereby prevented from living  with
    his family members, is also deserving of real weight.  When  these  two
    factors are combined with the appellant's ability to satisfy all  other
    aspects of the  relevant  Rules,  my  consideration  of  the  mandatory
    factors set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act, and the  inability  to
    pursue family life elsewhere elsewhere, the balance comes down  in  the
    appellant's favour, notwithstanding the important  factors  sitting  on
    the respondent's side of the balance  sheet.  That  may  not  be  by  a
    significant margin, but such is often the  nature  of  these  types  of
    case.

100. I conclude that the  respondent's  decision  of  13  March  2019  is  a
    disproportionate interference with the  appellant's  right  the  family
    life under Article 8 and is therefore unlawful under section 6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.



Anonymity


101. No anonymity direction has been made so far in these proceedings and
    no application has been made by the appellant.


102. In any event, there is no reason for one to be made at this stage.



Notice of Decision

103. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and that  decision  has  been  set
    aside.

104. I re-make the decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 23 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
Whilst I have found the original decision to be flawed, the success  of  the
appeal has very much depended on additional evidence being  provided  during
the course of the appellate proceedings.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                      Date: 23 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05593/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2021                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               Mr Adeniyi [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Chowdhury, Counsel, instructed by Daniel
                    Aramide Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Shore ("the  judge"),  promulgated  on  4  December
    2019,  by  which  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal of his human rights claim, a  claim  made  in  the
    context of an application for entry clearance in order to join his wife
    and three children in the United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant  had  already  had  two  appeals  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed, the first in 2014 and  the  second  in  2018.   The
    previous findings featured heavily in the judge's consideration of  the
    Appellant's appeal.

 3. My decision on error of law can be stated relatively briefly  given  Ms
    Everett's concession at the hearing.

 4. In essence, she accepted that the judge had failed to take  account  of
    relevant matters and had failed to  undertake  an  adequately  detailed
    independent assessment of the matters before him, in  particular  those
    relating to paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules  and  the  wider
    proportionality exercise required by Article 8.

 5. Ms Everett accepted that in 2018 the First-tier Tribunal had  found  in
    the Appellant's favour as regards certain matters, including:

      1) that he had never entered the United Kingdom illegally;

      2) that he had disclosed the use of at least one  other  identity  and
         had been granted entry clearance as  a  visitor  on  two  occasions
         since then;

      3) that he had never been an absconder; and

      4) that he had  provided  sufficient  evidence  of  his  identity  and
         nationality.

 6. The first problem with the judge's  decision,  as  acknowledged  by  Ms
    Everett, was that it was not sufficiently clear that  these  favourable
    matters had been factored into the overall assessment  under  paragraph
    320(11) or the wider proportionality exercise.

 7. The second problem was the lack of adequate reasoning accompanying  the
    judge's description of the evidence of the Appellant and  his  wife  as
    "vague and lacking in detail".

 8. The third difficulty, which in the circumstances  is  perhaps  of  most
    significance, is the judge's failure to have  considered  the  specific
    issues and evidence relating to the use of multiple  identities.   This
    point was clearly held  against  the  Appellant  in  the  two  previous
    appeals and again by the judge.

 9. Three names have been cited and relied on over the course of time.  The
    first of these,  Damola  Adeniyi,  was,  it  transpires,  in  fact  the
    Appellant's birth name, a name which he changed quite  legitimately  by
    way of Deed Poll.  The judge failed to have regard to  the  context  in
    which the use of this identity had been used.  There is  no  suggestion
    that it was either false or was used  in  any  dishonest  way.   It  is
    accepted that the changed name had been  disclosed  to  the  Respondent
    back in 2005 (there was no evidence before the judge to  indicate  that
    it had only come to the Respondent's attention in 2013, as  alleged  in
    the rule 24 response).

10. In respect of the second and third names used, Joel Nagree  and  Ogbiji
    Omagbemi, these had been disclosed previously.  In any event, the  name
    Joel Nagree had never been used for the purposes of obtaining leave  to
    remain: it was used by the Appellant in respect of  a  parking  offence
    only.  The point here is that whilst the judge  was  entitled  to  take
    account of the previous First-tier Tribunal decisions by virtue of  the
    well-known Devaseelan principles, he was also obliged to undertake  his
    own assessment of all relevant matters in light of the evidence  before
    him.  Whether or not the previous  judges  had  undertaken  a  detailed
    analysis of the multiple identities issue, the judge was  bound  to  do
    so.

11. Ms Everett's overall concession acknowledged (in my view quite rightly)
    that the judge's reliance on what had been said in the previous  First-
    tier Tribunal decisions without more was,  in  all  the  circumstances,
    inadequate in respect of the assessment of paragraph  320(11)  and  the
    wider proportionality exercise.  This is  particularly  so  given  that
    that ground  of  refusal  is  discretionary  in  nature  and  that  the
    consideration of proportionality in paragraph 38 of  the  decision  is,
    with respect, extremely brief and lacking in detailed analysis.

12. For  these  reasons,  and  in  light  of  Ms  Everett's  properly  made
    concession, I conclude that the judge has materially erred in  law  and
    that his decision must be set aside.

13. I would add a  further  observation  and  one  with  which  Ms  Everett
    expressed her agreement at the hearing.  In paragraphs 38.5 and 39, the
    judge uses the phrase "exceptional circumstances" in  a  manner  giving
    rise to a real danger that he was imposing  a  threshold  test  in  the
    Appellant's case, rather than  simply  describing  the  nature  of  the
    outcome of any Article 8 claim in which the relevant Immigration  Rules
    could not be satisfied.  There is no need for me  to  consider  whether
    this constituted a material error of law, but it does raise  a  concern
    as to the approach adopted.

14. In terms of disposal, I conclude that this appeal should be retained in
    the Upper Tribunal for a resumed hearing in  due  course.   Some  fact-
    finding will be required, but the Upper Tribunal is fully  equipped  to
    undertake this task.  To assist with the remaking decision  I  set  out
    those matters which the parties have confirmed are now common ground:

      a) the Appellant has never entered the United Kingdom illegally;

      b) the Appellant has never been an absconder;

      c) the Appellant disclosed his change of name from Damola  Adeniyi  to
         his present name to the Respondent and he was granted  visit  visas
         in 2005 and 2007 in his current identity;

      d) that the Appellant never used his birth name in a dishonest manner;

      e) that the Appellant has provided adequate evidence of  his  identity
         and  nationality  (with  reference  to  paragraph  320(3)  of   the
         Immigration Rules);

      f) that the minimum income requirement has been  and  is  met  by  his
         wife;

      g) that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
         his wife and a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with
         his three children in the United Kingdom.

15. The two specific matters which remain live are the  particular  use  of
    the identities used by the Appellant in the past,  namely  Noel  Nagree
    and Ogbiji Omagbemi and  whether  there  had  been  a  failure  by  the
    Appellant to disclose his full  immigration  history  (whether  or  not
    relevant to the making of  any  applications  for  leave  to  enter  or
    remain) in his most  recent  visa  application  form.   The  Respondent
    maintains her reliance on paragraph 320(11) of the Rules.

16. My provisional view is that the re-making of the decision in this  case
    can be facilitated by way of a remote resumed hearing.

17. I issue further directions to the parties below.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the parties

      1) No later than 7 days after this decision is sent out, the Appellant
         is to confirm in writing  with  the  Tribunal  and  the  Respondent
         whether it is intended to call oral evidence at the resumed hearing
         and, if it is, indicate who will be giving such evidence. If it  is
         proposed to call the Appellant himself, this must be made clear;




      2) At the same time, the Appellant shall confirm whether  he  has  any
         objections to the resumed hearing being conducted remotely ;


      3) No later than  14  days  after  this  decision  is  sent  out,  the
         Respondent is to confirm in writing whether she has any  objections
         to the resumed hearing being conducted remotely ;


      4) No later than  28  days  after  this  decision  is  sent  out,  the
         Appellant is to  file  and  serve  a  consolidated  bundle  of  all
         evidence now relied on, including any updated  witness  statements;
         no


      5) No later than  35  days  after  this  decision  is  sent  out,  the
         Respondent may file and serve any further evidence relied on;


      6) No later than 10 days before the  resumed  hearing,  the  Appellant
         shall file and serve a skeleton argument;




      7) With liberty to apply.



Signed      H Norton-Taylor                  Date: 23 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


