
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/05652/2018
     HU/07940/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 July 2019                      |On 09 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                            sMH- first appellant
                           wUN - second appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Hodgetts, of Counsel instructed by Bankfield
                    Heath Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants appeal, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Gumsley who in a determination promulgated on 9
    August 2018 dismissed the appellants' appeal against a decision of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse them  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   The appellants are citizens of Pakistan. The first appellant  was  born
    on 1 October 1986 and entered Britain on 16 December 2006 as a student.
     Thereafter he made various applications  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student and then as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant and Tier 1  (General)
    Migrant.  On 4 June 2016 he made an application for indefinite leave to
    remain which was refused on that day with the right  of  Administrative
    review  which  was  not  exercised.    On  29  June  2016  he  made  an
    application for Tier 1 indefinite leave to remain SETO which  was  then
    varied to an SET leave to remain application.  On 30 November  2016  he
    applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  the  ten  years  long
    residency provisions and that application was refused  on  13  February
    2018.  The second appellant, his wife, who was  born  on  22  September
    1982, entered Britain as his partner on 18 December 2014  with  a  visa
    valid un 1 July 2016 .  She made an application for leave to remain  as
    the spouse of a settled person on that day  which  was  refused  on  14
    March 2018 and she appealed.  The appeals were later consolidated.  The
    appellants have two children, SHA who was born on 2 July  2015  and  HH
    was born on 16 August 2017.

3.   The first appellant's application was refused under the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276B(ii)(c) and paragraph 276B(iii)  with  reference  to  the
    general grounds for refusal as set out in paragraph 322(5).  The  basis
    of refusal was that the appellant had given different figures  for  his
    earnings  to  the  respondent  and  to  the  Inland  Revenue   in   his
    applications made in 2011 and 2013.  The respondent considered that the
    appellant had  boosted  his  earnings  to  assist  in  his  immigration
    application and had reduced his tax liability by  declaring  a  smaller
    income on his tax returns.  The respondent stated that was a deliberate
    deception  because,   if  he  had  stated  that  his  earnings  in  his
    application to the respondent were those set out in his tax return   he
    would not have had sufficient points to qualify for leave to remain  in
    2011 and 2013,  but if those figures had been correct, the tax which he
    had paid would have been much greater.  The grounds  of  appeal  stated
    that the appellant had set out the correct figures  to  the  respondent
    but had under declared his tax which was the fault of his  accountants.



4.   The judge, having set out  the  relevant  figures  (which  were  agreed
    between the parties) assessed the evidence of the  first  appellant  at
    very considerable length  and  found  that  the  appellant  "to  be  an
    unimpressive witness who was simply not telling the truth". She stated:



         "I am satisfied  the  respondent  has  proven  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities that the first appellant was involved in  an  attempt
         to deceive to agencies of HM government to suit his own purposes at
         the  given  time.  I  am  satisfied  that  this  was  a  deliberate
         deception."

5.      The grounds of  appeal  asserted  that  the  judge  had  applied  an
    incorrect burden and standard of proof and that the application  should
    not  have  been  refused  under  paragraph  322(5).   While  the  first
    appellant accepted that he had submitted  inaccurate  figures  for  his
    income, he claimed not to know anything  of  the  error  and  HMRC  had
    stated that they  did  not  consider  the  appellant  to  engage  in  a
    deliberate attempt to defraud.  Moreover, it was argued that the  judge
    had not considered the children's best interests  or  the  difficulties
    the eldest child would face as an autistic child in  Pakistan  and  had
    failed to give that factor sufficient  weight  in  the  proportionality
    exercise.

6.   The appeal was then  heard  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chana and dismissed.

7.   On an application being made to the Court  of  Appeal,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gleeson on 24 May 2019 reviewed Judge Chana's  decision  pursuant
    to paragraphs 45 and 46 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 as amended and stated:-

         "When deciding this appeal Judge Chana did not have the benefit  of
         the Court of Appeal's decision in Balajigari v Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 673".

    Judge Gleeson stated that she was satisfied that the  application  fell
    within  the  parameters  of  paragraph  45(1)(b)  as  since  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision, as a Court had made a decision which  was  binding
    on the  Upper  Tribunal  which  had  it  been  made  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision could have had a material effect on  the  decision.
    She therefore set aside the decision of Judge Chana.

8.    The appeal therefore came before me as an appeal against the  decision
    of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Gumsley  and  clearly,  I  must
    consider her decision in the light of the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal  in  Balajigari.  I  note,  of  course  that  the  judgement  in
    Balajigari and in the other three combined  cases  relates  to  appeals
    against judicial review decisions and is in large part guidance to  the
    Secretary of State in how to deal with cases such  as  the  present  in
    which different figures have been given for income in an application to
    the respondent and in  tax returns to  HMRC.   In  that  judgment  Lord
    Justice Underhill stated that:-

         "A discrepancy between the earnings declared to HM RC  and  to  the
         respondent may justifiably give rise to a suspicion that it is  the
         result of dishonesty but it does not by itself justify a conclusion
         to that effect. What it does is to call for an explanation.  If  an
         explanation once sought is not forthcoming, or is unconvincing,  it
         may be at that point to be legitimate for the Secretary of State to
         infer dishonesty but even in that case the  position  is  not  that
         there is a legal burden on the applicant  to  disprove  dishonesty.
         The  Secretary  of  State  must  simply  decide,  considering   the
         discrepancy in the light of the explanation (or lack of it) whether
         he is satisfied that  the  applicant  has  been  dishonest  ...  we
         consider (as Martin Spencer J did (in his decision in Shabaz Khan))
         that the concept of standard of proof is not inappropriate  in  the
         present context. This is because what  is  being  asserted  by  the
         Secretary of State is that an applicant for ILR has been dishonest.
         That is a serious allegation carrying with it serious consequences.
         Accordingly, we agree with Martin Spencer J that the  Secretary  of
         State must be satisfied that dishonesty has occurred, the  standard
         proof being the balance of probabilities, but bearing in  mind  the
         serious nature of the allegation  the  serious  consequences  which
         follow from such a finding dishonesty".

9.     Lord  Justice  Underhill  emphasised  the  importance  of  procedural
    fairness in that the applicant must be given the opportunity to  answer
    the  allegation  of  dishonesty  and  that  paragraph  322(5)  of   the
    Immigration Rules involved a  two-stage  analysis,  firstly  to  decide
    whether that paragraph applied at all, the issue of  being  whether  or
    not it was undesirable to grant leave in the  light  of  the  specified
    matters and secondly,  since  such  undesirability  was  a  presumptive
    rather than mandatory ground of refusal, to  decide,  as  a  matter  of
    discretion, whether leave should be refused on the  basis  of  it.   He
    added that defects in the decision of the Secretary of State  need  not
    necessarily lead to a paragraph 322(5) refusal  being  quashed  if  the
    Upper Tribunal was satisfied that they were not material.  He  referred
    to the judgement of Martin Spencer J in Shahbaz Khan that the  starting
    point where the Secretary of State discovers a  significant  difference
    between the income claimed in previous application for leave to  remain
    and that declared to HM  RC,  was  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to draw an inference that the applicant had been deceitful  or
    dishonest and therefore he should  be  refused  ILR   within  paragraph
    322(5) of the immigration rules.  Moreover, if private and family  life
    was being exercised in Britain it would be for the Secretary  of  State
    to justify the refusal of indefinite leave to remain.  If the  earnings
    discrepancy relied on is in fact the result of  dishonesty  that  would
    normally be sufficient justification for the decision.

10.  That is the approach which I must take when  determining  this  appeal.
    While the principal focus of the submissions before me as  set  out  by
    both representatives and particularly by  Mr  Hodgetts  in  a  detailed
    skeleton argument, which effectively supersedes the original grounds of
    appeal, is the determination of the First-tier Judge, I start by noting
    the terms of the  refusal.   Clearly  the  relevant  decision  is  that
    relating to the first  appellant  as  his  wife's  status  is  entirely
    dependent on his although her situation and that of the children are of
    particular importance when I consider the issue of the  rights  of  the
    appellants under Article 8 of the ECHR.

11.   The  file  contains  very   considerable   correspondence   from   the
    appellant's solicitors to the respondent starting in  June  2016.  They
    state that, prior to making the  application  for  ILR,  the  appellant
    had checked his tax returns with HMRC  and  enclose  letters  from  his
    accountants about the claimed error in his returns. In  a  letter  from
    the appellant's solicitors  dated  28  November  2016  the  appellant's
    solicitors set out the appellant's immigration history and stated  that
    he had purchased a Dixy Chicken franchise for ten  years  in  2015  the
    value of the franchise being �110,000.  It was stated that the business
    was growing month on month.  It  was  stated  that  the  appellant  was
    hoping "to bring jobs and prospected (sic) with his hard work".   In  a
    paragraph headed previous application and character it was stated:-

         "Previous Application and Character


         The Home Office refused our client's previous Indefinite  Leave  to
         Remain application because there was an error in his taxes.  In his
         last  application  for  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain,  our  client
         explained that he called HMRC prior to  submitting  his  Indefinite
         Leave to Remain application to the Home Office, he was advised that
         there were no outstanding taxes.   Our  client  requested  all  his
         SA302s for last 5 years, as he was  hoping  that  he  would  review
         these prior to his appointment, however he only received the SA302s
         after the Home Office made their decision, so he was unaware of the
         errors in his tax records until after the decision.


         Our client's  previous  application  was  refused  under  paragraph
         322(5) of the immigration rules.  It was alleged  that  our  client
         was deceitful or dishonest in his dealings with HMRC and  the  Home
         Office.  Our client strongly denied the allegations  and  maintains
         he has not been dishonest.  As our client was unaware of the  error
         in his taxes returns, he did not have the knowledge hence he  could
         not have acted deceitfully.


         To address the Home Office's concerns, our client provided a letter
         from FSF Accountants dated 20th June 2016, which confirms  that  he
         notified his accountants of his self-employment income and they had
         filed his returns wrongly resulting in the  information  not  being
         provided to HMRC.  This letter makes  clear  that  our  client  was
         unaware of the mistake and he did not intend to provide  inaccurate
         information.  Our client has stopped using  the  services  of  FSF,
         because of the errors that they made.  Our client  has  asked  that
         these matters are investigated by  FSF,  so  the  reasons  for  the
         errors  can  be  understood  given  the  impact  on  our   client's
         immigration application.  Our client has provided the  Home  office
         with amended tax returns (*see attached for ease), which  correctly
         reflect his income.   Our  client  is  making  a  formal  complaint
         against FSF Accountants for the mistakes.  Our client has corrected
         the errors with HMRC.  Our client submits  that  this  demonstrates
         that he had not made any false declarations or been  dishonest,  as
         these were errors which he was unaware of.






         Correcting the Error/Remedy


         On realising the errors, our client contacted  HMRC  and  rectified
         the errors.  It is important to note that the updated HMRC  records
         show out client's income is as claimed by him, so  consistent  with
         his declarations to the Home Office.  Our client has  attempted  to
         act prudently, on becoming aware of the errors, he  contacted  HMRC
         and he corrected the errors.


         Our client also forwarded to the Home Office further evidence  from
         the HMRC which included:


             1.   HMRC letter dated 04/07/2016


                  a.   These documents showed our client's  previous  years'
                      returns have been amended as per his  declaration  to
                      UKVI.  His accountant's mistakes have been  corrected
                      so his tax liability is now correct.


             2.   HMRC Letter dated 18.07.2016


                  a.   This showed that our client's tax affairs  have  been
                      corrected, so that all taxes due have been accurately
                      calculated  based  on  his  actual  income  that  was
                      declared to HMRC.


             3.   HMRC letter dated 21/07/2016 enclosing SA302 for 2015-16


                  a.   These showed that our  client  had  filed  his  taxes
                      correctly for the above period.


             4.    Self-Assessment  -  Tax  Calculation  and  SA302   dated
                  20.07.2016


         The above evidence, our client submits, shows that he has  resolved
         the issues previously raised by the Home Office.


         The additional evidence and explanations  provided  by  our  client
         shows that our client has not acted dishonestly, so  there  are  no
         grounds for the refusal under 322 (1A).  it is submitted  that  the
         allegation cannot therefore be held against  the  client's  current
         application for ILR.


         It is important to note  that  our  client's  Accountants  accepted
         their error resulted in the wrong information being provided to the
         HMRC."

12.  It was argued moreover that the appellant had developed a  private  and
    family life in the ten years he had studied and worked in  Britain  and
    had started a family here.

13.  The respondent requested further documents and on 14  June  2017  these
    were sent to the respondent.  These included a completed questionnaire,
    letters  from  the  appellant's  accountant,   tax   calculations   for
    2015/2016,  P60  certificates  for  the  years  2011  to  2017,  a  tax
    calculation and amended assessment from  HMRC  as  well  as  a  patient
    summary for SHA and "tax year overviews" form HMRC.  With regard to the
    questionnaire it was emphasised that the  appellant  had  set  out  the
    steps he had taken on discovery of the error with  regard  to  his  tax
    returns and reference was made  to  the  letter  from  the  appellant's
    accountant.  It was emphasised that the appellant had been  unaware  of
    the error in his tax returns until  he  requested  copies  on  his  tax
    returns from HMR. It was stated that HMRC had accepted  his  correction
    of the errors made and it was submitted that the  appellant  would  not
    have jeopardised his position by  submitting  any  incorrect  or  false
    information to the Home Office or any other government department.   It
    was submitted that the appellant had not made false representations  to
    the Home Office as he was unaware of the errors which had been made.

14.  A further letter dated 30 August 2017 again dealt at some  length  with
    the issue of the tax discrepancies asserting that there had not been  a
    discrepancy between what had been reported to the Home Office and  what
    had been stated to HMRC.  It stated that the appellant had not  checked
    the contents of the final tax returns.  The letter also stated that the
    appellant's son, SHA, who was aged 2 years 2 months was anaemic and did
    not store iron in his red blood cells he was showing development issues
    including speech therapy.

15.  The letter of refusal is detailed.  It first sets out  the  appellant's
    immigration history before setting out the documents submitted and then
    referred to the general grounds for refusal setting out  the  terms  of
    paragraph 322(5).  Lengthy reasons  were  then  given  as  to  why  the
    Secretary  of  State  considered  that  those  provisions  did   apply.
    Reference was made to the revised tax calculation for 2010/2011 dated 1
    June 2017 and it was pointed out that the appellant would not have been
    awarded points for earnings under �25,000 under the Tier  1  Rules  and
    would  therefore  not  have  received  leave  on  his  Tier  1  general
    application.  Similar comments were made with regard to the application
    made on 15 June 2013.  The Secretary of State concluded that the  delay
    of several years of directing declarations to HMRC indicated  that  the
    appellant had little intention of correcting the returns  promptly  and
    had therefore showed little respect for UK tax laws.

16.  The Secretary of State of State noted a  letter  from  FSF  Accountants
    Ltd dated 20 June 2016 which stated that the self-employment income was
    "misreported due to a clerical error at the time of  submitting  a  tax
    return".  The Secretary of State did not  consider  that  there  was  a
    credible explanation that a registered accountant would submit his self-
    assessment tax return declaring earnings which were considerably  lower
    than their client's actual earnings.  It was pointed out  that  it  was
    the appellant's responsibility  to  ensure  that  his  tax  return  was
    submitted to HMRC on time and with the  correct  information.   It  was
    again pointed out that he had a business management and  administrative
    degree from New College, Durham and it was  therefore  not  a  credible
    explanation that he would not have noticed the considerable discrepancy
    between the  sums  declared  to  HMRC  and  on  his  Tier  1  (General)
    application and the tax implications that would have.  The Secretary of
    State therefore considered it was undesirable that the appellant should
    remain in Britain in the light of his character and conduct.

17.  It was acknowledged that paragraph 322(5) was not a  mandatory  refusal
    and stated that it was not satisfactorily demonstrated that  the  error
    was genuine.  It was stated that there  was  a  clear  benefit  to  the
    appellant either by failing to declare his full earnings to  HMRC  with
    respect to reducing his tax liability or by  falsely  representing  his
    earnings to UK Visa and Immigration.

18.  The letter of refusal then referred to the terms of paragraph 276B  and
    stated that for the reasons given that the appellant  fell  within  the
    general grounds for refusal.

19.  The Secretary of State then considered the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    appellant and his family and in particular  focused  on  the  issue  of
    exceptional circumstances as regards to the children.  It  was  pointed
    out that the appellant's son was aged 2 and his daughter was aged  only
    1 month and it was considered that the family could return to  Pakistan
    together.  The Secretary of State also considered  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had purchased a Dixy Chicken franchise and  stated  that  was
    his personal choice  and  that  he  had  done  so  prior  to  obtaining
    indefinite leave to remain. It was stated that was not  an  exceptional
    reason to prevent the refusal of the application.

20.  It will be seen from this summary of the letter  of  refusal  that,  by
    the time the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  application,  he  had
    received  and  had  been  able  to  consider  that   very   substantial
    documentary evidence which had been put forward.  This was not  a  case
    where the Secretary of State had made a decision without the  appellant
    been given the opportunity to explain how the discrepancies had  arisen
    and  furthermore  the  Secretary  of  State  properly  considered   the
    explanations put forward and gave clear reasons for  finding  that  the
    appellant's explanation of the discrepancies between the sums submitted
    to the Home Office and those submitted to the Inland Revenue  were  not
    genuine mistakes. Moreover, the Secretary of State had  considered  the
    article 8 rights of the appellant and  his  family  and  therefore  had
    considered the discretionary aspect of the decision. I would add  that,
    unlike a decisions made against which there is no right of  appeal  and
    the remedy is a judicial review application, this was a case where  the
    applicant had a full right of appeal. The fact that he did have a right
    of appeal is a clear indication  that  the  procedures  used  were  not
    unfair.

21.  The  determination  of  Judge  Gumsley  clearly  states  that  she  was
    satisfied that the respondent had discharge the burden of proof and  it
    is clear  from  the   determination  that  she  placed  weight  on  the
    seriousness of the allegation She pointed out that  she  placed  weight
    on the fact that  the  first  appellant  is  a  man  with  no  criminal
    convictions and that that was relevant when considering what  would  be
    "essentially" a criminal offence in attempting to  defraud  HMRC.   She
    stated that she took that into  account.  She  sets  out  the  relevant
    figures and the applicable paragraphs of the Immigration Rules and then
    in  paragraphs  20  onwards  assesses  the  evidence.   She  noted  the
    submissions made and the fact that the appellant blamed his accountants
    and that the letters provided headed FSF Accountants,  from  which  she
    quoted at some length,  and referred to  the  further  evidence  placed
    before her at the hearing which showed that at  the  date  of  the  two
    discrepancies FSF Accountants were not even in existence  as  they  had
    only been incorporated on 24 June 2013 and therefore, on  the  evidence
    before her, the error in the tax returns  could not have been  made  by
    FSF Accountants.  She adjourned the appeal so that the appellant  could
    produce further evidence to clarify the  role  of  the  accountants  in
    submitting the returns.

22.    The  appellant  then  submitted  a  statement  which  said  that  the
    accountant, Waqar Ahmed, he had used had worked as a consultant  for  a
    firm of accountants called Proacc and had subsequently worked  for  FSF
    but he had not actually been employed by Proacc or FSF.  The  appellant
    said that Waqar Ahmed   had disappeared and was no longer  working  for
    FSF and indeed FSF had  ceased  trading.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    address of FSF was the same as that of Proacc and that Proacc had  been
    registered as the appellant's agents with HMRC  only  on  8  June  2016
    after the first refusal decision.  The judge dealt at very considerable
    length with the evidence relating to  the  existence  or  otherwise  of
    Proacc or FSF.

 23. The appellant had then produced a letter from Proacc as  an  attachment
    to an email where they had taken responsibility for the  mistake.   The
    letter was attached to an email purportedly dating from 2016 from a man
    called Abdul Basit but was unsigned and the  judge  said  that  it  was
    "somewhat disconcertingly" in exactly the same language and  detail  as
    that provided in the letter from FSF.  The appellant was asked why,  if
    Proacc were responsible  as  a  firm,  no-one  from  that  company  had
    provided a proper statement and attended the hearing despite  the  main
    person being Abdul Basit. The judge went on to state:


         "I find it incredible that, given the trouble the  first  appellant
         considers he is  presently  in,  as  a  result  of  someone  else's
         mistakes, and a specific request made for an adjournment to  obtain
         evidence, he has made no effort to try to get someone from the firm
         responsible to attend, or even provide a statement,  especially  as
         Waqar Ahmed had apparently disappeared".


24.  She also stated that she found it incredible  that  the  appellant  had
    made no form of complaint about any of the accountants and that it  was
    strange that the mistake "claimed had been made for three years running
    by the same trainee which indicated a concerning lack of  supervision".
    The judge noted that the mistake claimed by the appellant had only been
    reported after his first application had been  refused.   Having  noted
    further submissions from the appellant the judge stated that she  found
    him to be evasive  in  his  evidence  and  appeared  "to  be  extremely
    confused as to what his latest account of matters was or should be".

25.  The appellant had said that he left all tax matters to Waqar Ahmed  who
    had said he would alert the appellant of tax payments when needed.  The
    judge pointed to the fact that the appellant  has  a  qualification  in
    business management and noted that when asked they had  not  questioned
    that he was paying no tax on a self-employed income in spite of  having
    an account showing healthy profits.

 26. The judge also noted that the second appellant has an MBA and an MS  in
    Management Science.  The judge went on to note concerns  regarding  the
    number of accountants employed by the appellant and took  into  account
    the fact that HMRC appeared to have  accepted  the  explanation  given.
    She stated that she considered that  the  appellant  has  not  given  a
    truthful account of his affairs.

27.  The judge then went  on  to  consider  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights and  those  of  his  children.   She  noted  that  the
    appellant had lived in Britain for about twelve years and had  built  a
    business and invested financially in doing  so.   The  judge  found  in
    relation to paragraph 276ADE the respondent was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the first appellant failed the suitability requirement  and  would
    not face very significant obstacles  in  returning  to  Pakistan.   She
    found that the appellant's conduct,  character  and  associations  were
    such that he clearly failed the relevant suitability requirements.

28.  She considered the issue of the children noting  their  young  age  and
    noted a report from an educational psychologist which made a  reference
    to the appellant's son being on the autistic  spectrum  and  presenting
    with complex social and communication  needs  and  that  he  had  extra
    support at nursery.

29.  The judge having considered evidence of the  treatment  of  those  with
    disabilities in Pakistan stated there was evidence that the  state  did
    provide healthcare facilities for those with disabilities.   The  judge
    stated that:-


         "Whilst I do not seek to minimise the concerns  these  matters  may
         cause their parents these are not life threatening or  particularly
         unusual conditions.  When I asked for clarification it was conceded
         on behalf of the appellants that there was  no  evidence  presented
         that treatment for these conditions was not available in  Pakistan.
         Whilst perhaps not of the standard of the United Kingdom all areas,
         the objective evidence shows that Pakistan has a functioning public
         and private healthcare system.  In addition H clearly has concerned
         and committed parents who are aware of the possible issues that may
         arise and are likely, with their education, to be able to seek  and
         access appropriate care and support for him."

      The  judge  went  on  to  state  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration system was clearly in the public interest and  referred  to
    deliberate deception and dishonesty which was likely to bring the whole
    system into disrepute.  It was her finding that the first appellant had
    chosen to deceive the system and she placed weight on that  and  having
    considered  all  relevant  matters  concluded  that  it  would  not  be
    disproportionate for the appellants  to  be  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

30.   In  his  skeleton  argument  Mr  Hodgetts  referred  to  the  test  in
    Balajigari stating that the judge had  erred  by  not  considering  the
    discretionary powers which included the impact on  an  innocent  family
    and the welfare of the children.  He argued that the judge should  have
    considered that this was an  unusual  case  in  that  no  self-employed
    income had been declared to HMRC.   The  error  had  been  that  of  an
    apprentice used by the firm of accountants and that did not necessarily
    show the intentional dishonest plan of the appellant.   The  fact  that
    there was a large discrepancy was not of itself sufficient to establish
    an inference of dishonesty and he argued that there was no legal burden
    of proof on the appellant to disapprove dishonesty.  He stated that the
    judge had erred by holding the large discrepancy  in  tax  per  se  was
    sufficient to shift the burden of proof onto the appellant and that the
    judge should have considered  the  appellant's  character  given  other
    evidence  provided  including  a  letter  from  his  employer,   Tesco.
    Moreover, he stated that the judge had not properly analysed the letter
    from HMRC or taken that letter into account.  It appeared that HMRC had
    accepted evidence from the appellant's own accountant with  the  errors
    recorded by their own apprentice.

31.  He argued that it was irrational and was prima  facie  inconsistent  to
    conclude that the appellant had dishonestly attempted to  deceive  both
    HMRC and the respondent.

32.  The third ground set out in  the  grounds  of  appeal  related  to  the
    appellant's eldest child, SH, who was autistic.  It was argued that the
    judge's treatment of his autism was incorrect in that  she  had  stated
    that his difficulties were "not particularly  unusual".   Moreover,  it
    was stated that the  judge  had  erred  in  her  consideration  of  the
    discretionary factors in this case.

33.  He argued that there was no concluded lawful  assessment  of  paragraph
    322(5) bearing in mind the Home Office had made a concession in respect
    of paragraph 276ADE.  It was stated that the judge had erred by  making
    no consideration of undesirability even if dishonesty was  established.
    He stated the judge had not engaged with the specifics  of  the  letter
    from the HMRC particularly given that there was evidence to corroborate
    the appellant's claim.  He stated that it was irrational for the  judge
    to not to make a finding whether the  tax  return  or  the  information
    before  the  Home  Office  was  wrong  and  referred  to  a   "forensic
    accountant's report" of July 2018.  Moreover, he stated that  the  Home
    Office had not taken issue with the documents provided and said that it
    was irrational to consider that the documents provided was  fraudulent.
    Moreover, he referred to the best interests of  the  child  and  argued
    that the judge should not have considered that  the  appellant's  son's
    condition was run of the mill.  He asserted that there had not  been  a
    sufficiently detailed fact-finding exercise  regarding  the  particular
    circumstances of the child: he  referring  to  further  evidence  of  a
    diagnosis of autism.  These were factors, he  said,  which  would  play
    into the discretionary judgment which was required under Balajigari.

34.  Ms Jones referred to paragraph 42  of  Balajigari  which  set  out  the
    issues which the Home Office  should  consider.   She  pointed  to  the
    statement which said:-

         "If  an  explanation  one  sought  is  not  forthcoming   and   was
         unconvincing it may at that point be legitimate for  the  Secretary
         of State to infer dishonesty but even in that case the position  is
         not that there is a legal  burden  on  the  applicant  to  disprove
         dishonesty.  The Secretary of State must simply decide  considering
         the discrepancy in light of the explanation or lack of  it  whether
         he is satisfied that the applicant has been dishonest."

35.  She argued that there was no material error  in  the  determination  of
    the judge who very properly adjourned  the  appeal  to  obtain  further
    evidence from the appellant's accountants.  Moreover, she  stated  that
    there was little evidence regarding the appellant's son's condition and
    that the further evidence now being submitted was not before the  judge
    and therefore was not relevant to the issue of whether or not an  error
    of law had been made.  In any event she pointed to the  fact  that  the
    Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  had  also  referred  to  Section  55  and
    considered  the  issue  of  whether  or  not  there  were   exceptional
    circumstances.   She  stated  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion which she had.

Discussion

36.  Much was made in the grounds of appeal about the issue of the  standard
    and burden of proof, referring to  the  judgment  in  Balajigari.   The
    reality, of course,  is that,  as  I  have  pointed  out  above,   that
    judgement relates to judicial review cases and the procedures which the
    Secretary of State should take when deciding whether or not  to  refuse
    an application under the provisions of paragraph 322(5) and thereafter,
    when considering judicial review applications against  such  decisions,
    the framework which the  Upper  Tribunal  should  apply.  This  is,  of
    course,  a statutory appeal where the judge must  consider  whether  or
    not the respondent was entitled to make the decision and was correct to
    do so and in determining the appeal, the judge must  consider  all  the
    evidence including, of course, the explanations given by the  appellant
    and then decide whether or not there was deception and then whether  or
    not it is appropriate that  the  discretionary  power  to  invoke  that
    provision was used correctly.

 37.  As was stated  by  Underhill  SJ  in  paragraph  42  the  judgment  in
    Balajigari  an  explanation  once  sought  is  not  forthcoming  or  is
    unconvincing it may be legitimate for the Secretary of State  to  infer
    dishonesty. That is what the respondent did in this case and it was for
    the judge to consider the explanations put forward and  decide  whether
    or not the respondent was  entitled  to  do  so,  but  making  her  own
    decision, having heard the evidence, whether or not the  appellant  had
    acted dishonestly. The judge clearly states that she considers that the
    respondent had discharge the burden of proof upon him and did so in the
    context that she accepted the  seriousness  of  the  allegation  as  is
    evident from the fact that she took into account  that  there  were  no
    criminal charges against the appellant.

38.   It is the duty of the Secretary of  State  to  properly  consider  the
    evidence submitted and indeed that includes asking for further evidence
    before reaching a conclusion.  Clearly this is what  the  Secretary  of
    State did and the Secretary of State was therefore entitled to reach  a
    conclusion that the appellant had been dishonest and following  through
    from that decision, to conclude that the appellant's application should
    be refused.

39.    In deciding the appeal against that decision  Judge  Gumsley  clearly
    considered the documents and indeed very fairly adjourned the appeal so
    the appellant could provide further evidence from his accountants.  The
    judge did consider the evidence  in  very  considerable  detail  and  I
    consider that she was entitled to find that  the  appellant  had  acted
    dishonestly.  She gave clear reasons for her decision.   She set out  a
    detailed analysis of the accountants' letters and indeed  the  ways  in
    which the appellant's evidence changed with regard to his  instructions
    of the various firms and then the instruction of Mr Waqar  Ahmed,   who
    had now disappeared, and she  was  entitled  to  comment  that  it  was
    relevant, on such a  serious  matter,  that  there  was  a  paucity  of
    evidence from the accountants now instructed by the appellant.  She  is
    quite correct to conclude that the evidence being put  forward  by  the
    appellant was not credible.  Much  was  made  by  Mr  Hodgetts  of  the
    forensic report prepared by Baldwins Accountants dated  16  July  2018.
    The reality however is that it is vague in particular where it states:-



         "Self-employed income arising on three separate  periods  of  trade
         have been verified to the books of prime  entry  and  on  a  sample
         basis the build-up of income cross checks to the  bank  statements.
         The assessible profit is consistent with the  amounts  retained  by
         HMRC."

     It is difficult to understand what is actually  stated  there  -  there
    was nothing before the judge to show  the  separate  periods  of  trade
    which had been verified to the books or what was meant by "the build-up
    of income cross  checked  to  bank  statements".   Judge  Gumsley  was,
    moreover, entitled to place weight on the fact that the writer  of  the
    letter from Baldwins did not give evidence.  Mr Hodgetts did  not  take
    me to the relevant bank statements which had been assessed by Baldwins.
      An  independent  forensic  report  should  surely  have  included   a
    documentary evidence to back  up  the  assertions  made.   The  reality
    moreover is that the judge did not only properly consider  all  aspects
    of the evidence before her but that she was entitled to assess the  way
    in which the appellant gave evidence and to find  that  it  was  highly
    unsatisfactory.  She was entitled to point  out  that  the  appellant's
    qualifications, indeed those of his wife, were such that his  assertion
    that he had not questioned the returns  made  was  not  credible.   Her
    conclusion that the appellant had not been honest was  undoubtedly  one
    she was entitled to reach.  Having done so the judge  did,  within  the
    context of the Article 8 claim,  consider  the  relevant  discretionary
    elements - in effect following  the  third  test  in  Balajigari.   The
    reality is that because of the dishonesty  the  appellant  achieved  an
    advantage which  enabled  him  to  not  only  remain  in  Britain  with
    extensions of stay to which he  was  not  entitled,  but  also  if  not
    picked up would have enabled him to  be  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain - again status to which he was not  entitled.    The  judge  was
    entirely correct to state that  if  there  is  to  be  any  immigration
    control then those who  act  dishonestly  should  not  be  entitled  to
    benefit from their dishonesty thereby obtaining an advantage  which  is
    not only one to which they are not entitled but also  one  which  those
    from overseas who act honestly and do not meet the requirements of  the
    Rules do not receive.

40.    Moreover,  the  judge  did  properly  consider  the  issue   of   the
    appellant's son.   On  the  evidence  before  her,  her  comments  were
    entirely ones which she is entitled to make.  It is not the  case  that
    she dismissed the distressing condition which the appellant's son  has,
    but she was entitled  to  consider  that  within  the  context  of  the
    treatment which would be available in Pakistan and,  indeed,  there was
    nothing to show that there would be no treatment available to him,  and
    also to place weight on the fact that the family would be returning  as
    a unit. Again she was entitled to place weight on the young age of  the
    children, and indeed on the fact that the  second  appellant  has  only
    lived in Britain for a short period of time as she arrived in 2014.   I
    consider that the conclusions of the judge were fully open to  her  and
    indeed that they were reached having considered all relevant facts. The
    fact that the judge stated that SHA's situation  was  not  particularly
    unusual is not a material issue as she quite  properly  considered  all
    relevant factors regarding his health and the care he would receive  in
    Pakistani from his parents.

 41.  I would add that the judgement in  Balajigari  does not say  that  the
    respondent is not entitled to use the provisions  of  paragraph  322(5)
    where there  has  been  dishonesty  and  there  has  been  no  criminal
    proceedings and I further consider that the fact that the argument that
    the respondent stated that he  found that the provisions  of  paragraph
    322(5) applied but  accepted that the appellant  met  the   suitability
    requirements   of  paragraph  276  is  not  correct  ;  the  respondent
    specifically  found that paragraph  276B (111)  applied.  I  would  add
    that there is nothing illogical to consider that  the  appellant  could
    have made dishonest representations to both the Home Office  and  HMRC.
    I would ad and, moreover,  the fact  that  HMRC  accepted  the  amended
    returns and did not prosecute the appellant does not indicate that  the
    HMRC accepted that the appellant had not intended to be  dishonest,  it
    merely means that they considered that their resources  in  prosecuting
    the appellant could be better used in other work - as is clearly stated
     in paragraph  73  of   Balajigari.

42.  For the above reasons I find that there is no material error of law  in
    the determination of  the  First-tier  Judge  and  therefore  that  her
    decision should stand.  If  it  is  the  case  that  there  is  further
    evidence regarding the prognosis of the appellant's son that is clearly
    a matter for any further application.

Signed:[pic]                            Date: 27 July 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed:  [pic]                          Date: 27 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
