
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05417/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 March 2019                     |On 05 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               mrs Surjit Kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Murphy, Counsel, instructed by Eagles
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                         REMAKE DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the remaking of the decision in the Appellant's appeal  against
    the Respondent's refusal  of  her  human  rights  claim  (made  via  an
    application for entry clearance).

 2. The Appellant, a national of India, made the claim on 20 December 2016,
    asserting that due to various medical conditions she required  personal
    care with everyday tasks, and that  such  care  was  not  available  in
    India.   Her  claim  was  sponsored  by  two  of  her  children   ("the
    Sponsors"), both British citizens and resident in this country.

 3. The  Appellant's  appeal  was  originally  dismissed  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in a  decision  promulgated  on  28  August  2018.   The
    decision was challenged and at a hearing on 23 January 2019 I concluded
    that the judge had materially erred in law.  As  a  consequence  I  set
    this decision aside and adjourned the case for a  resumed  hearing.   A
    copy of my error of law decision, which was promulgated on  8  February
    2019, is annexed to this remaking decision.

 4. In summary, I concluded that the judge had failed to  provide  adequate
    reasons in respect of his conclusion that  appropriate  care  would  be
    available to the Appellant in India.




The core issues in the appeal

 5. The judge had accepted that the Appellant did require  "personal  care"
    in order to perform everyday tasks and thus E-ECDR.2.4 of  Appendix  FM
    to the Immigration Rules ("the  Rules")  was  satisfied.   I  expressly
    preserved that finding and it is no longer a live issue (see [13] of my
    error of law decision).   Insofar  as  the  Rules  are  concerned,  the
    remaining core issue  relates  to  E-ECDR.2.5  of  Appendix  FM,  which
    provides as follows:

         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant  and  their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help  of  the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country  where
         they are living, because-

         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
         can reasonably provide it; or

         (b)  it is not affordable.

 6. In the context of this  case,  it  has  not  been  suggested  that  the
    Appellant could succeed under Article 8 if she were not  able  to  meet
    the provisions of the relevant Rules.




The evidence before me

 7. In remaking the decision in this appeal I have taken  full  account  of
    the relevant evidence contained in the Respondent's  bundle  and  three
    bundles provided by the Appellant.  The first of these (A1) was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, and  is  indexed  and  paginated  1-283.   The
    second (A2) was submitted in preparation for the error of  law  hearing
    in January of this year and I have already admitted this  evidence.  A2
    is indexed and paginated 1-40.  The third bundle (A3) was  provided  in
    advance of the resumed hearing and I have also now admitted  this.   It
    is indexed and paginated 1-21. A3 contains an  expert  report  from  Dr
    Rozmin Halari, a Consultant Clinical  Psychologist.  The  Sponsors,  Mr
    [PS] and Ms [MK], both attended  the  resumed  hearing  and  gave  oral
    evidence before me.  A full note of this evidence is  contained  within
    the Record of Proceedings and I do not propose to set it out  here.   I
    will refer to aspects of this evidence, where necessary,  when  setting
    out my findings of fact below.




Submissions of the parties

 8. For the Respondent, Mr Tarlow relied on the Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    refusal notice.  He emphasised the fact that the family had not in fact
    looked for alternative live-in carers  for  the  Appellant  during  the
    course of the last three years, nor had they attempted to try and  find
    any  form  of  residential  care.   Whilst  he  accepted  the  cultural
    preference for the Appellant to be looked after  by  her  children,  Mr
    Tarlow submitted that this was insufficient to meet the high  threshold
    relating to adult dependent relatives under Appendix FM.   He  referred
    me to and relied on the Court of Appeal's  judgment  in  Ribeli  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 611 and emphasised the high threshold  and  the  fact  that  a
    choice made by family members in this country not to go to the  country
    in which the Appellant lives would not normally be enough to succeed in
    a case.  In respect of the expert report from Dr Halari,  contained  in
    A3, Mr Tarlow confirmed that there was no proper basis to challenge its
    contents but he submitted that notwithstanding this, the  evidence  was
    insufficient to meet the relevant threshold.

 9. For the Appellant, Mr Murphy submitted that it would not be  reasonable
    for any members of  the  Appellant's  family  residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom to go and live in India  on  a  permanent  basis  in  order  to
    provide care for her.  Saying this, he relied on what he  described  as
    the important family connections of the  two  Sponsors  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

10. Mr Murphy referred me to a number of paragraphs of  the  expert  report
    and submitted that this evidence, combined with that of  the  Sponsors,
    went to show that the  Appellant  would  become  socially  isolated  if
    unable to be with her family and  her  health  would  deteriorate.   Mr
    Murphy acknowledged that if it were sufficient simply to say  that  the
    Appellant's basic everyday needs were met by  being  in  a  residential
    home, the test under the Rules may not be met.  However,  he  submitted
    that the wider picture needed to be considered.  The evidence suggested
    that the absence of  familial  care  would  result  in  her  having  no
    motivation and possibly not even wishing to get out of bed on a regular
    basis.  Finally, Mr Murphy sought to distinguish the  Appellant's  case
    from the facts in Ribeli.




My findings of fact

11. As mentioned earlier, I have expressly preserved  the  finding  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that the Appellant requires personal care  in
    order to perform everyday tasks.

12. In respect of the evidence now before me as  it  relates  to  the  core
    issue of the nature and location of appropriate care for the Appellant,
    I find it to be reliable, insofar as it goes and subject to  particular
    matters set out below.  I therefore  take  as  my  starting  point  the
    essentially credible evidential-base set out in the  three  Appellant's
    bundles and as presented  to  me  in  the  oral  evidence  of  the  two
    Sponsors.

13. I make the following findings of fact.

14. I accept that the Appellant's state of mental health  has  deteriorated
    since the passing of her husband (the Sponsor's father) in 2015.

15. I find that she continues to live in the home in which she has  resided
    for many years. Following the death of the husband, the  Appellant  had
    received care from individuals who had come into the home  on  a  daily
    basis to assist her. However, one of these carers passed away  in  2016
    and I accept that at least one other had actually, or at least  sought,
    to steal from her.

16. I find that over the last  two  years  or  so  it  has  been  Sponsors,
    together with their sibling, [HS], who have travelled over to India  in
    order to help the Appellant. It does not appear as though one or  other
    of her children has been with the Appellant on a constant basis, but it
    is likely that  there  has  been  someone  there  for  the  significant
    majority of the time.

17. I fully accept that the Appellant's children feel  a  strong  sense  of
    duty towards their mother, both on a familial and cultural basis:  they
    clearly genuinely believe that she would be better cared for by them in
    the United Kingdom than anywhere else.

18. On the Appellant's part, I accept that she holds a strong desire to  be
    with one or more  of  her  children  in  United  Kingdom.  This  is  as
    understandable as the feelings of her children.

19. On the basis of the oral evidence, I find that the  Sponsors  have  not
    considered employing a live-in carer in the last  couple  of  years.  I
    accept they hold a genuine belief that adopting this course  of  action
    would not be in the Appellant's best interests.

20. Again in light of the oral evidence, I find the Sponsors have not  made
    any enquiries into the possibility of the Appellant going to live in  a
    residential care home in India. I accept the reasons given for  this  -
    the strong familial and cultural norms already mentioned  -  have  been
    genuinely expressed.

21. I turn to  the  particular  type  of  personal  care  required  by  the
    Appellant,  her  current  health,  and   the   reasonably   foreseeable
    consequences of remaining in India.

22. I accept Dr Halari's opinion that the Appellant suffers from "moderate"
    levels of depression (paragraph 5.5 of his report).

23. The following paragraphs from Dr Halari's report are also of  relevance
    to my assessment.  At 5.11.3 it is said that being  cared  for  by  her
    children would amount to a significant factor in the improvement of her
    health.  At 5.10.6 and 5.11.5 Dr Halari concludes that the  Appellant's
    mental and physical wellbeing would be likely  to  deteriorate  if  she
    were to be cared for by a live-in carer or in a residential care  home.
    This conclusion is based, at least in part, on what is said in 5.10.4:

         "Ms Kaur is extremely scared of strangers, she does not trust  them
         nor does she trust or feel comfortable with care  homes  in  India.
         She is likely to  experience  significant  anxiety,  confusion  and
         panic  if  she  had  a  live-in  carer  or  if  she  had  strangers
         approaching her in a care home."

    At 5.9.1 and 5.9.2 the expert states that the Appellant would:

         "Not be able to carry out day-to-day tasks if for example  she  was
         in a care home or if she had a live-in carer.  She would not be  in
         any way physically, mentally or cognitive (sic) well enough  to  be
         able to care for herself or to perform everyday tasks."

24. Paragraph 5.10.2 states:

         "If she were in a care home or had a live-in carer  with  her,  has
         significant mental, physical and cognitive difficulties  would  not
         allow her to access help or get the required support from a carer."

25. Finally,  within  paragraph  5.11.5,  Dr  Halari  makes  the  following
    observation:

         "There would be a  significant  risk  to  both  her  emotional  and
         physical well-being if she remains in India and were to reside in a
         care home or with a live-in carer."

26. With due respect to Dr Halari, I am not clear as to some aspects of his
    evidence. For example, it is unclear to me why the Appellant would  not
    be able to undertake day-to-day tasks (assuming that term  is  used  to
    denote aspects of personal care) if she were living  in  a  residential
    care home. By  its  very  nature,  one  of  the  purposes  of  such  an
    institution would be to provide the relevant  assistance  in  order  to
    ensure a proper level of care. Following on from that,  it  is  unclear
    why he believes the Appellant would not be able to access help  or  get
    required  support  if  she  were  in  a  home.  As  with  my   previous
    observation, the help and required support would be on site.

27. I place weight on Dr Halari's view that the Appellant would not want to
    have a live-in carer or be resident in a care home. It is likely, based
    on her overall circumstances, that the Appellant would be  fearful,  at
    least initially, about being cared for by strangers. Dr  Halari's  view
    that her mental health would deteriorate is clearly deserving of weight
    when seen in that context.

28. There are, however, three considerations which have  a  bearing  on  my
    view of Dr Halari's evidence and indeed my overall  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's case. First, the Appellant has  never  of  course  actually
    resided in a care home. Whilst I  am  not  criticising  either  her  or
    sponsors for this, it is a fact.

29.  Second,  and  linked  to  the  first  point,  there   have   been   no
    investigations by either the family or relevant professionals in either
    the United Kingdom or India, about the possibility of residential  care
    homes with either specialities in treating elderly people  with  mental
    health needs, or the availability of specialist mental health treatment
    being provided in  the  home  from  an  outside  source  (for  example,
    psychiatrists or psychologists from clinics/hospitals who might be able
    to go into see a resident).

30. The third matter is the  effect  of  the  first  two.  Whilst  I  fully
    acknowledge that Dr Halari has applied his professional judgment to the
    Appellant's  circumstances,  in  respect  of  the  specific  issue   of
    residence in a care home, his  opinions  are,  to  a  material  extent,
    speculative. His view  cannot  of  course  have  been  based  upon  the
    Appellant's past experiences of having lived in the home  because  this
    has never occurred. Further, he  has  been  unable  to  factor  in  the
    possibility of either a more specialist care home or the  provision  of
    relevant treatment from outside because he has not been  provided  with
    any information on these options and has not undertaken any research of
    his own (I make it clear that no criticism of him is meant by this).

31. Fourth, in the absence of any evidence from the Appellant  side,  I  am
    not prepared to accept that there is no residential care home provision
    in India (or indeed simply within Punjab) which either  specialises  in
    elderly people with mental health problems, or at least provides access
    to mental health treatment from outside sources.  In  my  view,  it  is
    extremely unlikely that a complete absence of such care exists.

32. If it were said that I have engaged in impermissible speculation as  to
    the possibility of the relevant provision for  the  Appellant's  mental
    health needs (as opposed to her physical needs, which, at least on  the
    evidence before me, could clearly  be  adequately  provided  for  in  a
    residential care home), I would  respond  as  follows.  The  burden  of
    showing that the relevant provision of the Rules satisfied  rests  with
    the Appellant. On appeal, an essential, if not the  only,  issue  which
    has been put forward as the basis upon which she can succeed is that of
    mental health. It is not a peripheral  matter.  I  am  fully  entitled,
    indeed I am bound, to address my mind to the core issues in  the  case;
    these include the adequacy of prospective care  for  the  Appellant  in
    India. The points I have set out above simply relate to that issue.

33. In light  of  the  above,  I  find  that  Dr  Halari's  view  that  the
    Appellant's mental health would "significantly deteriorate" if she were
    to be in a residential care home is undermined. To put it another  way,
    I find that, given the existence of appropriate residential  care  home
    provision, it is  unlikely  that  the  Appellant's  mental  health  and
    overall well-being would be as significantly jeopardised  as  described
    by Dr Halari in his report.

34. I turn to the circumstances of the United Kingdom-based family.  It  is
    quite clear that they are a close-knit extended  family  unit.  I  find
    that the first Sponsor, Mr [PS], works in this country and is a devoted
    husband, father and, importantly, grandfather. I  accept  his  evidence
    that his wife plays an active role in the lives of their grandchildren.
    I find that his brother, [HS], is also married and is similarly a  very
    engaged grandparent. As for the  second  Sponsor,  I  accept  that  her
    husband is currently undergoing kidney dialysis on a very regular basis
    and that she quite  obviously  needs  to  be  with  him  at  this  very
    difficult time.

35. Overall, it is clear that family in this country have significant  ties
    here. It is also clear that, taking the extended family unit  together,
    there are significant financial resources available  to  them  and  the
    Appellant, and that neither the first Sponsor nor [HS] are  effectively
    precluded from visiting India on a fairly regular basis  by  reason  of
    particularly important responsibilities in the United Kingdom.

36. I find that if the Appellant were to reside in the United  Kingdom,  it
    is very unlikely that there would be any recourse  to  the  NHS,  as  I
    accept the Sponsor's word that they would fund  any  necessary  medical
    treatment for her.





Conclusions

37. In applying my findings of fact to E-ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM I set  out
    the following self-directions:

          i) the threshold imposed by this provision is avowedly  "rigorous
             and demanding" ([43] of Ribeli);

         ii) the test is an objective one ([67] of Ribeli);

        iii) the focus of the provision is on the ability of the subject to
             receive appropriate care in their home country and  that  that
             care must be connected to the need to perform everyday  tasks.
             To that extent, there is a clear nexus between E-ECDR.2.4  and
             E-ECDR.2.5.

38. I have found that the two Sponsors and their brother quite clearly  and
    understandably wish to have the  Appellant  with  them  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that  they  would  indeed  be  able  to  provide  her  with
    excellent care.  I fully appreciate  the  strength  of  their  cultural
    inclinations as well.  I have found that the  Appellant  herself  would
    much rather be  cared  for  by  members  of  her  own  family  than  by
    strangers.  Again, this is entirely understandable.  However, as I have
    stated previously, the test is an objective one.  In and of themselves,
    preferences will, with respect, carry little weight.

39. I conclude that it would not  be  reasonable  for  either  of  the  two
    Sponsors or [HS] to go and reside in India  on  a  permanent  basis  in
    order to care for the Appellant. In my view,  their  ties  and  overall
    circumstances in this country are such that a permanent move would have
    unjustifiably  significant  consequences   not   only   for   them   as
    individuals, but also other members of their families here.

40. Despite that conclusion, in my judgment  the  Appellant's  appeal  must
    fail. This is because, even discounting the possibility of live-in care
    at home, appropriate personal care for the Appellant (both  in  respect
    of her physical and mental health needs) in  a  residential  care  home
    would be available in India. In so saying, I apply my findings  as  set
    out in [20]-[33] to the objective and demanding test required under the
    Rules.

41. An element of my considerations, albeit not one of central  importance,
    is the fact that family members from the United Kingdom would be  in  a
    position to visit the Appellant on a regular basis,  albeit  that  they
    would not be residing there permanently.

42. I appreciate that my decision will come as a real disappointment to the
    Appellant and her family. I emphasise once again that the test in cases
    such as this is a very stringent one and I bound to apply the law as  I
    find it to be.

43. As mentioned previously, it has not been suggested that  the  Appellant
    could succeed on any other basis if the provisions of the  Rules  could
    not be satisfied.

44. The Respondent's decision to refuse the Appellant's human rights  claim
    does not breach her Article 8 rights  and  is  therefore  not  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law and I have set it aside.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 4 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed        [pic]             Date: 4 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05417/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 January 2019                   |On 05 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               mrs Surjit Kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, Counsel, instructed by Eagles
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Howard (the judge), promulgated on 28  August  2018,  in
    which he dismissed her appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent,
    dated 6 March 2017, refusing to grant entry clearance and thereby  also
    refusing her human rights claim.  That claim had been  based  upon  the
    Adult  Dependent  Relatives  provisions  under  Appendix  FM   to   the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. In essence it was said that the Appellant suffered from several medical
    conditions  and  required  personal  care.   It  was  also  said   that
    appropriate care was not available in India.




The judge's decision

 3. In light of the medical evidence before him the  judge  concluded  that
    the  Appellant  did  in  fact  require  personal  care  and  that   the
    requirements of E-ECDR.2.4 of Appendix FM were met  [19].   However  at
    [20] he goes on to say the following:

         "... however, it is clear from  the  evidence  I  heard  that  such
         appropriate care is available in  India  and  the  family  has  the
         resources to pay for it."

 4. The judge  then  concluded  that  the  requirements  of  E-ECDR.2.5  of
    Appendix FM were not met.

 5. Having gone on to consider Article 8 in its wider  context,  the  judge
    follows the Razgar methodology and takes account of the various factors
    in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
    In doing so he concludes that it was the expectation of the Appellant's
    family in the United Kingdom that relevant medical care for  her  would
    be provided by the NHS.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  are  succinct.   They
    assert that the judge failed to provide any or any adequate reasons  in
    support of his conclusion at [20] that appropriate care  was  available
    in India.  Second, the judge's  conclusion  that  the  family  expected
    medical care in this country to be provided by the NHS was contrary  to
    the evidence.

 7. Permission to appeal was refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  on
    renewal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum in a decision dated 13
    December 2018.




The hearing before me

 8. Mr Murphy relied on the grounds of appeal and his skeleton argument.

 9. Mr Wilding, quite sensibly in my view, accepted that there was  a  lack
    of reasoning in [20] and that the error was very probably material.




Decision on error of law

10. I conclude that there are two material errors of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

11. The first relates to [20].  There are simply no  reasons  provided  for
    the important finding that there was appropriate care for the Appellant
    available in India.  The Appellant's children in the United Kingdom had
    given evidence to say that there was no such  appropriate  care,  given
    the history of the carers previously employed (see [13]) and  the  fact
    that they were having  to  go  over  to  India  themselves  to  provide
    appropriate assistance to the Appellant.   There  was  nothing  in  the
    judge's decision to suggest that the evidence of the family members was
    deemed untruthful.

12. The second error relates to  the  NHS  medical  care.   The  judge  had
    already found that the family members in this country were fairly well-
    off.  In addition, as far as I can see there was no evidence whatsoever
    to indicate that these  family  members  expected  any  future  medical
    treatment to be provided by the NHS.  The judge's conclusion that there
    was such an expectation appears to  be  unsupported  by  an  evidential
    basis.  This was a factor that the judge had taken  into  account  when
    considering Article 8 in its wider context and is therefore in my  view
    material.

13. In light of the above I set the judge's decision aside.  In so doing  I
    expressly preserve the findings  and  conclusions  that  E-ECDR.2.4  of
    Appendix FM had been met.  There was  no  objection  to  this  from  Mr
    Wilding.




Disposal

14. I am going to retain this appeal in the Upper Tribunal and have it  set
    down for a resumed hearing before me in due course.

15. The core issue in the appeal is whether or not E-ECDR.2.5  of  Appendix
    FM has been satisfied, although this is not  necessarily  determinative
    of the Article 8 claim.

16. Two important questions arise: first,  what  is  the  appropriate  care
    needed  to  meet  the  Appellant's  difficulties;   second,   is   such
    appropriate care available in India.  In answering the second question,
    thought will need to be given as to whether residential care  might  be
    possible.

17. In terms of ensuring that all relevant  evidence  is  obtained  at  the
    resumed hearing I will issue directions to the parties, below.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and I set it aside.

I adjourn this  appeal  for  a  resumed  hearing  before  me  in  the  Upper
Tribunal.



Directions to the Parties

      i) the Appellant shall submit any further evidence relied on at  least
         ten working days before the resumed hearing;

     ii) further evidence must include updated statements  from  the  family
         members in the United Kingdom addressing  the  issues  set  out  in
         paragraph 16, above;

    iii) oral evidence at the resumed  hearing  is  permitted  but  only  if
         updated statements have been provided in advance in compliance with
         direction 2;

     iv) an expert report on the Appellant's circumstances may  be  obtained
         but this appeal will not be adjourned again  solely  on  the  basis
         that the provision of such evidence is awaited.



No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]             Date: 8 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

