
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05553/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at Cardiff Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|Under Rule 34                        |                                     |
|On 19 March 2021                     |On 31 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    M N O
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya who was born on 2 December 2003.

 2. On 19 December 2018, she made an application  for  entry  clearance  to
    settle in the UK as the daughter of the sponsor, her father under  para
    297 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 3. On 22 February 2019, the ECO refused the appellant's application  under
    para 297 and also under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Following  a
    hearing, on 2 December 2019 Judge M A Khan  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  In relation to para 297 of the Immigration Rules, he  was  not
    satisfied that the sponsor had "sole responsibility" for the  appellant
    as required under para 297(i)(e).  Further, he was not  satisfied  that
    there were "serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations"
    which made the appellant's exclusion undesirable under para  297(i)(f).
    Finally, he concluded that the appellant's exclusion did not breach Art
    8 of the ECHR.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   In
    particular, the  grounds  contended  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for his  finding  under  para  297  that  it  was  not
    established  that  the  sponsor  had  "sole  responsibility"  for   the
    appellant and that the judge's conclusion was irrational.

 6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but, on 4 August 2020, UTJ Blum granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal  on  all  grounds,  but  in  doing  so  the  judge  specifically
    identified that it was arguable that the judge had materially erred  in
    law and/or failed to give adequate  reasons  in  reaching  his  adverse
    decision on "sole responsibility".

 7. UTJ Blum issued directions concerning the future conduct of the appeal,
    including expressing the provisional view that the error of  law  issue
    could be determined without a hearing.   The  appellant  filed  further
    submissions on 26 August 2020 and the Secretary of  State  submitted  a
    rule 24 response  on  27  September  2020.   Neither  party,  in  their
    submissions, objected to  the  error  of  law  issue  being  determined
    without a hearing.  Further, in her rule 24 response the  Secretary  of
    State conceded that a material error of law was made out on  the  basis
    of the appellant's grounds and she invited the  UT  to  set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination and to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo  hearing.   Further  directions  were
    made by UTJ Finch on 10 September 2020.

 8. On 19 March 2021, the appeal was listed before me in order to determine
    how to proceed with the appeal.  In the light of the issues raised  and
    that  the  respondent  has  conceded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision should be set aside as the judge materially erred in law, I am
    satisfied that it is in the interests of justice to determine the error
    of law issue without a hearing under rule 34 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

 9. In the light of the respondent's concessions set out  in  her  rule  24
    response, with which I agree, I am satisfied that the judge  materially
    erred in law in reaching his adverse findings under  para  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules and, therefore, in reaching his decision  to  dismiss
    the appeal under Art 8  of  the  ECHR.   In  those  circumstances,  the
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

10. Both parties' submissions recognised that there  should  be  a  further
    hearing in order to remake the decision.  It is not suggested that  any
    of the judge's findings should be preserved.  Indeed, the respondent in
    her rule 24 response invited the UT to remit the appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing.

11. In these circumstances, the appropriate disposal of the  appeal,  given
    the nature and extent of fact-finding required, is to remit the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing.

Decision

12. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

13. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo  rehearing
    before a judge other than Judge M A Khan.  None of the judge's findings
    are preserved.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               23 March 2021


