
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/05406/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 30 June 2021                      |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|On 17 June 2021                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Chacko Abraham Thenakarayl
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Kannangara, instructed by Primarc Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Entry Clearance  Officer  (ECO),  for
    convenience I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on  28  January  1953.
    At the time of the First-tier Tribunal he was 67 years of age.

 3. On 6 February 2020, the appellant applied for entry clearance to settle
    in the UK as the Adult Dependent Relative ("ADR") of his  daughter  Mrs
    Blessy Puthanveettil ("the sponsor"), a British citizen  under  Section
    EC-DR of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).   On
    19 March 2020, the ECO refused the appellant's  application  for  entry
    clearance.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 19  January  2021,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Rastogi)
    allowed the appellant's claim under Art 8 of the ECHR.  The  judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant met the requirements of the ADR  rules  in
    Appendix FM and, as a consequence, his exclusion  from  the  UK  was  a
    disproportionate interference with his family life  with  the  sponsor.
    In addition, the judge also found, that  if  he  was  wrong  about  the
    appellant meeting the requirements of the ADR rules,  nevertheless  his
    exclusion was disproportionate as it would lead to unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences and so would be a breach of Art 8 outside the Rules.

 5. The ECO sought permission to appeal.  On 10 February 2021,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge J M Holmes) granted the ECO permission to  appeal.



 6. Following directions issued by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  appeal  was
    listed for an error of law hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice  Centre
    to be heard remotely on 17 June 2021.  I was based at the  Cardiff  CJC
    and Mr Whitwell, who  represented  the  ECO,  and  Mr  Kannangara,  who
    represented the appellant, joined the  hearing  remotely  by  Microsoft
    Teams.

The ADR Rules

 7. The appellant relied upon the ADR rules in Section  EC-DR  of  Appendix
    FM.  The relevant provisions, in issue before the judge, are set out in
    E-ECDR.2.4. and E-ECDR.2.5. as follows:

         "E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and  their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or  disability  require  long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.

         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant  and  their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help  of  the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country  where
         they are living, because -

         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or

         (b)  it is not affordable."

 8. Appendix FM-SE sets out evidential requirements at paras 33-37.  So far
    as relevant to this appeal, paras 34 and 35 provide as follows:

         "34. Evidence that, as a result of age, illness or disability,  the
             applicant requires long-term person care should take the  form
             of:

             (a)   independent  medical  evidence  that   the   applicant's
                  physical  or  mental  condition  means  that  they  cannot
                  perform everyday tasks; and

             (b)  this must be from a doctor or other health professional.

         35.  Independent evidence that the applicant is unable,  even  with
             the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK,  to
             obtain the required level of care in the  country  where  they
             are living should be from:

             (a)  a central or local health authority;

             (b)  a local authority; or

             (c)  a doctor or other health professional."

 9. In  summary,  therefore,  the  ADR  rules  require  the  individual  to
    establish that as a result of their "age, illness or  disability"  they
    require "long-term personal care to perform  everyday  tasks"  and  the
    individual is unable to obtain the required level of care in their  own
    country, even with the practical and financial  help  of  the  sponsor,
    either because it is not available  and  there  is  no  person  in  the
    country who can reasonably provide it or it is not affordable.

10. The central issues must, as a result of paras 34 and 35 of Appendix FM-
    SE, be established by independent evidence  from  a  doctor  or  health
    professional (in the  case  of  the  requirement  that  the  individual
    cannot, as a result of their condition,  perform  everyday  tasks)  and
    from the NHS, a local authority or health professional (in the case  of
    the requirement that they are unable to obtain the  required  level  of
    care).

11. In BRITCITS v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368, the Court of Appeal upheld  the
    legality of the ADR rules in Appendix FM.  At [58] - [59], Sir  Terence
    Etherton MR (with whom Davis and Sales LJJ agreed) made  the  following
    general observations concerning the ADR rules:

         "58. First, the policy intended to be implemented by  the  new  ADR
         Rules, as appears from the evidence, the new ADR  Rules  themselves
         and the Guidance, and confirmed in the oral submissions of Mr  Neil
         Sheldon, counsel for the SoS,  is  clear  enough.  It  is  twofold:
         firstly, to reduce the burden on the taxpayer for the provision  of
         health and social care services  to  those  ADRs  whose  needs  can
         reasonably and adequately  be  met  in  their  home  country;  and,
         secondly, to ensure  that  those  ADRs  whose  needs  can  only  be
         reasonably and adequately met in the UK are granted  fully  settled
         status and full access to the NHS and social care provided by local
         authorities. The latter is intended to avoid disparity between ADRs
         depending on their wealth and to  avoid  precariousness  of  status
         occasioned by changes in the financial circumstances of  ADRs  once
         settled here.

         59.  Second, as is apparent from the Rules and  the  Guidance,  the
         focus is on whether the care required by the ADR applicant  can  be
         "reasonably" provided and to "the required  level"  in  their  home
         country. As Mr Sheldon  confirmed  in  his  oral  submissions,  the
         provision of care in the home country must be reasonable both  from
         the  perspective  of  the  provider  and  the  perspective  of  the
         applicant, and the standard of such care must be what  is  required
         for that particular applicant. It  is  possible  that  insufficient
         attention has been paid in the past to these considerations,  which
         focus on what  care  is  both  necessary  and  reasonable  for  the
         applicant to receive in their home  country.  Those  considerations
         include issues as to the accessibility and geographical location of
         the provision of care and the standard of care. They are capable of
         embracing emotional  and  psychological  requirements  verified  by
         expert medical evidence. What is reasonable is, of  course,  to  be
         objectively assessed."

12. As the court there recognised, the standard of care available  must  be
    that which is required  for  the  particular  individual  and  must  be
    reasonable both from the perspective of the person providing  the  care
    as well as the individual themselves.  What is required is  capable  of
    embracing emotional and psychological requirements verified  by  expert
    medical evidence.

The Judge's Decision

13. In this appeal, the judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor and  had
    a witness statement from the sponsor's  sister  (also  the  appellant's
    daughter) who had, at least for the moment, left her family in the  USA
    and was caring for the appellant in his home in  India.   In  addition,
    the judge had before him two letters from Dr Suresh dated  16  December
    2019 and 28 November 2020 (at pages 28 and 29 of the bundle).

14. Before the judge, the ECO did not dispute the nature of the appellant's
    medical conditions but rather whether the effect upon him was  that  he
    required long-term care to perform everyday tasks and whether such care
    was available or could not reasonably be provided in India.

15. The judge dealt with the medical and other  evidence  in  detail.   The
    judge set out the evidence from  Dr  Suresh  at  paras  29  and  30  as
    follows:

         "29. Dr Suresh of the Carits Hospital, Kottayam, Kerala wrote on 16
             December 2019 explaining that the appellant had  been  treated
             for his kidney disease since 2003 but in November 2019 he  was
             admitted to hospital with creeping creatinine, breathlessness,
             chest discomfort and pericardial effusion and  he  had  to  be
             started  on  emergency  dialysis,  treated  with  antibiotics,
             undergo  a  pericardiocentesis  and  was  treated  with  other
             supportive measures.  He also referred to  the  other  medical
             issues which the appellant has.  He then explained that:

                  'Over the years due to muscular wastage  from  the  kidney
                  disease and other age related issues, has  aggravated  his
                  previous ankle fracture causing him difficulty to mobilise
                  and attending his basic needs.  He currently needs  a  lot
                  of support due to his co-morbidities and in my opinion  he
                  won't be able to survive without support from his  family.
                  He needs to move in with his daughter given  he  lives  on
                  his own after his wife passed away and no close  relatives
                  to attend to his needs.  Please do the needful as he is at
                  serious risk of being on his own."

         30.  In  his  second  letter  dated  28  November  2020  Dr  Suresh
             confirmed that the appellant is currently  on  dialysis  three
             times a  week  and  'he  still  needs  assistance  with  daily
             activities and moreover psychological support which  only  his
             family can provided ... As a result of his age and illness  he
             requires long-term personal care to help him perform  everyday
             tasks'.  He repeated  tha[t]  this  is  due  to  the  muscular
             wastage from the kidney disease which has compounded the ankle
             fracture.  He continued 'he not only needs long-term  care  to
             meet his daily task but also the presence of his daughters  to
             meet his psychological  well-being  as  his  wife  has  passed
             away.' Finally he also he added  'Also  to  my  knowledge  his
             youngest daughter resides in the USA with a 8 year old son and
             husband.  She had to come over to care and assist him with his
             daily task.  This in itself is affecting her child's  physical
             and emotional needs as  they  currently  reside  in  the  USA.
             Moreover it is unaffordable for  them  to  meet  the  required
             level of care for him in here.'

         31.  Although arguably, in his first  letter,  Dr  Suresh  did  not
             quite state as  expressly  as  he  might  that  the  appellant
             requires long-term personal care to  perform  everyday  tasks,
             the essence of what he said  implied  as  such.   However,  he
             remedied that in his second letter where the opinion is  given
             expressly."

16. The judge then dealt with the other evidence in  the  appeal  from  the
    sponsor and the sponsor's sister who was looking after the appellant in
    India.  At paras 32 - 38, the judge said this:

         "32. His opinion is corroborated in a number of ways.   Firstly  by
             Ms Mulamootill's witness statement in which she says  she  has
             to assist the appellant with washing, dressing and bathing, to
             manage his special diet, especially the supplement  drinks  he
             requires; to help him mobilise as he is at increased  risk  of
             falling after  the  dialysis  in  particular  and  by  way  of
             psychological support.

         33.  The sponsor gave oral evidence in which she confirmed that she
             also travelled to India in 2019 where she stayed  for  fifteen
             days as her father had been taken unwell and required surgery.
              She said they had not realised how bad things had  got  until
             they arrived.  They were not even away he  had  fractured  his
             ankle previously.  It was obvious he was not safe to  be  left
             which is why his sister stayed.  She said the  muscle  wastage
             means he is not strong enough to lift  things  and  his  ankle
             fracture means he is very slow plus he  suffers  with  balance
             issues after the dialysis.  Therefore he needs help with daily
             tasks such as washing and dressing.  She also  confirmed  that
             he needed help with his special  diet.   They  had  previously
             tried carers but they would not assist with such things and so
             they left the employment.  Also they  could  not  find  carers
             that would stay overnight and they could not risk their father
             being left alone.  Nursing homes were not the answer either as
             if there are problems, they expect the family to sort  it  out
             and there is no family in India.  In any case,  the  appellant
             is at risk of decline without one of them  staying  with  them
             and she worries he would not make  it.   She  explained  later
             that he has always been a very independent person and  he  did
             not like to ask for help even  if  his  dignity  and  personal
             issues had been compromised.  She said he is  more  likely  to
             succumb to death by giving up.  She would not  allow  that  to
             happen so if the appeal is refused she would leave her  family
             to care for him even  though  that  would  break  up  her  own
             family.

         34.  In response to a question I asked her, the  sponsor  confirmed
             that if appropriate care was  available  they  could  probably
             afford it but the care that is available is not appropriate as
             it is not safe.  Later she clarified that she  probably  could
             not afford 24 hour care if it was available but her point  was
             that the care her father actually required is not available.

         35.  The appellant filed a bundle of WhatsApp messages between  the
             sponsor and her sister dating from 8 October 2019 to  December
             2020.  They are an illuminating insight  into  the  situation.
             The messages start as both sisters are planning  their  travel
             to India.  The sponsor's outbound ticket  was  booked  for  19
             October  and  she  was  due  to  stay  for  three  weeks.   Ms
             Mulamootill travelled on 26 October.  There  are  no  messages
             between 26 October and 23 November  2019  as  presumably  both
             sisters were together in India at the  time.   Ms  Mulamootill
             has remained in India since then.

         36.  The messages reveal some  of  the  physical  difficulties  the
             appellant has with balance and showering  and  in  respect  of
             which  he  requires  assistance  and  also   refers   to   his
             presentation after a dialysis [AB88/117].   They  also  reveal
             occasional worsening of health resulting in the need for extra
             hospital attendances [AB90].  There are also numerous messages
             about money revealing the sponsor's entire  response  for  the
             cost  of  the  appellant's  dialysis  and  most  other   large
             household expenses such as the costs  of  repairing  household
             items and the bills.   There  is  reference  to  the  lack  of
             additional support [AB 92] and brief  references  to  securing
             some health albeit not working  out  or  not  being  long-term
             [AB96/AB111].  There is  also  reference  to  the  appellant's
             mental health and tendency not to ask  for  help  and  towards
             depression and loss of hope [AB98/99/102/112/132].  There  are
             numerous messages  from  Ms  Mulamootill  about  the  terrible
             impact the separation from her family is having on all of them
             yet her insistence that she cannot leave the appellant as  she
             is terrified that he would rapidly decline and would not  make
             it [AB101/115/117/120/124/130/132/135] and that  but  for  the
             pandemic the plan was that the sponsor would have taken over a
             couple of months in Summer 2020 [AB102/106].

         37.  I find the WhatsApp messages to corroborate what  the  sponsor
             has said about the care her sister gives to the appellant  and
             their concerns about him.  Her evidence  was  also  consistent
             with that of her sister and broadly speaking with  Dr  Suresh.
             On the latter point, I identified  a  potential  inconsistency
             between the sponsor's evidence and that of  Dr  Suresh  as  to
             whether the care she said her father required was  unavailable
             or unaffordable.  I raised this with her as I  had  understood
             her evidence to be that it was the former yet  in  his  second
             letter Dr Suresh said it was the latter.  That  gave  rise  to
             the appellant clarifying her evidence in the way that  I  have
             set out at [34] above.

         38.  Overall I found the sponsor to be a  credible  witness  and  I
             attach significant weight to the evidence she  gave.   I  also
             attach significant  weight  to  the  WhatsApp  messages  as  a
             contemporaneous account of the situation which  the  appellant
             and her daughters have been facing since October 2019."

17. The judge then returned to Dr Suresh's letters at para 39:

         "39.     I also attach reasonably significant weight to both of  Dr
             Suresh's letters.  They are  consistent  with  each  other  in
             terms of the main thrust of what they say.  The second  letter
             was obviously commissioned to  rephrase  Dr  Suresh's  opinion
             with the wording required by the Rules.  However,  insofar  as
             the appellant's need for care to  perform  everyday  tasks  is
             concerned, the evidence as a whole supports such a finding and
             it accords with the opinion Dr Suresh has  expressed  in  both
             letters.  The only reason which leads me to reduce the  weight
             I would otherwise attach to his letters is they are unclear as
             to whether the type of care the appellant needs is unavailable
             in India or unaffordable and if it is the latter  he  has  not
             explained the basis for such an opinion.  However, reading the
             two letters as a whole I find the thrust  of  what  Dr  Suresh
             says is that  the  appellant  does  not  just  need  long-term
             personal care to  perform everyday tasks but also  his  mental
             health and that is why he needs  the  support  of  his  family
             members.  To that extent, the care he needs is unavailable  in
             India, aside from  Ms  Mulamootill's,  but  he  addresses  the
             reasons why she cannot continue to provide such care."

18. At paras 40 - 41, the judge referred to the evidence of Ms  Mulamootill
    and the impact, which he accepted, upon  her  and  her  family  of  her
    separation from them in the USA whilst she is caring for the  appellant
    in India.  He concluded that, as a result of Ms Mulamootill's evidence:



         "It is more likely than not that the appellant  requires  the  care
         that Ms Mulamootill has been providing".

19. At paras 44 - 48, the judge gave his reasons, based upon  the  evidence
    from Dr Suresh and the supporting  evidence  of  the  sponsor  and  her
    sister, why he was satisfied that the appellant met the requirements of
    the ADR rules.  At para 43, the judge stated:

         "Taking his two letters as a  whole  I  find  that  Dr  Suresh  has
         addressed the criteria contained within para 34 of Appendix FM-SE."

20. At paras 44 - 47, the judge said this:

         "44.  Accordingly,  I  find  as  a  fact  that  the  appellant  has
             difficulty mobilising and this is worse after dialysis when he
             suffers with poor balance and he  is  therefore  at  increased
             risk of falling and it is not safe to be left alone until that
             passes.  As he needs dialysis three times a week,  this  is  a
             regular and long-term  problem.   In  any  event,  the  muscle
             wastage and mobility problems means that the appellant  cannot
             safely manage other of his daily tasks  such  as  washing  and
             dressing and so he also  needs  care  to  perform  such  tasks
             safely.  The muscle wastage is as  a  result  of  his  chronic
             kidney disease which is now deteriorating and therefore I find
             it  unlikely  to  improve.   Accordingly  the  appellant   has
             satisfied me that this too is a long-term problem and  so  his
             need for personal care to help him in these tasks is also long-
             term.  I also find as a fact that the appellant requires long-
             term personal care to  assist  him  to  prepare  and  eat  his
             specialised diet.  The type of care  he  needs  here  is  more
             nuanced.  It includes  care  in  the  form  of  prompting  and
             encouraging as the evidence is that without  the  presence  of
             his daughter he would give in to his illnesses and let  nature
             take its course.  The worsening  of  the  appellant's  medical
             condition appears to have been the catalyst for a  decline  in
             his  mental  health  too.   This  is  another  aspect  of  the
             appellant's condition in respect of which I  find  as  a  fact
             that  he  needs  long-term   personal   care   to   meet   his
             psychological and emotional needs.  In the light of the nature
             of the assistance the appellant requires, some of it is  of  a
             personal nature and it is important that the  appellant  feels
             comfortable that the care he needs is provided in a way  which
             maintains his dignity.  If not, in the light of  the  evidence
             about his character and his tendency to slip into low mood and
             hopelessness, I find it is more likely than not that  he  will
             reject such care and that will result in him being  unable  to
             meet his own needs.  I find as a  fact  that  the  appellant's
             need for long-term personal care, as I have  outlined,  arises
             from his age, illness or disability.

         45.  For the same reasons I set out at [41]  above,  the  appellant
             has satisfied me that the particular care he requires in India
             is not available or otherwise his  daughters  would  not  have
             made the sacrifices they have or would care for him.  However,
             in order to meet the requirements of the Rules, the  appellant
             needs to satisfy  me  of  this  factor  by  way  of  specified
             evidence as prescribed in para 35 of Appendix FM-SE."

21. The judge then dealt with that latter issue including consideration  of
    Dr Suresh's evidence at paras 46 - 47 as follows:

         "46. Referring back to [39] above, this is a case where the medical
             evidence about the lack of appropriate  care  in  India  is  a
             little unclear.  However, when read as a whole the evidence of
             Dr Suresh is the appellant needs to be cared for by his family
             as that is the only way that he can not only receive the long-
             term personal care he requires to perform everyday  tasks  but
             also the necessary emotional and  psychological  support.   Dr
             Suresh addressed why Ms Mulamootill cannot continue to provide
             that care.  Paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE  does  not  provide
             any additional requirements as to the content of the specified
             evidence form a Doctor other than  that  they  should  provide
             'evidence that the appellant is unable even with the practical
             and financial help of the sponsor in the  UK,  to  obtain  the
             required level of care in the country where they are  living.'
             On balance, I find that Dr Suresh has done that in his  second
             letter.  The reality is that as Dr Suresh's  opinion  is  that
             the appellant's care needs to be from family members.  I  find
             this to be the 'required level of care'  the  appellant  needs
             adopting the terminology of  para  EC-ECDR.2.5.   There  is  a
             limit as to how much else he can say about the availability of
             that in India beyond what he is told by the appellant  but  to
             the extent that he is aware of the family  situation,  he  has
             referred to it and therefore I find he has addressed the  fact
             that the required level of care  is  not  available  and  that
             there is no-one  in  India  who  can  reasonably  provide  it.
             Therefore I find that the appellant has provided the specified
             evidence as required by para 35 of Appendix FM-SE.

         47.  I have not just considered Dr Suresh's evidence in  isolation.
             I have considered it  alongside  the  other  evidence  in  the
             appeal and I am easily satisfied that the  long-term  personal
             care the appellant requires to perform everyday tasks  is  not
             reasonably available in India.  I do not  find  it  reasonable
             for Ms Mulamootill to remain in India any  longer  to  provide
             that care.   She  and  her  family  have  made  a  significant
             sacrifice to care for the appellant thus far and the  evidence
             of  the  impact  upon  all  of  them  of  that  sacrifice   is
             overwhelming.  In summary, the WhatsApp messages  reveal  that
             Ms Mulamootill's husband, who is currently on a work  visa  in
             America and who works in a lab has  had  to  juggle  work  and
             childcare which has at times resulted in leaving  work  early,
             having to take the child into the  lab  with  him  and  facing
             potential disciplinary proceedings as  a  result.   Therefore,
             the child has had  to  be  cared  for  by  numerous  different
             friends and  acquaintances,  including  during  the  pandemic,
             which has highlighted anxiety about the  health  implications.
             The child has at times been very upset by his mother's absence
             and this has in turn  increased  her  distress.   For  similar
             reasons, nor do I find it reasonable for the sponsor to  leave
             her family and relocate to India to  provide  the  appellant's
             care.  She has three children age 9, 6 and 9 months old.   She
             is a Critical Care Nurse currently working at weekends and her
             husband works  full-time  during  the  week  as  an  engineer.
             Therefore there is always  someone  around  to  care  for  the
             children (and if the appeal is  allowed,  the  appellant),  or
             that is primarily the sponsor and so if she  had  to  relocate
             that would be contrary to the  best  interests  of  the  three
             children.  Finally I am  satisfied  in  the  totality  of  the
             evidence that the paid care the  family  have  tried  was  not
             appropriate but, in any event, I do not find  that  such  care
             can meet the appellant's emotional and psychological needs  or
             even his physical needs if he rejected it."

22.  Having  then  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of paras E-ECDR.2.4. and 2.5., the judge went on  in  para
    51 to conclude that even though the sponsor was the  appellant's  adult
    child, applying Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 170,  family  life  was
    established on the basis of "more than normal emotional  ties"  between
    them.  The judge said this:

         "In this appeal, I have regard to the fact that the  appellant  and
         sponsor  do  not  live  together  and  in  fact  live  in  separate
         countries.  However, the striking feature here  is  the  extent  to
         which the appellant is financially dependent upon the sponsor.   In
         addition to  the  bank  statements  which  the  appellant  provided
         showing the money transferring from the sponsor to  the  appellant,
         the WhatsApp messages reveal that but for the money  she  provides,
         the appellant has practically nothing.   Often  the  messages  were
         along the lines of asking for money as the balance in  the  account
         was very  low.   As  mentioned,  she  pays  for  all  his  dialysis
         treatment.  Added to that is the sponsor's willingness to leave her
         own family and employment in the UK to care for  the  appellant  in
         India if the need arises.  Taken together, I am satisfied there are
         features of dependency which go beyond the  normal  emotional  ties
         and I am satisfied that a family life exists between the  appellant
         and sponsor."

23. Then, applying what was said in TZ (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
    1109 at [34], the judge found that, given Art 8.1 was engaged  and  the
    appellant met the  requirements  of  the  ADR  rules,  the  appellant's
    exclusion was disproportionate as  there  was  no  public  interest  to
    justify interfering with his family life with the sponsor.

The ECO's Challenge

24. On behalf of the ECO, Mr Whitwell relied upon the  grounds  of  appeal.
    In those grounds, it  is  contended  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding  that  the  appellant  requires  long-term
    personal care based upon Dr Suresh's evidence and further that any care
    required was not available in India.  Secondly, it is contended that as
    care  is  currently  being  provided  by  the  sponsor's  sister   (the
    appellant's other daughter) then, applying the present tense in the ADR
    rules, it cannot be said that care "is not available".   It  was  wrong
    for the judge to look at the situation as if the sponsor's  sister  had
    returned to the USA.  Thirdly it is contended that  as  the  judge  had
    reached  an  unsustainable  finding  in  relation  to  the  Rules,  his
    conclusion that the appellant should succeed outside the Rules  on  the
    basis that any interference was disproportionate was infected  by  that
    error.

25. In adopting those grounds, Mr Whitwell reaffirmed the  contention  that
    Dr Suresh's evidence did not support the judge's findings.  He referred
    me to the Court of  Appeal's  decision  in  Ribeli  v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, Pretoria [2018] EWCA Civ 611 at [45] - [52] to  emphasise  the
    need for the requirements of the Rules to be satisfied  by  independent
    evidence, here medical evidence.

26. When I enquired from Mr Whitwell whether he maintained  the  contention
    in the grounds that the Rules could not be met  because  the  sponsor's
    sister, (the appellant's other daughter) was presently  providing  care
    and so it could not be said that it "is not  available"  in  India  (my
    emphasis), Mr Whitwell made no specific oral submissions in respect  of
    that.  He indicated that he had no instructions on what  the  Secretary
    of State's position was on this general issue.

27. Further, Mr Whitwell drew attention to para 3 of Judge Holmes' grant of
    permission which raised an issue not found in the ECO's grounds, namely
    whether the judge had erred in law in finding that  there  was  "family
    life" between the sponsor and the appellant based upon  mere  financial
    dependence.  Again, Mr Whitwell did not, having considered para  51  of
    the judge's decision, seek to make any additional oral  submissions  in
    relation to this.

28. Finally, however, Mr Whitwell recognised that the judge had allowed the
    appeal under Art 8 not only on the basis that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the ADR rules but, even if he did  not,  on  the  basis
    that there were "unjustifiably harsh consequences" such as to  outweigh
    the public interest.  Mr Whitwell accepted that the  judge's  reasoning
    in this regard at paras 56 - 63 was not challenged in the ECO's grounds
    and he was not, therefore, in a position  to  contend  that  the  judge
    erred in law in allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8 outside the
    Rules.  He accepted that, whatever the position was in relation to  the
    judge's decision that the appellant met the  requirements  of  the  ADR
    rules, his appeal was allowed by the judge on another basis and,  as  I
    understood his submissions, as that was not  challenged  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the ECO's appeal necessarily fell to  be  dismissed  on  that
    basis alone.

The Appellant's Submissions

29. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Kannangara submitted  that  the  judge's
    decision was a detailed one and he had made clear findings on both  the
    Rules and on the existence of family life.  He submitted that the judge
    had considered the two letters of Dr Suresh and had properly  concluded
    that the evidence satisfied paras 34 and 35  of  Appendix  FM-SE.   The
    judge was entitled to take into account that what was said by Dr Suresh
    was supported by the evidence of the sponsor and indeed her sister.  He
    submitted that, in any event, the judge had allowed  the  appeal  under
    Art 8 outside the Rules even on the basis that the appellant,  contrary
    to his primary finding, could not meet the requirements of the Rules.

Discussion

30. I will deal first with the ECO's contention that the  judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons based upon the required evidence  under  Appendix
    FM-SE in finding that the appellant requited long-term care  which  was
    not available in India.

31. The judge dealt very fully with Dr Suresh's evidence which I  have  set
    out above.  At para 31, the judge noted that Dr Suresh's second  letter
    dated 28 November  2020  dealt  specifically  with  his  need  for  the
    appellant's long-term care  in  order  to  perform  daily  tasks  which
    required the presence  of  his  daughters  to  meet  his  psychological
    wellbeing.

32. The Court of Appeal identified in the BRITCITS case, that the ADR rules
    are not only concerned with the physical needs of  the  individual  but
    also their psychological and emotional needs.  Consistent with paras 34
    and 35 of Appendix FM-SE, Dr Suresh's evidence,  in  my  judgment,  did
    deal with the  appellant's  needs,  both  physical  and  psychological,
    arising from his physical and mental health conditions.  Appendix FM-SE
    does not require evidence of a particular quality but rather supporting
    evidence from a particular source, here a health professional  such  as
    Dr Suresh, attesting to the individual's need  for  long-term  care  in
    order to deal with everyday tasks arising from his physical and  mental
    health conditions.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  accept  Dr  Suresh's
    evidence  as  satisfying  the  requirements  of   Appendix   FM-SE   as
    establishing the substantive requirements of the ADR rules.  Subject to
    the point about whether the  care  provided  by  the  sponsor's  sister
    presently prevents the Rule being met,  the  evidence  from  Dr  Suresh
    supported by the sponsor and her sister entitled the judge to find that
    the personal care required by the appellant was not available nor could
    be reasonably provided in India as it needed to be provided  by  family
    such as the sponsor and her sister.

33. The Court of Appeal in the BRITCITS case reminds us that the ADR  rules
    look to the provision of a reasonable level  of  care  "both  from  the
    perspective of the provider and the perspective of the  applicant,  and
    the standard of such care must be what is required for that  particular
    applicant" (at [59]).  Here, the judge was entitled to accept,  on  the
    basis of the evidence  before  him,  that  the  care  required  by  the
    appellant could only be reasonably provided by a family member such  as
    the sponsor or her sister.  To the extent that the perspective  of  the
    provider is taken into account, as the BRITCITS case acknowledges,  the
    judge was undoubtedly entitled to conclude that it was  not  reasonable
    to expect the sponsor's sister to continue to reside in India separated
    from her family in the USA and it was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
    sponsor to live in India to provide the care given her circumstances in
    the UK.

34. As Mr Kannangara submitted, and is plain from  the  extensive  extracts
    from the judge's decision that I have set out,  the  judge  dealt  very
    carefully indeed with the evidence and made clear findings  based  upon
    that evidence, not shying away from any points of difficulty raised  by
    the evidence.

35. For these reasons, I reject the ECO's ground that  the  judge  did  not
    have the  required  evidence  to  be  satisfied  that  the  substantive
    requirements of the ADR rules were  met  or  that  he  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding that was the case.

36. As regards the construction of the Rules, whilst  they  stipulate  that
    the required level of care  "is  not  available"  in  India  nor  could
    reasonably be provided  or  is  not  affordable,  that  should  not  be
    interpreted to exclude the appellant's situation in this  appeal.   The
    Rules look to the appellant's circumstances in his own country and  the
    availability of the provision of care in that country.  It would, in my
    judgment, run counter to the policy underlying  the  ADR  rules  if  an
    individual, who needed long-term personal care in order  to  deal  with
    everyday tasks, could not obtain that care in their  own  country  but,
    because relatives from abroad had travelled to support  the  individual
    on a  temporary  basis,  it  could  now  be  said  that  care  "is  ...
    available".  The underlying policy of allowing an individual to come to
    the UK to join family in the UK under the ADR rules would be  subverted
    if the requirements of the Rules could not be met where, on a temporary
    basis, those family members travel to the individual's country in order
    to  provide support that  would  not  otherwise  be  available  in  the
    individual's own country.  As I have said, Mr Whitwell did not seek  to
    pursue this aspect  of  the  grounds,  not  least  because  he  had  no
    instructions as to the Secretary of State's  position  on  this  point.
    For the reasons I have given, I reject what is said in the  grounds  to
    be the proper construction of the Rules.

37. The final point concerns the judge's finding in para 51, that there  is
    family life established between the appellant and sponsor.  As  I  have
    indicated, this was not challenged by the ECO in the grounds of appeal.
     It was raised, for the first  time,  by  Judge  Holmes  when  granting
    permission to appeal.

38. Plainly, the judge in this appeal had well in mind the correct approach
    to whether family life existed between a parent and an adult child  set
    out in Kugathas which he cited at para 51.  The judge did not, as Judge
    Holmes suggests in his grant of permission, determine  that  there  was
    family life between the appellant and sponsor simply on  the  basis  of
    financial dependency.  Indeed, the evidence  before  the  judge,  given
    orally by the sponsor, was of a considerably greater involvement in the
    appellant's life and support of him including travelling to India  with
    her sister in 2018 (see para 33 of  the  decision).   The  relationship
    between the appellant and sponsor was plainly a  close  one  given  his
    physical and mental health problems and the continuing  involvement  of
    the sponsor in providing support for him.  There was, in  my  judgment,
    ample evidence before the judge to sustain  his  finding  that  "family
    life" was established with the sponsor.  That may, perhaps, explain why
    the ECO did not seek to  challenge  that  finding  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

39. For these reasons, therefore, the judge did not err in law  in  finding
    that the appellant had established the requirements of the  ADR  rules,
    in particular in E-ECDR.2.4. and 2.5. of Appendix FM.

40. Applying the  approach  set  out  in  TZ  (Pakistan)  at  [34],  having
    sustainably found that there was family life between the appellant  and
    sponsor and that as the requirements of the Rules were met,  the  judge
    found it would be disproportionate to exclude the  appellant  from  the
    UK.  On that basis, the judge was entitled  to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

41. However, as I have already indicated, the judge also allowed the appeal
    under Art 8 outside the Rules even if he was wrong that  the  appellant
    satisfied the requirements of the ADR rules.  The judge's findings  and
    reasoning in paras 56 - 63 were not challenged in the grounds of appeal
    and Mr Whitwell acknowledged that, as a consequence,  he  was  in  some
    difficulty in seeking to set aside the judge's decision  to  allow  the
    appeal under Art 8.

42. I agree.  On that basis alone, the ECO's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    cannot succeed and the judge's decision to allow the appeal under Art 8
    stands.

Decision

43. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 did not  involve  the  making  of  a
    error of law.  Consequently, that decision stands.

44. Accordingly, the ECO's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                23 June 2021


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and, as that decision  has  not  been
challenged, it also stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                23 June 2021

