
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/05450/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote hearing held at Field House   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 04 February 2021 (V)              |On 28 April 2021                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                            SAJIA AFRIN CHOWDHURY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr P. Saini instructed by Direct Access
For the respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 07  March  2019
    to refuse a human rights  claim.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Greasley
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 11 July  2019.  In  a
    decision dated 13 January 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins found that
    the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law
    and set it aside.

2.    The case was reviewed following the start of  the  Covid-19  pandemic.
    The President of the Upper Tribunal  directed  for  the  matter  to  be
    listed for a telephone case management hearing, which took place on  12
    May 2020. In light of the need  to  take  precautions  to  prevent  the
    spread of Covid-19 the appeal was listed for a remote hearing by  video
    conference for the decision to be remade. The hearing listed on 16 June
    2020 was adjourned for  the  respondent  to  clarify  her  position  in
    relation to the allegations of deception. The respondent  was  directed
    to serve a  written  summary  of  her  position  in  relation  to  each
    allegation of deception and legible copies of any evidence relied  upon
    by 14 July 2020 at the latest.

3.    There was no objection to the mode  of  hearing.  After  some  initial
    difficulties getting the appellant online, she confirmed that  she  was
    able to see and hear the legal representatives. She was  able  to  give
    evidence in English without any apparent difficulty.  I  monitored  the
    situation throughout the hearing and was satisfied  that  the  mode  of
    hearing was fair and did not  impair  the  appellant  from  giving  her
    evidence in any material way.

Background

4.    The appellant's immigration history is complex and  some  aspects  are
    not entirely clear from the evidence. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh who entered the UK on 15 February 2010 with entry  clearance
    as a Tier 4 student that was valid until 25 April 2011. She was granted
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 student from 15 August  2011  until
    30 October 2012 and again from 08 June 2012 to 01 July 2013. The  exact
    dates of her applications for further leave to remain are unclear  from
    the evidence.

5.    The appellant says that she married a man called  Plaban  Majumder  on
    12 August 2012. It is reasonable  to  infer  from  the  fact  that  the
    appellant says that she made a further application for leave to  remain
    outside the immigration rules on 12 October  2012  naming  him  as  her
    dependent that, at that time, he was not a British citizen and required
    leave to remain in the UK. The application was refused  on  07  October
    2013 with a right  of  appeal.  The  appellant  lodged  an  appeal  but
    subsequently withdrew it on 17 September 2014. The  appellant's  lawful
    leave extended by section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971  ("IA  1971")
    came to an end on that date. She has remained in the UK without  lawful
    leave since then.

6.    The appellant says that she made an application for  leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant on 16 September 2014. Although  she  says
    that she made the application the day before she withdrew  the  appeal,
    by operation of section 3C(4) IA 1971 a person cannot apply to vary  an
    application while their leave is extended under  section  3C.  Such  an
    application would normally be deemed invalid. However,  it  seems  that
    the respondent accepted the application, which might have been received
    after the date she withdrew the appeal. Although  the  application  was
    accepted, by operation of statute, the appellant's lawful  leave  still
    ended on the date the previous appeal came to an end.  The  application
    for leave to remain as a Tier 2 migrant was refused on 20 February 2015
    with an in-country right of appeal. The First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed
    the appeal on 21 October  2015.  Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was refused and her appeal rights became exhausted on 24  June
    2016.

7.    On 20 July 2016  the  appellant  made  further  submissions  on  human
    rights grounds. In a decision dated  10  October  2017  the  respondent
    refused to treat the submissions as a fresh human  rights  claim.   The
    appellant sought to challenge the decision by way of an application for
    permission to bring judicial review proceedings, which was  refused  on
    25 April 2018.

8.    In her witness statement, the  appellant  says  that  she  applied  to
    'vary' the human rights application on 01 November 2017.  This  was  in
    fact a fresh application because the previous application  was  refused
    on 10 October 2017. In her statement she  says  that  her  husband  was
    granted Indefinite Leave to Remain on 28 January 2018.  The  respondent
    states that the appellant applied to vary the application  on  29  June
    2018 but the copy of the  application  contained  in  the  Home  Office
    bundle indicates that her solicitors submitted the application by cover
    letter dated 16 March 2018.  The appellant says that she separated from
    her husband on 17 May 2018 because of continuing domestic abuse.

9.    The respondent's  chronology  records  a  subsequent  application  for
    leave under the domestic  violence  route,  which  was  refused  on  08
    November 2018. The decision was maintained following an  Administrative
    Review on 21 December 2018. In light of the appellant's stated fear  of
    returning to Bangladesh she was invited to make a protection claim  but
    failed to attend an appointment on 05 March 2019.

10.   This appeal is brought against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  07
    March 2019 to refuse the human  rights  claim  which  was  made  on  01
    November 2017 and varied to an application based on family  life  as  a
    partner. The respondent refused the application under the 'Suitability'
    requirements of Appendix FM of the immigration  rules  because  it  was
    alleged that she used a fraudulent English language test certificate in
    an earlier application for leave to remain made on  29  February  2012.
    Educational Testing  Services  (ETS)  cancelled  the  test  certificate
    issued after a test taken at Westlink College on 13  December  2011  on
    the ground that there was evidence to show that a proxy test taker  was
    used. In any event, the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  'Relationship'
    requirement of Appendix FM because she was no longer  in  a  subsisting
    relationship with her  partner.  Her  husband  issued  a  statement  to
    declare that the marriage was over and  that  divorce  proceedings  had
    been initiated.

11.   The respondent found that the appellant did not meet the private  life
    requirements contained in paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules.
    There was no evidence to show that she  would  face  'very  significant
    obstacles' to integration in her  country  of  nationality,  where  she
    spent her formative years and a significant portion of  her  adulthood.
    It was likely that  she  retained  linguistic,  cultural  and  familial
    connections in Bangladesh. The appellant had no leave to  remain  since
    the expiry of her last grant of leave. There were no other  exceptional
    circumstances that might justify a grant of leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds.

12.   The respondent noted her claim that her family was  planning  to  kill
    her if she returned to Bangladesh because she  married  a  Hindu.  When
    given the opportunity to make a protection claim she did not attend the
    appointment. This cast doubt on her claim to be in fear  on  return  to
    Bangladesh. The respondent asserted  that  the  Bangladesh  authorities
    would be able to provide sufficient protection.

Decision and reasons

Fraud allegation

13.   The burden of proof is on the respondent to show  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities that the TOEIC English language  certificate  issued  by
      ETS was obtained by fraud and that the use of deception in an  earlier
      application for leave to remain justified refusal under  paragraph  S-
      LTR.4.2 of Appendix FM of the immigration rules.

14.   The first thing to note is that the allegation made  in  the  decision
      letter to justify refusal under the 'Suitability' requirement  related
      solely to a test that was said to have been taken as long  ago  as  13
      December 2011 at Westlink College. The decision letter went on to make
      a second allegation relating to a test taken at Synergy College on  19
      October 2011 as a public interest  consideration  when  assessing  the
      case under the heading of 'Exceptional Circumstances'.  There  was  no
      response from the respondent to  the  directions  made  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal on 16 June 2020 to clarify her position in relation to  these
      tests. However, the original bundle that was filed and served  by  the
      respondent for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  in  2019  included
      evidence relating to tests  taken  at  Westlink  College  and  Synergy
      College, which the 'Look-up tool' indicated were both deemed 'Invalid'
      by ETS. The appellant was on notice from the start that she would need
      to respond to allegations of fraud relating to  tests  taken  at  both
      colleges.

15.   Although Mr Saini objected to Ms Cunha's late filing  of  evidence  on
      the morning of the hearing, in fact, most of the documents were in the
      original Home Office bundle. The only new document was a printout of a
      Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS) assigned on  28  February
      2012 to study at the London School of Business and Finance (LSBF).  On
      closer inspection, a second printout was the same CAS appearing  in  a
      slightly different format. The CAS  refers  to  the  English  language
      speaking score which corresponded with the test that was said to  have
      been taken at Westlink College on 13 December 2011. The information in
      the CAS did not take the evidence that was already  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal any further. Apart from a general objection to late  service,
      Mr Saini was unable to give any reason why it might cause  his  client
      any difficulty. I found that there was no reason to  refuse  to  admit
      the document.

16.   Neither party has produced much detailed evidence about the course  of
      events during the period in question  at  the  end  of  2011  and  the
      beginning of 2012. The case put to the  appellant  by  the  respondent
      when questioned at the  hearing  was  rather  confused.  Many  of  the
      questions were aimless  and  not  rooted  in  the  evidence  that  the
      respondent had produced. The appellant's responses were equally  vague
      citing the passage of time as the reason for her lack of  recollection
      of events. For this reason, it may be helpful to set out what  can  be
      gleaned from the documentary evidence.

17.   The respondent' chronology indicates that the  appellant  was  granted
      leave to remain as a Tier 4 student on 15 August 2011, which was valid
      until 30 October 2012. It is unclear from  the  respondent's  evidence
      what college the appellant was granted leave to remain  to  attend  or
      why she would need to make a further application for leave  to  remain
      on 29 February 2012 to study at  the  LSBF.  The  appellant's  witness
      statement says that she was studying ACCA at  the  London  College  of
      Accountancy (LCA) at the time. LCA increased the  fees  so  she  along
      with other students transferred to LSBF which  advised  her  that  she
      would need a new English language certificate. The appellant says that
      she only had seven days  to  obtain  a  test  certificate  before  the
      deadline to enrol at the college, but did not specify the date. On her
      own evidence she was under some time pressure to  obtain  a  new  test
      certificate.

18.   The documentary evidence indicates that the appellant was issued  with
      two TOEIC certificates. The first is said to have been a test taken at
      Synergy College on 19 October 2011 (Certificate no: 1000000227577592).
      The score for the speaking test was 150. The second is  said  to  have
      been taken at Westlink College on 13 December  2011  (Certificate  no:
      1000000240280306). The score for the speaking test was 200.

19.   The respondent has not  produced  copies  of  the  test  certificates.
      However, a copy of the test certificate that appears to relate to  the
      speaking (150) and writing (160) parts of  the  TOEIC  test  taken  at
      Synergy College on 19 October 2011  is  included  in  the  appellant's
      bundle [pg.25-26]. Another certificate with a different identification
      number relates to the listening (465) and reading (415) parts  of  the
      TOEIC test [pg.24].  The certificate  indicates  that  those  elements
      were taken on 24 October 2011 but it is unclear from the face  of  the
      document  which  college  issued  the   certificate.   The   different
      identification number indicates that it  might  have  been  issued  by
      Westlink College.  The  scores  are  consistent  with  other  evidence
      suggesting that this certificate was likely to  have  been  issued  by
      Westlink College. It is unclear why the appellant has not been able to
      produce the certificate relating to the speaking and writing  elements
      of the test taken at Westlink College on 13 December 2011.
20.   The respondent has produced various printouts of Look-up  tools  which
      are documents  created  by  the  respondent  that  record  information
      received from ETS as  well  as  various  other  information  about  an
      applicant including  their  passport  number:  see  MA  (ETS  -  TOEIC
      testing) [2016] UKUR 00450 [15(ii)]. The evidence is produced to  show
      what information the respondent received from ETS.  The  Look-up  tool
      entitled 'ETS SELT Source Data' records details of  the  speaking  and
      writing tests taken at both colleges with  the  relevant  scores.  The
      Look-up tool shows that the respondent received information  from  ETS
      to say that both speaking and writing tests were deemed 'Invalid'.
21.   There is no direct information from ETS to show how  the  test  result
      in this case was assessed or why it was then  cancelled  as  'Invalid'
      because of evidence of a proxy test taker. The  respondent  relies  on
      generic evidence in the form of witness statements  from  Home  Office
      officials,  Rebecca  Collings  and  Peter   Millington,   which   were
      considered in some detail by  the  Tribunal  in  SM  &  Qadir  (ETS  -
      Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016]  UKUT  229.  They  outline  general
      information about the investigation of widespread  fraud  following  a
      Panorama  programme  aired  in  February  2014.  Whilst  the  Tribunal
      outlined weaknesses in the evidence it concluded that the  combination
      of evidence contained in the Look-up tool and the 'generic statements'
      was sufficient to discharge the initial evidential burden of proof [67-
      68]. The Court of Appeal in SSHD v Shehzad & Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ
      615  found  the  rejection  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  of  the  same
      combination of evidence  as  insufficient  to  discharge  the  initial
      evidential burden of proof amounted to an error of law [26].
22.   The respondent has  produced  an  expert  report  by  Professor  Peter
      French dated 20 April  2016.  He  was  instructed  by  the  respondent
      following the Tribunal's  decision  in  SM  &  Qadir.  The  report  is
      'generic' in the  sense  that  it  does  not  deal  specifically  with
      information or analysis relating to this case. Professor French is  an
      expert in forensic speech science. He was asked to give an opinion  on
      the reliability of the methodology used by ETS, and in particular, the
      likelihood of false positives being reported on voice analysis of test
      results. He considered the report produced by Dr Harrison,  which  had
      been considered by the Tribunal in SM & Qadir. Much of the  report  is
      quite technical, but Professor French concluded that the methods  used
      would have resulted in substantially more false negative results  than
      false positive results. It was not possible  to  establish  a  closely
      specified percentage of false positives. He estimated that the rate of
      false positive results was likely to be "substantially  less  than  1%
      after  the  process  of  assessment  by  trained  listeners  had  been
      applied". This evidence forms part of a body of evidence, including Dr
      Harrison's evidence as outlined in SM  &  Qadir.  It  shows  that  the
      possibility of false positive results in assessing the use of a  proxy
      test taker cannot be discounted. The  number  of  false  positives  is
      difficult to assess, but it seems likely  that  the  number  of  false
      positive results in the ETS assessment process is low.
23.   The respondent has also produced information relating to the  colleges
      where the appellant  took  the  tests.  The  statistics  held  by  the
      respondent show that ETS had records of 104 speaking and writing tests
      taken at Synergy College on 19 October 2011. Of those 96  were  deemed
      'Invalid' and 8 were deemed 'Questionable' i.e. ETS deemed none of the
      tests taken that day reliable enough to stand.  Another  Look-up  tool
      print out states that out of a total of 4894 tests  taken  at  Synergy
      College  2410   were   deemed   'Invalid'   and   2484   were   deemed
      'Questionable'. While the printout also indicates  that  none  of  the
      tests recorded at Synergy College were deemed reliable the  evidential
      value of the document is weakened because  it  does  not  provide  any
      context. It does not outline the period of time the statistics covered
      nor indicate whether there were any other test results outside  a  set
      period that might have been deemed reliable.
24.   Other documents produced  by  the  respondent  include  two  documents
      entitled  'ETS  Test  Analysis'  which  appear  to  be  self-generated
      documents summarising basic details relating to the appellant as  well
      as  records  of  what  information  is  held  relating  to  the   test
      certificates in question. The Home Office records  indicate  that  the
      test certificate  from  Westlink  College  was  used  to  support  the
      application for leave to remain made on 29  February  2012.  The  test
      certificate issued by Synergy College was not used in any application.


25.   The respondent has also produced a report entitled  'Synergy  Business
      College' dated December 2016. Again, the document appears to be  self-
      generated by the respondent. It is not clear what expertise the author
      has to analyse the data provided by ETS. Ms Cunha did not refer to the
      report  or  assist  me  to   understand   the   various   graphs   and
      illustrations. The report appears to conduct a comparison between data
      from TOEIC certificates  issued  by  ETS  and  similar  qualifications
      conducted by Pearson. In so far as the report  indicates,  in  general
      terms, that there were  concerns  about  the  over-inflation  of  test
      results that might indicate  the  use  of  proxy-test  takers,  it  is
      broadly consistent with the statistics received from ETS  relating  to
      Synergy College.
26.   The same  set  of  evidence  was  produced  in  relation  to  Westlink
      College. The test centre Look-up tool states  that  114  speaking  and
      writing tests were taken on 13 December 2011. Of these 99 were  deemed
      'Invalid' and 15 were deemed 'Questionable' i.e. ETS  deemed  none  of
      the tests taken that day reliable enough to stand. The second  Look-up
      tool relating to general statistics suffers from the same weakness. It
      states that out of a total of 915 tests taken at Westlink College over
      an unspecified period of time 661 were deemed 'Invalid' and  254  were
      deemed  'Questionable'.  Similarly,  the  self-generated   statistical
      analysis report relating to Westlink College dated January 2017 is  at
      least broadly consistent with the reasons why ETS was likely  to  have
      cancelled a large number of test certificates  from  Westlink  College
      due to concerns over the false inflation of test results.
27.   In light of the decision in SM & Qadir and Shehzad  I  find  that  the
      combination of the ETS 'Look-up tool' and the 'generic statements'  is
      sufficient to shift the burden of proof to the appellant to provide an
      innocent explanation to the allegation.
28.   Unfortunately, those who helped the appellant to prepare  her  witness
      statement did not assist her to address the evidence produced  by  the
      respondent, which should have disclosed a rough  chronology  of  where
      and when she  took  the  tests.  There  was  a  contrast  between  the
      appellant's oral evidence, where she repeatedly said  that  she  could
      not remember the details, and the seemingly more detailed recollection
      of what happened outlined in her statement. Although her statement was
      superficially more detailed, it clearly did not accord  with  the  ETS
      records. The appellant asserted that she took  the  test  at  Westlink
      College on 19 October 2011, which is in fact the date  when  she  took
      the test at Synergy College. Her statement does not address  the  test
      taken on 13 December 2011, which the ETS  records  show  was  done  at
      Westlink College. When she wrote to ETS on 26 August 2020 to  ask  for
      the test recordings the appellant also seemed confused,  stating  that
      she did not think that she did  a  test  at  Westlink  College  on  13
      December 2011 as stated by the Home Office.
29.   I bear in mind that it has been 10 years since the appellant took  the
      tests. She also took more than one test. There  is  some  evidence  to
      indicate that the  appellant  has  sought  psychological  support  for
      issues arising from domestic abuse.  The  most  recent  correspondence
      from her local mental health team to her GP  dated  22  December  2020
      stated  that  she  had  been  diagnosed  with   Emotionally   Unstable
      Personality Disorder, Mixed Anxiety  and  Depressive  Disorder.  Other
      similar letters have the same practical function of informing  her  GP
      of the outcome of her appointments. None of this evidence explains the
      nature or extent of her conditions. Nor does it  specifically  address
      the possibility of difficulties with memory or concentration  although
      I find that I can  take  judicial  notice  of  the  fact  that  it  is
      generally known that depressive disorders might affect concentration.
30.   Mr Saini referred me to the appellant's educational certificates  from
      Bangladesh, which indicated that she was likely to have been taught in
      English. Although  the  appellant  spoke  English  to  a  good  enough
      standard to give evidence at a hearing in 2021 her  current  level  of
      spoken English tells me nothing about her level of English at the  end
      of 2011 and whether there might have been a  motivation  to  cheat.  I
      bear in mind that even on the appellant's own evidence she  was  under
      time pressure to provide LSBF with an English language certificate  so
      it is possible that she may have had other motivations for obtaining a
      certificate quickly through fraudulent means.
31.   Overall, the appellant's evidence  was  vague  and  confused.  It  was
      insufficiently reliable for me to be satisfied, having heard from her,
      that she did genuinely take the test. However, I bear in mind that she
      was being asked to recall events that took place 10 years ago.  Whilst
      only the appellant knows for sure whether she cheated in the  test  or
      not, the confusion in the details of her evidence relating to  matters
      that seem quite clear from the ETS records, such as when and where she
      took various tests, indicated that some of the inconsistencies in  her
      evidence arose more from a lack of recollection rather than deliberate
      evasion.
32.   While I did not find the appellant's evidence of  much  assistance,  I
      bear in mind that the overall legal burden of proof is  still  on  the
      respondent.
33.   I have  weighed  the  evidence  as  a  whole  to  assess  whether  the
      respondent has discharged the overall legal burden of  proof.  I  have
      taken into account that, aside from the fact that  ETS  recorded  both
      tests as 'Invalid' due to evidence of a proxy test taker, there is  no
      direct evidence from ETS to show how or why the company  came  to  the
      conclusion that this particular appellant obtained a  fraudulent  test
      certificate. The evidence produced by the respondent is self-generated
      and relies heavily on information received from ETS  relating  to  the
      cancellation of her test results and those of other  people  who  took
      tests at the same colleges. It seems clear that  ETS  carried  out  an
      investigation into a large number  of  test  results,  which  included
      assessment of recordings of the speaking tests, in  which  proxy  test
      takers were found to have been used. Although the evidence relating to
      the reliability of the ETS process is difficult  to  assess  with  any
      accuracy, expert evidence suggests that the  likelihood  of  a  'false
      positive' result arising from the ETS process of verification is  low.
      The categorisation of a test result as  'Invalid'  suggests  that  ETS
      considered that there was evidence of fraud or deception  involved  in
      the test as opposed to a categorisation of 'Questionable', which  only
      suggests administrative irregularities were identified.  The  evidence
      relating  to  the  numbers  of  test  results  deemed   'Invalid'   or
      'Questionable' indicates that  there  were  likely  to  be  legitimate
      concerns about the possibility of widespread fraud at both colleges.
34.   If the respondent relied on only one test, I may have found  that  the
      evidence was sufficient to discharge the burden of proof. The evidence
      relies almost exclusively on information and  statistics  provided  by
      ETS, but when one steps back from those statistics, the respondent had
      failed to provide any coherent explanation as  to  why  the  appellant
      would cheat in two tests at two colleges within such a short period of
      time.

35.   Neither  party  produced  evidence  to  show  what  level  of  English
      language ability was required by the  immigration  rules  in  February
      2012 when the appellant applied to vary her leave to remain. Mr  Saini
      said that he thought that the test score of 150 for the speaking  test
      taken at Synergy College  may  have  been  insufficient  to  meet  the
      requirements at the time. He said that it was plausible that she would
      take the test again to obtain a better result.

36.   It is not necessary for the tribunal to spend  time  scouring  through
      archived records of  lengthy  and  complicated  immigration  rules  to
      ascertain whether the first test result was likely to meet the English
      language requirement of the immigration rules  at  the  relevant  time
      because the respondent has offered no clear case theory  or  plausible
      explanation for the dual assertions of  fraud  that  have  been  made.
      Three points give me cause for concern:

        i) If the  appellant  failed  the  first  test  it  undermines  the
           respondent's allegation of fraud. It is reasonable to infer that
           those conducting the fraud would have  given  her  the  required
           pass mark if the test result was fraudulently  obtained  because
           that would be the whole purpose of the fraud.

       ii) If the appellant failed the first test it may have given her  an
           incentive to cheat on  the  second  to  secure  the  result  she
           needed, but it is equally plausible that  she  may  have  worked
           harder to get the relevant pass mark on the second occasion.

      iii) Even if a score of 150 on the first speaking test was sufficient
           to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  immigration   rules,   the
           respondent has offered no plausible explanation as to why,  even
           if the first test result was fraudulently  obtained,  she  would
           then seek to obtain a second fraudulent  test  certificate  less
           than four weeks later.

37.   I cannot discount the possibility that the appellant may have  cheated
      on at least one of the tests. The evidence produced by the  respondent
      indicates that there were likely to be serious concerns about fraud at
      both colleges. The fact that all the test  results  on  each  day  the
      appellant  took  tests  were  cancelled   as   either   'Invalid'   or
      'Questionable' does raise serious questions  about  what  happened  at
      those  colleges.  The  appellant's  evidence  in   response   to   the
      allegations was vague and  confused.  The  evidence  relating  to  the
      reliability of the ETS procedures does leave  room  for  a  margin  of
      error, however slight. When one steps back from the statistics to look
      at the course of events, the assertion made by the respondent that the
      appellant obtained both certificates by fraud does not make sense  and
      no plausible theory was put forward  in  the  decision  letter  or  in
      submissions at  the  hearing  to  explain  what  possible  reason  the
      appellant might have to obtain two fraudulent test results within such
      a short space of time. Although the evidence does raise  doubts  about
      the reliability of the test results, the  overall  burden  is  on  the
      respondent to make out such a  serious  allegation.  For  the  reasons
      given above, I conclude that the evidence, when considered as a whole,
      is insufficient to show that it is  more  likely  than  not  that  the
      appellant obtained both or even one of the test results by  fraud.  It
      follows that the respondent has failed to show that refusal under  the
      'Suitability' requirement of the immigration rules was justified.

38.   Mr Saini sought to rely on the report of the  All-Party  Parliamentary
      Group (APPG) on TOEIC  dated  22  July  2019.  He  did  not  give  the
      respondent notice of this before the start of the hearing. It was  not
      reasonable for the respondent to anticipate  this  potential  argument
      when no copy of the report was provided, even if it is known to be  in
      the public domain. This was surprising given Mr Saini's  objection  to
      the respondent's late evidence. Rather than having to make a  decision
      as to whether he could rely on a  document  that  had  not  even  been
      filed, which could have derailed the hearing, the issue was  'parked'.
      It was agreed that I would invite further submissions if, after having
      considered the other evidence in detail, I considered  that  the  APPG
      report might be relevant to my decision.  In  view  of  my  conclusion
      relating to the allegations of fraud, it is not necessary to  consider
      the APPG report. In any event, it would only  have  the  character  of
      opinion evidence in  light  of  the  recent  decision  in  DK  and  RK
      (Parliamentary privilege, evidence) [2021] UKUT 61.

Human rights claim

39.   I turn to consider the appellant's  substantive  human  rights  claim.
      Although the appellant expressed concerns about her safety if returned
      to Bangladesh it was not argued that she would  be  at  risk  of  ill-
      treatment that would reach the threshold of Article 3 of the  European
      Convention.

40.   The claim based on her family life with a settled  person  has  fallen
      away since the breakdown of her marriage. At the  hearing,  the  claim
      was put forward solely with reference to her private life  in  the  UK
      and the proportionality of removal.

Article 8(1) - private and family life

41.         The appellant is a 37-year-old woman  from  Bangladesh.  At  the
      date of the hearing she had lived in the UK for a period of 10  years.
      The evidence shows that she was awarded a Bachelor of Commerce  degree
      in accounting in Bangladesh in 2009. She came to the UK to  study  and
      obtained a Degree in Business Management  in  2013.  There  is  little
      evidence of any studies, work or  other  activities  since  then.  Her
      marriage broke down shortly after her husband obtained settled status.
      The appellant's bundle contains letters of support  from  friends  and
      references from other people who have known her in the UK.  While  the
      evidence does not show significant ties, I accept that  the  appellant
      is likely to have established a private life in the UK over  the  last
      10 years and that her removal is likely to interfere with  that  right
      in a sufficiently grave way to engage the operation of Article 8(1) of
      the European Convention.

Article 8(2) - proportionality

42.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects  the  right  to  private
      and family life. However, it is not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
      interfered with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite law
      that the state has a right  to  control  immigration  and  that  rules
      governing the entry and residence of people into the country  are  "in
      accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  Article   8.   Any
      interference with the right to private or family life must  be  for  a
      legitimate reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.

43.   Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ('NIAA
      2002') applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to  determine
      whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's
      right to respect for private and family life under Article  8  of  the
      European Convention. The 'public interest question' means the question
      of whether an interference  with  a  person's  right  to  respect  for
      private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

44.   The appellant  does  not  meet  the  long  residence  requirements  of
      paragraph 276B of the immigration rules. The immigration  history  set
      out above shows that her lawful leave to remain  came  to  an  end  in
      2014. The fact that she made a further application for leave to remain
      within the 28 day 'grace period' then provided for in the  immigration
      rules did not operate to extend her leave  to  remain:  see  R  (Masum
      Ahmed) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1070.  Thereafter  any  application  was
      made at a time when she was an overstayer. The  appellant  also  falls
      far short of the 20 year private life requirement for  long  residence
      under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules.

45.   The appellant needs to show that  she  would  face  'very  significant
      obstacles' to integration in  Bangladesh  to  meet  the  private  life
      requirement of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  immigration  rules.  In
      Kamara v SSHD [2016] 4 WLR 152 the Court of Appeal  outlined  the  key
      elements of the test, which is also  found  in  section  117C(4)  NIAA
      2002.

         "14.      In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
             "integration" into the country to which it is proposed that he
             be deported, as set out in section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
             399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the  mere  ability
             to find a job or to sustain life while  living  in  the  other
             country. It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language
             as subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for
             a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms  that
             Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of "integration"  calls
             for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the
             individual  will  be  enough  of  an  insider  in   terms   of
             understanding how life in the society in that other country is
             carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to  have
             a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
             operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build  up
             within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships  to
             give substance to the individual's private or family life."

46.   It is clear that the appellant  would  prefer  to  remain  in  the  UK
      rather than return  to  Bangladesh.  She  says  that  her  family  has
      disowned her and expressed a general  fear  of  them  if  returned  to
      Bangladesh because she entered into a mixed religion marriage  in  the
      UK. However, the appellant has not put forward a protection claim,  no
      argument was put forward to suggest that  she  would  be  at  risk  of
      Article 3 ill-treatment, no evidence was highlighted to  support  such
      an argument at the hearing.

47.   The appellant told me that  her  family  lives  in  Mymensingh,  which
      publicly available maps indicate is a town about 120km north of Dhaka.
      The evidence shows that the appellant studied in Dhaka  and  that  she
      was awarded a degree in accountancy in Bangladesh. A reference  letter
      from GMark Consulting Limited dated 15 November  2009  certified  that
      the appellant worked for the company as a finance  and  administration
      officer from January 2008. The appellant was born and  brought  up  in
      Bangladesh. She came to the UK when she was  26  years  old.  She  has
      spent her most of her life in  Bangladesh  and  is  likely  to  retain
      linguistic, cultural and  familial  connections  there.  The  evidence
      shows that she was able to study and  work  in  Dhaka  away  from  her
      family home before she came to the UK. Since arriving in  the  UK  the
      appellant has been awarded a degree in Business Management.  No  doubt
      she would face some initial challenges to re-establishing  herself  in
      Bangladesh, but she is an educated woman who has  qualifications  that
      would assist her to find work to  support  herself  as  she  has  done
      before. Mr Saini asserted that her mental health might  also  pose  an
      obstacle, but for the reasons given above, the medical evidence is not
      sufficiently detailed to disclose a serious  mental  health  condition
      that might affect the appellant's ability to re-establish  herself.  I
      conclude that the evidence falls far short  of  showing  that  she  is
      likely to face 'very significant  obstacles'  to  integration  in  her
      country of nationality within the meaning outlined in Kamara.

48.         In conducting the overall balancing exercise under Article  8(2)
      I have considered the factors outlined in section 117B NIAA 2002.  The
      appellant has been an overstayer since 2014  and  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of the immigration rules. Weight must  be  given  to  the
      need to maintain an  effective  system  of  immigration  control.  The
      appellant  speaks  English  and  is  capable  of  supporting   herself
      financially if she had permission to work but  these  factors  are  at
      best only neutral in the assessment. The appellant has lived in the UK
      for a period of 10 years. I accept that there are letters  of  support
      from various friends and  acquaintances  and  that  the  appellant  is
      likely to have made some connections in the UK, but there no  evidence
      to show that she has significant ties. The appellant entered the UK as
      a student and should have had no expectation of  settlement.  She  has
      remained without leave since 2014. Little weight should  be  given  to
      the appellant's private life when it was established at  a  time  when
      her position was precarious or unlawful.

49.         Mr Saini referred to the decision in Khan  v  SSHD  [2018]  EWCA
      Civ 1684 at [37] and argued in general and unparticularised terms that
      the appellant should be put in the position that she  was  before  the
      decision to refuse the application on 'Suitability' grounds was  made.
      He failed to outline how what was said in  Khan  might  apply  to  the
      facts of this particular case. The underlying application for leave to
      remain was made on 01 November 2017. At the time the appellant was  an
      overstayer. The exact nature of the  application  is  unclear  on  the
      evidence currently before the Upper Tribunal, but it appears that  the
      appellant applied for leave to remain with  her  husband  outside  the
      rules. Her husband was granted ILR in  early  2018  and  a  subsequent
      application was made to vary her leave to remain to that of a partner.
      However, the marriage broke down shortly after. The claim to remain on
      the basis of her marriage is no longer pursued. In these circumstances
      it is difficult to see how my finding that the respondent  has  failed
      to discharge the burden of proving the allegations of fraud should put
      the appellant back in a particular position when the  reason  for  the
      original application has fallen away and the appellant does  not  meet
      any of the other requirements of the  immigration  rules  relating  to
      family or private life in the UK.

50.          Mr  Saini  also  made  a  vague  submission  relating  to   the
      application for leave on grounds of domestic abuse, which appeared  to
      amount to nothing more than an assertion that it was unfortunate  that
      she did not meet the requirements at  the  time  because  her  husband
      refused to co-operate with the application for leave to  remain  as  a
      partner.  The appellant made an application for  leave  to  remain  on
      this basis on 30 August  2018.  The  application  was  refused  on  08
      November 2018 because  she  did  not  meet  the  requirement  to  have
      previously been granted leave to enter or remain as a partner, amongst
      other issues. Given that  her  marriage  broke  down  soon  after  her
      husband was granted ILR this was just a  consequence  of  events.  The
      provision is designed to enable those who have been granted  leave  to
      remain as a partner to leave an abusive relationship without  fear  of
      jeopardising their position in the UK. In this case the appellant  did
      not meet the requirements because she had never been granted leave  to
      remain as a partner. Whilst the medical  evidence  suggests  that  the
      historic abuse she suffered during her marriage has affected her in  a
      negative way, it is difficult to see how the mere fact of  such  abuse
      might be seen as a factor that should be given any significant  weight
      when the appellant did not meet the requirements for leave  to  remain
      on that basis.

51.         Having weighed all the circumstances of this case  I  find  that
      the appellant fails to meet the requirements of any of the immigration
      rules relating to family or private life in the UK. If a  person  does
      not meet the requirements of the immigration rules a person is usually
      expected to  leave  the  UK.  No  other  compelling  or  compassionate
      circumstances have been highlighted that might render the  appellant's
      removal disproportionate. The appellant might prefer to remain in  the
      UK, but her understandable desire to do so does not equate to a  right
      to remain on human rights grounds.

52.         I conclude that removal in consequence  of  the  decision  would
      not be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


DECISION

The appeal is DISMISSED on human rights grounds


Signed   M. Canavan          Date 20 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan



____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email

