
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/06052/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Tuesday 24 April 2018                  |On Friday 27 April 2018            |
|                                          |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AAL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Fisher, Counsel instructed by Sterling Lawyers
Ltd

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal on 4  December  2017.
Although the reason behind that order does not there appear, I did not  hear
any submissions about whether it would  be  appropriate  to  discharge  that
order and I therefore continue it.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference, I
      refer below to the parties as they were  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      albeit that the Secretary of State is  technically  the  Appellant  in
      this particular appeal.  The Respondent appeals against a decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill promulgated  on  28  February  2018
      ("the  Decision")  allowing  the  Appellant's   appeal   against   the
      Respondent's decision dated 22 March 2017 giving  him  notice  of  her
      intention to deport him to New Zealand.

   2. The deportation order is made under section  3(5)(a)  Immigration  Act
      1971 on the basis that the Appellant's deportation is conducive to the
      public good.   The Respondent relies on the  Appellant  having  caused
      serious harm by his offending.  However, the Respondent  also  refused
      the Appellant's human rights claim by decision dated  12  April  2017.
      For the reasons which I have set  out  below,  that  is  in  fact  the
      Respondent's decision under appeal.

   3. The Appellant is a national of New Zealand.  He came to the  UK  on  9
      June 2015 with a Tier 5 Youth Mobility Migrant Visa valid  to  9  June
      2017.  On 13 February 2017, the Appellant was convicted on five counts
      of committing an act  outraging  public  decency  by  behaving  in  an
      indecent manner.  The offences involved  the  Appellant  taking  video
      footage  under  women's  skirts  whilst  travelling  on   the   London
      Underground system.  The offences involved ten  videos  taken  on  six
      separate dates on 15 July 2016, 7, 15, 16 and 24  August  2016  and  1
      September 2016.  The Appellant was arrested on 18 October 2016.  There
      is no evidence that any of those women who were  the  targets  of  the
      filming were aware of it and it cannot be said that they  were  harmed
      physically or emotionally by those offences.

   4. The Appellant was sentenced to a period of sixteen weeks' imprisonment
      which was reduced on appeal to eight weeks. He pleaded guilty  to  the
      offences and was found to be at low risk  of  harm  to  others  but  a
      medium risk to women in a limited way. A psychologist's report  before
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge also indicated that  the  Appellant  was
      later assessed as a low risk.

   5. The Appellant made a voluntary departure on 21 April 2017,  his  human
      rights claim having been  refused  and  certified  under  section  94B
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  He now
      resides in Australia where he works.  He says that the making  of  the
      deportation order will have  an  adverse  effect  on  him  because  he
      travels on business with his work and may be  denied  entry  to  other
      countries for that reason.  He also says that the order will amount to
      a lifelong ban preventing his return to the UK for work in the  future
      although he does not express any immediate plans to return here.

   6. The Judge allowed the appeal finding that the Respondent did not  show
      that the Appellant's offending had caused serious harm.   I  was  told
      by Ms Fisher that the Respondent expressly conceded at the  First-tier
      Tribunal hearing that she did  not  rely  on  the  Appellant  being  a
      persistent offender.  Based on findings made at [45] to  [48]  of  the
      Decision, the Judge found that the criteria set out at paragraph  398C
      of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") were not made out on the facts.
       He went on to reach the decision that "[t]he appeal in respect of the
      making of the Deportation Order (Immigration Act 1971) is allowed".




   7. The Respondent appealed on two grounds:-

   a) Although no physical harm took place, the Judge could  not  know  with
      any certainty that no psychological harm occurred since he  could  not
      know whether the victims had become aware of the filming;

   b) The imposition of a custodial sentence permitted the presumption  that
      a serious offence had been committed,  the  nature  of  the  offending
      suggested that  the  Appellant  did  not  respect  social  values  and
      therefore the offences met the criteria of causing serious harm.


   8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shimmin
      on 21 March 2018 in the following terms so far as relevant:-
           "...[2] It is arguable that the judge has made a material  error
           of  law  in  finding  that  the  appellant's  offences  do   not
           constitute serious harm...."

   9. The appeal comes before me to determine whether there  is  a  material
      error of law in the Decision and if so either to re-make the  decision
      or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

   Error of law

  10. If the only point for me to consider was whether the  Judge  erred  in
      relation to his findings on the application of section 3(5)(a) and the
      application of the Rules in relation to deportation, I would have  had
      no hesitation in finding that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
      Decision.  Although whether an offence "has caused serious  harm"  may
      incorporate not only physical and psychological harm to the  victim(s)
      of the offence and may include harm caused to the wider community, the
      Judge has taken that aspect into account at [48] of the Decision.

  11. However, at the outset of the hearing, I identified a more fundamental
      error of law than that identified by the Respondent in the grounds  or
      in the grant of permission.  This issue  goes  to  the  heart  of  the
      jurisdiction of the Tribunal Judge to make the Decision.

  12. It is implicit in the "Notice of Decision" that the appeal was allowed
      on the basis that it was not in accordance with the law or the  Rules.
      It is said that the appeal against the deportation  order  made  under
      the Immigration Act 1971 is allowed. That this is the  decision  which
      the Judge thought was  under  appeal  is  reinforced  by  the  Judge's
      comment at [49] of the Decision that it was "unnecessary ..to go  into
      the detailed analysis of the human rights aspect of the case because I
      conclude that the test of serious harm is simply not met on the  facts
      of this Appellant's case."

  13. Mr Duffy confirmed that the appeal is  one  under  the  provisions  in
      section 82 of the 2002 Act following amendment by the Immigration  Act
      2014.  As such, the only decision which could be  under  challenge  in
      this case is the decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant's  human  rights
      claim.  That could only be appealed on the basis that  "the  decision"
      (ie the decision to refuse the human rights claim) is  unlawful  under
      section 6 Human Rights Act 1998.   Ms Fisher did not dissent from that
      proposition.

  14. In this  regard,  although  in  discussions  at  the  hearing,  I  was
      initially minded to  accept  that  I  could  consider  the  notice  of
      intention to deport as being  "the  decision"  which  is  said  to  be
      unlawful  in  human  rights   terms,   on   reflection   and   further
      consideration of the appeal provisions, I do not think that this is  a
      sustainable interpretation.  Section 82(1) of the 2002  Act  sets  out
      the decisions which may  be  appealed  which  include  only  (in  this
      context) that the Respondent has decided  to  refuse  a  human  rights
      claim and at section 84 that the decision breaches  the  Human  Rights
      Act.  That can only mean the decision to which section 82  refers  and
      therefore the decision to refuse the  human  rights  claim.   That  is
      therefore the only  decision  under  appeal.   Any  challenge  to  the
      lawfulness of the making of the deportation  order  itself  would  now
      have to proceed by way of a judicial review challenge.

  15. Furthermore, "human rights claim" is defined by  section  113  of  the
      2002 Act as meaning "a claim made by a person to remove  him  from  or
      require him to leave the United Kingdom or to refuse  him  entry  into
      the United Kingdom".  Although the Appellant has already left, he  has
      done so following certification under section 94B of the 2002 Act  and
      to that extent I can still consider whether the Appellant's removal is
      disproportionate. However,  as  I  observed  at  the  hearing,  it  is
      difficult to see how the Appellant could complain about  removal  from
      the United Kingdom (as distinct from his deportation) because he  only
      had limited leave the basis of which  has  now  expired.   He  is  not
      seeking to re-enter.  Although he has been required to leave  the  UK,
      the Appellant would struggle to say  that  he  could  not  be  removed
      consistently with his Article 8 rights.  His complaint is that  he  is
      being kept out of the UK by the deportation order  (or  probably  more
      accurately at this point in time that the existence of that order will
      prevent him travelling to other countries).

  16. It follows from the foregoing, that the Judge has  erred  by  starting
      and ending his consideration of the issues with the lawfulness of  the
      deportation order.  He has not gone on to consider what is the  effect
      of his finding that the Appellant  does  not  meet  the  criteria  for
      deportation.  He has not considered the only issue which was  for  him
      to determine namely whether the decision to remove  the  Appellant  or
      require him to leave breaches his human rights.

  17. Although the Respondent did not appeal on this ground, the error is  a
      "Robinson" obvious one.  Although I accept also that the error was not
      identified in the grant of permission to appeal, if there is an  error
      in the exercise of the Tribunal's jurisdiction, that goes to the heart
      of the validity of the Decision.  For that reason, the Decision cannot
      stand.  The error of law is material because the Tribunal has exceeded
      its jurisdiction in  the  making  of  the  Decision  for  the  reasons
      underpinning the Decision.  I therefore set the Decision aside.

   Re-making of the decision

  18. The starting point for consideration of the Article  8  claim  is  the
      making of the deportation order.  The Appellant does not  satisfy  the
      criteria for automatic deportation due to the length of his  sentence.
      The power to make the deportation order is therefore  exercised  under
      section 3(5)(a) Immigration Act 1971. That is on the basis  that  "the
      Secretary of State deems his deportation to be conducive to the public
      good".  That is a wide provision and  has  to  be  read  also  in  the
      context of the Rules which apply  to  the  practice  of  applying  the
      legislative power and relevant policies of the Secretary of State.

  19. The relevant starting point in the Rules  is  paragraph  398(c)  which
      provides that:-

           "(c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
           the public good and in the public interest because, in the  view
           of the Secretary of State, their offending  has  caused  serious
           harm or they are a persistent offender who  shows  a  particular
           disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing  that
           claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
           if it does not, the public interest in deportation will only  be
           outweighed by other factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
           circumstances over and above those described in  paragraphs  399
           and 399A."

  20. Ms Fisher  submitted  that  the  Judge's  findings  at  [45]  to  [48]
      concerning whether the offending has caused serious harm  are  without
      error and should be adopted.  She also pointed out that the Respondent
      conceded at the First-tier Tribunal hearing that she does not rely  on
      an assertion that the Appellant is a persistent offender.

  21. Mr Duffy unsurprisingly submitted that the Judge's  findings  were  in
      error for the reasons set out in the grounds of  appeal.   He  pointed
      out that section 3(5)(a) Immigration Act 1971 represents the Secretary
      of State's view that the Appellant's deportation is conducive  to  the
      public good which should be given weight.  He pointed out  that  in  a
      "non-conducive" deportation case, the offence is always likely  to  be
      at the lower end of the scale because the sentence  is  likely  to  be
      below twelve months as otherwise the automatic deportation  provisions
      would normally apply.

  22. Mr Duffy also  referred  to  the  case  of  Chege  ("is  a  persistent
      offender")  [2016]  UKUT  187  (IAC).   Ms  Fisher  objected  to  this
      submission based on the Respondent's concession.  It  is  recorded  at
      [12] of the Decision that the Secretary of State does not  argue  that
      the Appellant is  a  persistent  offender.    The  Respondent  in  her
      refusal of the human rights claim relies only on the Appellant  having
      caused serious harm.  The Respondent's grounds do not suggest that the
      Judge  misunderstood  her  case  in  relation  to  the   grounds   for
      deportation. Accordingly, I proceed on the basis that the  only  issue
      is whether the Appellant's offending caused serious harm.

  23. As the decision maker observes in  the  Respondent's  refusal  of  the
      human rights claim, paragraph 398 is the relevant section of the Rules
      which set out the practice to be  followed  by  officials  considering
      deportation  action  against  an  individual.   Whilst   I   recognise
      therefore the force of Mr Duffy's argument that  the  context  of  the
      deportation in this  case  is  the  Secretary  of  State's  view  that
      deportation of the Appellant is conducive to the public  good,  as  Ms
      Fisher pointed out, that has to be considered in the  context  of  the
      Respondent's policy and practice which sets out when  such  action  is
      appropriate.  It also has to be considered based on the wording of the
      relevant rule (as set out above).

  24. The  Respondent's  guidance  concerning  the  deportation  of  non-EEA
      foreign nationals appears  in  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions,
      Version 3.1 dated April 2015 and, so far as relevant  to  this  appeal
      states as follows [(3.1) and (3.2)] :-
           "3.1 Introduction
           Section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 allows the Secretary of
           State to deport individuals where their presence in  the  UK  is
           not conducive to the public good.  This gives the  Secretary  of
           State discretion to act  in  a  way  that  reflects  the  public
           interest.  Evidence of serious or persistent criminality must be
           proved to the immigration (balance of probabilities) rather than
           criminal (beyond reasonable doubt) standard.
           .....
           3.2 How to consider if deportation is appropriate
           A non-EEA foreign  national  will  normally  be  considered  for
           deportation pursuant to the Immigration Act 1971 if they do  not
           meet the criteria for  deportation  under  the  UK  Borders  Act
           2007...but they have been involved in criminal activity  in  the
           UK...and meet one of the criteria below:
                 .....
    . The non EEA foreign national  has  been  sentenced  to  less  than  12
      months' imprisonment, but the Secretary of State  considers  that  the
      offending has caused serious harm either in the UK or another country;



  25. Cross-reference is made in that guidance to  further  policy  guidance
      entitled "Criminality: Article 8 ECHR cases"  (version  6.0  dated  22
      February 2017) which makes the following relevant points at page [7]:-
           "Serious harm
           It is at the discretion of the Secretary of  State  whether  she
           considers an offence to have caused serious harm.
           An offence that has caused 'serious harm' means an offence  that
           has caused serious physical or psychological harm to a victim or
           victims, or that has contributed to a  widespread  problem  that
           causes serious harm to a community or to society in general.
           The foreign national does not have to  have  been  convicted  in
           relation to serious harm which followed from their offence.  For
           example,  they  may  fit  within  this  provision  if  they  are
           convicted of a lesser offence because it cannot be proved beyond
           reasonable doubt that they were guilty of a separate offence  in
           relation to the serious harm which resulted from their actions.
           Where a person has been convicted of one or more violent,  drugs
           or sex offences, they will usually be considered  to  have  been
           convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm."

  26. There is no indication that any of the Appellant's victims were  aware
      that their privacy was being invaded by his  actions  or  indeed  that
      they were victims at all.  It cannot be said that the Appellant caused
      them either physical or psychological harm by his actions.

  27. Whilst what the Appellant's behaviour was, as the Judge said at  [45],
      "lewd and indecent", it does not, in  my  estimation,  fall  into  the
      category of offending which can be said to have caused serious harm on
      any wider definition.  The Respondent's policy refers in  this  regard
      to the offending having contributed to a  widespread  problem  causing
      serious harm to the community or to society.  There is  no  evidential
      basis for such a view.  The question whether the offending "has caused
      serious harm" involves both that the conduct "cause harm" and that the
      harm is "serious".  Public affront to a course of offending  as  being
      contrary to societal norms does not  denote  that  the  offending  has
      caused harm.  Furthermore, the issue  is  not  whether  the  offending
      "might cause harm" or that it "could reasonably be expected  to  cause
      harm".  There is no reference  whether  in  the  rule  or  the  policy
      guidance to  the  offending  causing  public  revulsion  or  requiring
      deterrence as reason for finding that it "has caused serious harm" The
      question is only whether it has caused such harm.

  28. For those reasons and based also on the findings of the Judge at  [45]
      to [48] of the Decision (which I adopt as disclosing no error of law),
      the criteria in paragraph 398(c) are not met in the  circumstances  of
      this case.  That rule does not therefore apply.  It follows  that  the
      Appellant is not someone to whom deportation powers apply.  It follows
      that I do not need to go on  to  consider  whether  the  Appellant  is
      someone whose private and family life is  disproportionately  affected
      by the decision to deport him (applying paragraphs 399 and 399A).

  29. That though is not the end of the matter.  The issue for me is whether
      the Appellant's removal or the requirement  for  him  to  leave  is  a
      breach of his human rights.

  30. It does not appear to be suggested that the  Appellant  can  meet  the
      Rules based on his private life or family life.  It is  not  suggested
      that he has a partner or child in the UK.   He lived  in  the  UK  for
      just under two years before he left.  His status was  as  a  temporary
      worker.  There is no indication that he would have qualified  for  any
      further leave on this or any other basis. The route under which he was
      admitted provides for only two years leave  on  entry.   There  is  no
      provision for extensions of leave on the same basis.   Although  there
      is mention in the evidence to the possibility of finding a sponsor  to
      allow him to continue to work in the UK, there is no  evidence  before
      me that the Appellant had a sponsor lined up for such  purposes.    It
      is not suggested that there are any "very  significant  obstacles"  to
      his integration in his home country.  It appears that he now lives and
      works in Australia but that is not said to be because he cannot return
      to New Zealand.

  31. The Appellant's Article 8  claim  therefore  falls  to  be  considered
      outside the Rules.

  32. The difficulty with the Appellant's evidence in this regard is that it
      is largely directed at the decision to  deport  him  rather  than  the
      refusal of his human rights claim per se.  As such, the most which can
      be taken from his own evidence about the impact on his human rights is
      that, as the subject of a deportation order, he will not  be  able  to
      travel to other countries or return to the UK.  To  some  extent,  his
      concerns in that regard may be more illusory than real given that,  at
      least in the short term, he will have to declare his  criminal  record
      in any visa application. His suggestion in the evidence  that  such  a
      "ban" is lifelong is also exaggerated since it is open to him to  seek
      to revoke the deportation order (and in light of my above conclusions,
      it is open to him to make such an application on the  basis  that  the
      original deportation order was not lawfully made).

  33. The problem with the Appellant's evidence though is that I am not here
      concerned with the future effect of the  deportation  order  but  with
      whether the decision to remove or require the Appellant to leave is  a
      breach of his human rights.   Any  impact  on  the  Appellant's  human
      rights in relation to a future application to  re-enter  arising  from
      the effect of the deportation order is a matter which would have to be
      considered  if  and  when   an   application   is   made   for   entry
      clearance/leave to enter.  Put  another  way,  any  challenge  to  the
      lawfulness of the deportation order or of  a  refusal  to  revoke  the
      order would now be a matter which could only be raised in  a  judicial
      review challenge.

  34. I have little or no evidence  about  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
      Appellant's private  life  in  the  UK  nor  the  consequence  of  his
      removal/departure on that private life.  On the evidence I have, it is
      difficult to see how the Appellant's Article 8 rights are even engaged
      or, assuming they are, that there  has  been  a  sufficiently  serious
      interference  with  those  rights  to  require  justification  by  the
      Respondent.  The Appellant lived in the UK for a very short period  on
      a temporary basis as a worker.  His right to work was due to  come  to
      an end shortly after the date when he voluntarily departed.

  35. Even if I  accept,  based  on  that  period  of  residence,  that  the
      Appellant is bound to have formed some private  life  with  which  his
      removal interferes to a sufficient extent, I would  need  to  consider
      the proportionality  of  the  Respondent's  decision  to  require  the
      Appellant to leave.  I take into account my finding that the Appellant
      is not a person who can lawfully be deported  (at  least  not  on  the
      basis on which the Respondent relies).  That does not though mean that
      his criminal offending is not a  relevant  factor  which  favours  the
      public interest in removal. I therefore factor into account  not  only
      that the Appellant is no longer a person with any basis to  remain  in
      the UK under the Rules but also  that  he  has  been  convicted  of  a
      criminal offence.   Although  I  have  found  that  the  criteria  for
      deportation was not met on the basis relied upon  by  the  Respondent,
      the Appellant was nonetheless convicted of five  counts  of  outraging
      public decency.  The offences led to a sentence  of  imprisonment  and
      cannot be said to be so minor as to be ones which should be ignored in
      the proportionality balance.

  36. I accept that section 117C of the 2002 Act has no part to play in this
      appeal as I have found that the criteria for deportation are not  met.
      However,  Section  117B  provides  that   maintenance   of   effective
      immigration control is in the public  interest.   The  fact  that  the
      Appellant cannot meet the Rules based on either family or private life
      and that his private life is deserving of little  weight  because  his
      period of residence was on a precarious (temporary) basis militates in
      favour of removal.  The fact that he has recently  committed  offences
      which cannot be said to be very minor and which resulted in a term  of
      imprisonment is an additional factor favouring the public interest  in
      removal.

  37. Particularly in circumstances where there is little or no evidence  as
      to the private life which the Appellant has formed in the UK or  which
      shows any interference or any sufficiently serious  interference  with
      that private life, the decision refusing the Appellant's human  rights
      claim and requiring him to leave the UK is proportionate.

  38. For those reasons, the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  to
      refuse his human rights claim is dismissed.

DECISION

   1. The First-tier Tribunal Decision involves the  making  of  a  material
      error on a point of law. I therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal
      Decision of Judge Cockrill promulgated on 28 February 2018.
   2. I re-make the decision.  I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Signed

[pic]

Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Smith
    Dated:  [25] April 2018
