
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06041/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2018                           |On 8 November 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Jaber Ahmad Chowdhury
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Burrett, Counsel, instructed by Lawland
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom, promulgated on 22 May 2018, in which
    he allowed Mr. Chowdhury's appeal against the Secretary of State's
    decision to refuse leave to remain on human rights grounds.


 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to Mr. Chowdhury as the
    Appellant, and to the Secretary of State as the Respondent, reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows.

         "The Judge appears to have allowed the appeal for many of the
         reasons he found the Immigration Rules were not met.  The grounds
         argue no weight was attached to section 117B of the Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The Judge placed weight on the
         fact that weight could be attached where private or family life had
         been established and that this was one of those cases where there
         were compelling reasons.


         The grounds are arguable for the reasons set out in the grounds of
         appeal in a grant permission on all grounds."

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard submissions from both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Error of Law

 5. It was submitted in the grounds of appeal that the Judge had not
    applied the test he was supposed to apply, in particular in relation to
    section 117A to 117D of the 2002 Act.  It was submitted that the Judge
    erred in allowing the Appellant's appeal without regard to the public
    interest factors.

 6. In a comprehensive and full decision, the Judge considered all of the
    factors set out in section 117B.  Neither the grounds of appeal, nor
    the grant of permission, refer to the fact that, as was acknowledged at
    the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant would meet the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) if he were to have made an
    application at the date of the hearing, although he did not meet these
    requirements as at the date of the application.  This is a significant
    and weighty factor in any proportionality assessment, which is not
    acknowledged in the grounds of appeal nor in the grant of permission.

 7. The Judge considered the appeal under Article 8 outside the immigration
    rules, with reference to section 117B, from [35] to [45].  At [38] he
    states:

         "In this case, paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) is not met because the
         appellant has not made an application meeting the temporal
         requirement, although he meets the substantive requirements
         regarding the length of his residence.  Suitability has not been
         placed in issue by the respondent.  The decision therefore turns to
         some extent on the importance of the degree to which the appellant
         fails to meet the rules."

 8. At [39] he correctly states that "there is no formalised "near-miss"
    principle, although all the facts have to be taken onto account and
    considered in context".  At [40] he states that he is bound to have
    regard to the factors listed in section 117B.  He refers to the case of
    Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803, in particular [46].  He states: "However,
    it was common ground in that case that it was possible to conceive of
    cases caught by sections 117B(4) and (5) in which a private or family
    life of an especially strong kind had been established such that it
    should be accorded great weight."  He refers to [49] and [53] of
    Rhuppiah and quotes from [54]: "in order to identify an exceptional
    case in which a departure from that approach would be justified,
    compelling reasons would have to be shown". There is no error in this
    analysis of Rhuppiah.


 9. At [41] the Judge turns to consider the factors set out in section
    117B.  It is not, as submitted at the hearing, in a short and
    summarised fashion, but in a structured way.  He finds that the
    Appellant speaks English (117B(2)), and that he has not shown he is
    financially independent (117B(3)).  He states "little weight can be
    given to that private life, according to the statute, because nearly
    all his time in the UK has been unlawful."  He finds that the Appellant
    has been put in this position by his parents and uncle through no fault
    of his own.

10. At [42] to [45] the Judge carefully and correctly considers the
    "conundrum" posed by the Appellant's case.  In doing so he properly
    considers the proportionality of the decision.  He balances "the
    "little weight" which can be given to his private life with the fact
    that the respondent's own policy would be to grant leave to the
    appellant if he made a proper application".  He is correct in so doing.
     At [43] he considers whether or not there is a sensible reason to
    expect the appellant to make a further application.

11. At [44] he considers the matters weighing in the Respondent's favour,
    and states that he gives them "considerable weight".  At [45] he states
    as follows:

         "However, in my judgment, this is one of the cases in which
         compelling reasons have been shown to justify a finding that the
         decision is disproportionate in line with the analysis provided in
         Rhuppiah.  That is because the private life which the appellant has
         been permitted to establish in the UK, now spanning more than half
         of his life, is of a particularly valuable kind.  The appellant has
         spent all his teenage years here and has completed his secondary
         education here.  He has plainly lost many of his ties with
         Bangladesh and he has become entirely integrated in the UK.
         Despite my adverse credibility finding regarding his contact with
         his family in Bangladesh, there can be no doubt he has become at
         home in every sense in his uncle's family.  I keep in mind that it
         was not the appellant's decision that he should be brought to the
         UK in order to obtain a free education here.  The responsibility
         for that lies elsewhere.  Notwithstanding the requirement to apply
         section 117B(iv), I find that these matters render the decision
         disproportionate."

12. There is no error of law in this assessment.  The Judge's analysis is
    in line with the analysis provided in Rhuppiah.  Ms. Holmes stated that
    she was not going to dwell on Rhuppiah, and made no submissions on this
    caselaw, but this is precisely the case which the Judge has correctly
    considered.  He was entitled to find that the Appellant's private life
    was of the "particularly valuable kind", and to give weight to it
    accordingly.  I find there is no merit in the submission made before me
    that, because he did not have leave to remain, he was not integrated
    into the United Kingdom.  The Appellant was not party to the decision
    to leave him in the United Kingdom.  He is integrated into the United
    Kingdom by way of the education that he has received here, and the fact
    that he has been living here for over half of his life.  The Judge was
    entitled to find at [45] that he was integrated into the United
    Kingdom.

13. I find that the Judge has not failed to have proper regard to the
    public interest requirements under section 117B as was asserted in the
    grounds.  He has dealt properly with the weight to be given to the
    immigration control but, as he points out, at the date of the decision
    the Appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).  I accept
    Mr. Burrett's submission that paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) is not concerned
    with the connection which an individual may have with his country of
    origin, but recognises the ties which will have been placed down in the
    United Kingdom in the formative years of youth.  It provides that leave
    shall be granted where an individual has spent over half of his life in
    the United Kingdom and is aged between 18 and 25.  There is no need to
    consider how easy or otherwise it would be for that individual to
    return to his home country.  The rule acknowledges that ties which are
    built up in this stage of life are important, and have a different
    nature to those established later.

14. There was no dispute, either in the First-tier Tribunal or before me,
    that the Appellant would have met paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).  As I stated
    above, there was no acknowledgment of this in the grounds of appeal.
    The Respondent accepted that the Appellant met the suitability
    requirements.  Mr. Burrett submitted that, given that the Appellant met
    the suitability requirements, and the immigration rule itself, it was
    difficult to see how the Respondent could then say that it was in the
    public interest to deny the Appellant leave to remain.  However, the
    Judge did not consider the Appellant's case purely on that basis, but
    carefully and properly considered all of the factors, in particular
    whether the Appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).
    The fact that he found that the Appellant did not meet paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) did not prevent him from attaching weight to the fact
    that, as at the date of the hearing, the relevant date for
    consideration of Article 8, he would have met the requirements of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).

15. It is also significant to note that the Judge did not find that the
    Appellant himself was dishonest, but rather it was the older family
    members who had connived in him being left in the United Kingdom.  He
    finds at [30] that the Appellant was blameless for how the situation
    came about, which he repeats at [45].  He was aware that there was no
    action on the part of the Appellant to circumvent immigration control.



16. This was not an appeal which rested on whether there would be "very
    significant obstacles" to the Appellant's integration into Bangladesh,
    but rather the ties established in the United Kingdom.  It is correct
    at law that significant weight is to be given to the fact that an
    appellant meets the requirements of the immigration rules when carrying
    out a proportionality assessment, and the Judge gave significant weight
    to that factor, as he was entitled to do.

17. The Judge conducted a proper and fair proportionality assessment,
    balancing the public interest of maintaining effective immigration
    control against the private life of the Appellant.  He properly
    attached weight to the fact that the Appellant would meet the
    requirements of the immigration rules due to the private life he had
    established in the United Kingdom.  There is no error of law in his
    decision.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making of
    a material error of law and I do not set it aside.  The decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.


19. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 30 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
