


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06067/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On : 19 March 2018                      |On: 27 March 2018                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             tamasang jones zama
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Childs, instructed by Rotherham & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr Zama's appeal
   against the respondent's decision to refuse  his  application  for  entry
   clearance to settle in the UK with his father.

2.   For the purposes of this decision, I shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the  respondent  and  Mr  Zama  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born on 7 July 1997. He  applied
   in 2013, at the age of sixteen years, for entry clearance to settle  with
   his father, Hippolytus Zama, a British citizen  living  in  the  UK.  His
   application was considered under paragraph 297 of the  immigration  rules
   and was refused in a decision dated 7 August 2015.

4.   The respondent, in refusing the appellant's application, noted that  he
   had produced only a photocopy of his birth certificate and  that  it  was
   registered five years after  his  birth.  The  respondent  could  not  be
   satisfied from the document that the appellant was related as claimed  to
   the sponsor.  For  that  reason,  and  in  the  absence  of  evidence  to
   demonstrate how the  appellant  kept  in  touch  with  his  sponsor,  the
   respondent  was  also  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  had  had  sole
   responsibility for his upbringing.  The  respondent  noted  that  it  was
   claimed that the appellant was residing in Cameroon with his grandmother.
   No details had been given as to the whereabouts of his mother  and  there
   was no evidence that she consented to the appellant going to the UK.  The
   respondent was not satisfied  that  there  were  any  serious  compelling
   family or other considerations which made the appellant's exclusion  from
   the UK undesirable and that suitable arrangements had been made  for  his
   care. The respondent  accordingly  refused  the  appellant's  application
   under paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f) of the immigration rules and considered
   there to be no exceptional circumstances outside  the  immigration  rules
   for the purposes of Article 8.

5.   The appellant appealed against that decision.  In  an  Entry  Clearance
   Manager appeal review dated 26 January 2016 the decision was maintained.

6.   The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Moan  on
   13 October 2016. The sponsor attended the hearing and gave oral evidence.
   The judge accepted, from the  documentary  evidence  produced,  that  the
   sponsor was the appellant's  father.  The  judge  referred  to  a  letter
   produced for the  appeal  from  the  appellant's  mother  supporting  the
   application  and  confirming  that  the  appellant  had  lived  with  the
   sponsor's mother since he was five years of age. The judge also  referred
   to evidence of money transfers from the sponsor to his mother or  to  the
   appellant for the appellant's upkeep. The sponsor was now married with  a
   young child and was living in the UK and wanted his  son  with  him.  The
   sponsor gave evidence that his mother, the main carer for the  appellant,
   had recently died on 16 September 2016. The judge accepted that there was
   family life between the appellant and sponsor. The judge considered  that
   it was not reasonable to expect the sponsor and his wife and daughter  to
   move to Cameroon. She accepted that the requirements of  the  immigration
   rules were substantially met and that the respondent's decision  was  not
   proportionate and she allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8  human  rights
   grounds.

7.    Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  by  the
   respondent on the grounds that the judge had failed  to  make  a  finding
   that  the  appellant's  mother  had  abdicated  responsibility  for   his
   upbringing in line with the guidance in TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole
   responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049;  and  that   the   judge's
   proportionality assessment was flawed with respect to her findings on the
   ability of the sponsor to move to Cameroon.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted on  29  March  2017,  with  particular
   reference to the first ground of challenge.

Appeal Hearing

9.   At the hearing both parties made submissions.

10.  Mr Jarvis submitted that  the  judge  had  made  no  clear  finding  on
   whether the requirements of the  immigration  rules  were  met.  In  that
   respect he referred to the judge's finding at  [21]  and  [23]  that  the
   immigration rules have  "substantially"  been  met.  The  judge  made  no
   express finding on paragraph 297(i)(e) or (f) and the ECO was  unable  to
   see from the judge's decision on what basis the appeal was allowed.

11.  Ms Childs submitted that it was clear from the decision that the  judge
   considered the  requirements  to  have  been  met  with  regard  to  sole
   responsibility. The letter and affidavit from the appellant's mother made
   it clear that she had abdicated responsibility for the appellant and that
   the sponsor had sole responsibility for him. The judge did not  challenge
   the letter and affidavit and that was therefore sufficient  in  terms  of
   findings on sole responsibility. The judge, further, found  there  to  be
   serious and  compelling  circumstances  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
   297(i)(f)  of  the  rules,  following  the  death  of   the   appellant's
   grandmother. With regard to the proportionality assessment, it  was  open
   to the judge to find that it was not reasonable for the sponsor's British
   family to move to Cameroon. There was no material error of law.

12.  In response Mr Jarvis submitted that there was a  failure  properly  to
   consider the evidence from the appellant's  mother.  In  the  absence  of
   engagement with that evidence, no proper findings could be considered  to
   have been made in regard to sole responsibility.

Consideration and Findings

13.  I find myself in agreement with Mr Jarvis'  submissions.  There  is  no
   clear finding by the judge in regard to the letter and affidavit from the
   appellant's mother, in terms of its reliability  or  the  extent  of  the
   appellant's mother's relationship with her son.  Even  if  the  judge  is
   taken, by her reference to the letter at [9],  to  have  accepted  it  as
   genuine, and whilst she referred to the issue of sole  responsibility  at
   [12], it is not clear at all from  her  findings  that  she  applied  the
   guidance in TD (Yemen) and considered whether the appellant's mother  had
   actually abdicated responsibility for her son, as opposed to a preference
   that he move to the UK to join his father. The judge's findings  focussed
   on the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  father  without  any  clear
   indication of his mother's role in  his  life.  That,  in  turn,  plainly
   impacted upon the judge's  findings  on  compelling  circumstances  under
   paragraph 297(i)(f) and Article 8 outside the  rules.  I  agree  with  Mr
   Jarvis that it is not clear what the judge meant by the immigration rules
   being "substantially" met at [21] and [23] and it  is  relevant  to  note
   that the judge's decision on a fee award suggests that she did  not  find
   the rules to be met at the date of decision. Plainly  without  any  clear
   finding on the appellant's ability to meet the immigration rules  at  the
   relevant  time,  there  can  be  no  proper  Article  8   proportionality
   assessment and the judge's decision on Article 8 is accordingly flawed.

14.  For all of these reasons the judge's decision cannot be  sustained  and
   must be set aside and re-made. It seems to me that, given the need for  a
   full assessment of the evidence and the appellant's mother's role in  his
   life  and  for  appropriate  findings  of  fact  to  be  made,  the  most
   appropriate course would be for the case to be remitted to the First-tier
   Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

DECISION

15.  The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal  is
   allowed and the decision is set aside.

16.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant  to  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
   Practice Statement 7.2(b), to be heard afresh before any judge aside from
   Judge Moan.

    Anonymity


    Although the judge referred in  the  heading  of  her  decision  to  an
    anonymity direction having been made, the  decision  contains  no  such
    direction and the judge, at the end of the decision, said that no  such
    direction was made. Given that the appellant is now an adult I  see  no
    reason for there to be an anonymity order in any event.




Signed:       [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 20 March 2018
