
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/06463/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 December 2019                      |On 20 December 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                mr Mahad Khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik of Counsel, instructed by Sabz
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Swinnerton of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sent  on  6
    August 2019 dismissed the appeal of the appellant against the  decision
    of the respondent on 23 March 2019 to refuse his human rights claim.

2.   The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  are  unstructured  but  appear  to
    contend that the judge erred in:

    (1)  failing to properly weigh the relevant factors in the  context  of
         Section 117B of the NIAA 2002;


    (2)  failing to take account of the fact that the appellant had  stayed
         in the United Kingdom for almost half  his  life  at  the  time  of
         application and the date of hearing;


    (3)  deciding on the basis of no evidence that the appellant  would  be
         able to find a job or relocate to Pakistan notwithstanding his lack
         of ties and the acceptance that  his  nuclear  family  members  all
         resided in the United Kingdom; and


    (4)  failing to give adequate or any reasons why the  evidence  of  the
         appellant's sister had been rejected.

3.   I heard excellent submissions from both  Mr  Karnik  and  Mr  Tan.   In
    amplifying the grounds, Mr Karnik submitted that the  judge's  decision
    failed to show that he had understood the need for  assessment  of  the
    appellant's ability to integrate in Pakistan in the light of the  Court
    of Appeal guidance in  Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813  which  had  been
    endorsed in several decisions since, including very recently in  [2019]
    EWCA  Civ  2098.   That  failure  was  particularly  important  in  the
    appellant's case because it was accepted that he had  been  brought  to
    the United Kingdom at the age of 13.  In this regard, Mr Karnik  argued
    that at paragraph 23 the judge had put an impermissible  gloss  on  the
    meaning of the term "very significant obstacles" by  stating  that  the
    appellant's ability to form an adequate private life should  be  judged
    by the standards of Pakistan, not UK standards.

4.   By reference to the Court of Appeal decision  in  GM  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
    1630, Mr Karnik argued that  the  judge's  approach  to  the  balancing
    exercise required when assessing the case outside the Rules was flawed.
     Mr Karnik took  particular  exception  to  the  judge's  statement  in
    paragraph 26 that:


         "I took into account that the public interest in  firm  immigration
         control is not directed by the consideration of the person pursuing
         a claim under Article 8 has at no time been a financial  burden  on
         the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is  likely  to  remain  so
         indefinitely."

5.   Mr Tan contended that the judge had properly applied the relevant  test
    under the Rules and outside the Rules.  The judge had  focused  on  the
    issue of integration sufficiently.  The reference to  firm  immigration
    control did not amount to unduly elevating the public interest  factors
    in the proportionality assessment.  The judge was entitled to  conclude
    as he did in relation to the appellant's ability to find  work.   There
    was an adequacy of reasons.  The judge gave detailed treatment  of  why
    there had  not  been  shown  to  be  any  interdependency  between  the
    appellant and his sister.

6.   I am not persuaded that the judge materially erred in law.

7.   Insofar as the grounds challenge the judge's treatment of Section  117B
    considerations (the subject of ground  (1)),  a  fair  reading  of  the
    decision  shows  that  the  judge  had  regard  to  all  the   relevant
    considerations set out, including the appellant's  fluency  in  English
    and  his  financial  circumstances.   Whilst   the   judge   does   not
    specifically refer to Section 117B(5) when setting out the Section 117B
    considerations, he had earlier dealt with the issue of the  immigration
    status of the appellant.  It was clear that the judge  was  aware  that
    the appellant had come to the country when he was 13 and that this  was
    not by his own choice and therefore his immigration status up until the
    age when he became an adult (in 2012) was not in issue.   In  paragraph
    17 the judge stated that he  found  the  evidence  about  when  in  his
    adulthood the appellant claimed  to  have  discovered  his  immigration
    status to be precarious was vague.  At paragraph  21  the  judge  noted
    that he accepted that part of the time the appellant had overstayed was
    when he was a child under the care of his parents and the  decision  to
    overstay then was made not by him but  by  his  parents.   However  the
    judge noted that the appellant was now aged 24. That amounted to a fair
    treatment of the s.117(5) issue.

 8.     Mr Karnik takes issue with the judge's treatment in the  context  of
    the Section 117B considerations to the judge's reference  to  a  "firm"
    immigration control in paragraph  26.   I  do  not  consider  that  the
    judge's use of that adjective was intended to denote a higher threshold
    of public interest than is set out in the Act or in the Rules.  For one
    thing, the judge was purely concerned in  the  relevant  sentence  with
    what weight he could attach to the  appellant's  ability  to  be  self-
    sufficient or to be a burden on the state in relation to  Section  117B
    (3). For  another,  the  judge  clarified  in  the  final  sentence  of
    paragraph 26 that the significance of the  Section  117B  (2)  and  (3)
    considerations was  that  when  they  were  not  present,  "the  public
    interest is fortified".  That is consistent with the  established  case
    law principles dealing with Sections 117B (2) and (3).

9.     In relation to ground (2), the grounds contend that the  judge  erred
    by failing to take into account that the appellant had  stayed  in  the
    United Kingdom for almost half his life at the time of application  and
    the date of hearing.  I  find  no  discernible  error  in  the  judge's
    treatment of this issue. First of all, it was  accepted  by  Mr  Karnik
    that the  appellant  was  not  in  a  position  to  meet  the  relevant
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, even now that he had turned  25.
    Furthermore, it was clearly in the forefront of the judge's  mind  that
    the appellant had been in the UK since 2007 when he was aged  13.   The
    judge clearly took account of the appellant's evidence about the extent
    of his integration into the United Kingdom, noting that he had obtained
    skills, qualifications and experience  of  life  in  the  UK:  see  for
    example  paragraph  7  and  paragraph  21.   The  judge  herd   related
    submissions on this issue and was clearly entitled to make the findings
    on it that he did.

10.  In relation to the appellant's challenge to the  judge's  treatment  of
    whether or not he met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules
    by being able to show that there would be very significant obstacles to
    his integration into Pakistan (the subject of  ground  (3)),  I  concur
    with Mr Tan that whilst the judge does  not  refer  to  Kamara  or  any
    related case law his approach to this issue was entirely consonant with
    the approach set out in that decision.  That is perhaps  clearest  from
    paragraph 25 where the judge stated that he accepted that "there may be
    some obstacles to the appellant integrating into Pakistan, particularly
    when he first returned to the country but I  do  not  find  that  these
    would amount to very significant obstacles to his integration.".   This
    paragraph follows paragraph 24, wherein the judge stated:

    "24. I took into account his period of residence outside  Pakistan  and
         that he has been in the UK  since  the  age  of  13,  spending  his
         teenage years and  early  adult  hood  in  this  country.   He  had
         attended school in Pakistan,  starting,  he  thinks,  when  he  was
         eight. He attended for five years until he was 13. He has lived the
         majority of his life, albeit when he was a child in Pakistan and he
         will have obtained knowledge of the culture and  traditions  during
         this time. The evidence before me is that he is in good health  and
         is  resourceful.  He  has  managed  to  support   himself,   albeit
         illegally, by looking for and then doing work including  gardening,
         cleaning buses and some  bodywork  on  vehicles.  He  has  obtained
         qualifications in the UK  and  he  could  utilise  his  skills  and
         experience to  look  for  and  find  work  to  support  himself  in
         Pakistan. He speaks Urdu, one of the main languages in Pakistan  as
         well as English and he would be able to  communicate  socially  and
         also when looking for work and subsequently when he was doing it. I
         am not persuaded that he  would  have  forgotten  the  customs  and
         traditions in Pakistan, where he previously lived, was educated and
         socialised if he returned to that country. His claims that he would
         not be able to find work in Pakistan, and would be destitute,  lack
         credibility especially as, on his own  admission  he  has  made  no
         attempts to look for work in that country. While he was looking for
         work and re-establishing himself in Pakistan, his uncle  in  Sweden
         who has provided him with financial  support  previously  could  do
         this  again.  His  friend  in  the  UK,  offered  to  support   him
         financially if he remains in the UK. It is  reasonable,  that  this
         friend might also provide financial support to him by sending money
         to Pakistan while the appellant looks for work in Pakistan."

    It is clear in this paragraph that the judge had regard to a wide range
    of circumstances relating to the position that the appellant was likely
    to find on return in terms  of  understanding  how  his  life  in  that
    society would be carried on and his capacity to participate in it so as
    to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there and to be able to
    operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build up within  a
    reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance  to
    his private or family life.  The judge conducted  "a  broad  evaluative
    judgment".

11.  Still in relation  to  ground  (3),  it  is  said  that  there  was  no
    evidential  basis  for  the  judge's  assessment  of  very  significant
    obstacles. However, as paragraph  24  and  related  paragraphs  clearly
    convey, the appellant's  own  evidence  was  that  he  understood  Urdu
    although not able to read or write it. Even though the appellant stated
    that he had little contact with his paternal and/or maternal  relatives
    in that country, he himself clearly accepted  that  there  were  family
    members in Pakistan.  The judge's assessment of the appellant's  likely
    ability to find work in Pakistan  was  based  on  the  appellant's  own
    evidence regarding his health and his work experience.  It was also the
    appellant's own evidence that there had  been  financial  support  made
    available to him previously by an uncle in Sweden and a friend  in  the
    UK.  It was entirely  open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  similar
    financial support could be provided to  the  appellant  whilst  he  was
    looking for work in Pakistan.  The appellant's challenge to this aspect
    of the judge's findings amounts to no more  than  a  mere  disagreement
    with the judge's findings and associated reasons.

12.  Mr Karnik submits that the judge erred in paragraph 23 in stating  that
    the appellant's ability to form an adequate private  life  in  Pakistan
    should be judged by the standards of Pakistan,  not  by  UK  standards.
    Taken in isolation, that statement of the judge is open  to  criticism,
    in seeming to suggest that the standard was a purely relative  cultural
    standard, rather than an objective one.  However, read in  the  context
    of the decision as a whole, the judge clearly did conduct an  objective
    consideration of whether there were very significant obstacles.

13.  The grounds finally (ground (4)) take issue with  the  judge's  alleged
    failure to give adequate  or  any  reasons  why  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's sister had been rejected, feature which was  said  to  make
    unsustainable the findings  made  by  the  judge  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's role in the life of his nephews  and  nieces.   I  consider
    that this ground also lacks merit.  It is clear  that  the  judge  took
    account of the evidence as a whole, including the oral  evidence  given
    by the appellant and his sister.  The evidence of his  sister  was  set
    out at paragraph 18 and the judge noted that  it  was  consistent  with
    that given by the appellant.  At paragraphs 27 and 28 the judge stated:



         27.  I am not satisfied that if the appellant  leaves  the  UK  and
             returns  to  Pakistan   it   would   be   a   disproportionate
             interference with the right to respect for  Article  8  Family
             Life. The appellants family  life  with  his  sister  and  his
             nephew  and  niece  was  established  at  a  time   when   his
             immigration status is precarious. I am not satisfied that  his
             relationship with his sister is other than  that  of  a  close
             relationship  between  siblings.   There   is   no   financial
             interdependence  between   them.   They   live   in   separate
             households. They have only recently maintained contact  having
             met each other again, by accident in January 2019. I am  aware
             that because of her immigration status, she has  been  granted
             asylum in the UK, the appellants sister would not be  able  to
             visit him Pakistan with and/or without her children.  However,
             it would be possible for them to maintain  their  relationship
             through  social  media  including,  Facebook,  Skype,  and  by
             telephone. When he was living in Pakistan the appellant  could
             also apply for a visa to come and visit  his  sister  and  her
             family in the UK. I accept that several nights each  week  the
             appellant will look after his sister's children when she  goes
             to work on the nightshift but I note that she previously  paid
             a third party to do this. If he were to return to Pakistan  it
             is reasonable to expect that she would be able to arrange  and
             pay for childcare again as she did before.


         28.  The appellant's nephew and niece are young  children.  He  has
             only recently established a  relationship  with  them,  having
             become involved with his sister and her children,  only  since
             the end of January 2019. I accept that his  relationship  with
             the children may have quickly become close, that he sees  them
             several times each week and stays in the house to  look  after
             them several nights each week while  his  sister  is  working.
             However, I do not accept that he has become a father figure in
             their lives and or that he has a family life with  them  which
             engages Article 8. The Appellant does not  live  in  the  same
             household as the children. His sister, the children's  mother,
             not the appellant, is  their  primary  carer  responsible  for
             their day-to-day care and well-being. The children also have a
             father who is separated from their mother but,  who  maintains
             contact with them. If the appellant returns  to  Pakistan,  he
             would be able to maintain contact with the children, if  their
             mother and  or  another  adult  responsible  for  their  care,
             consents to this, e.g. by telephone and or  Skype.  I  am  not
             satisfied that these children would suffer by the  absence  of
             the appellant.  They would remain living with her mother,  she
             would continue to care for them and provide for their physical
             and emotional needs. I am not satisfied that their lives would
             be disrupted. I accept they would miss him, as they would miss
             a grandparent or other close family relative,  but  given  the
             appellant's precarious position, I do not  find  it  would  be
             disproportionate to return him to Pakistan.

    On a fair reading of these paragraphs, the judge was not disputing  the
    account given by the appellant and his sister of the circumstances.  At
    paragraph 18  he  noted  that  the  sister's  evidence  about  how  the
    appellant visits her  home  regularly  and  looks  after  the  children
    usually for a couple of nights each week when she is working the  night
    shift is "consistent with the appellant's own and I accepted it".  What
    the judge was doing in paragraph 27 and 28 was conducting an evaluative
    exercise of  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  and  his  sister
    regarding their relationship and also regarding his  relationship  with
    the nephew and nieces.  It was entirely open to the judge on the  basis
    of those accepted facts (in particular that they did not  live  in  the
    same household and were not  financially  interdependent)  to  conclude
    that they did not establish that there was a family  life  relationship
    (within the meaning of Article 8(1) of the ECHR) between the  appellant
    on the one hand and his sister and his niece and nephew on  the  other.
    In any event, the judge still took these relationships into account  as
    part of the Article 8 assessment (these been relevant  to  his  private
    life)  and  very  much  focused  on  the  factual  content   of   these
    relationship.

14.  It was the appellant's claim that the relationship with his sister  had
    become very close as it had been  when  they  were  children  and  that
    therefore substantial weight should be attached  to  this  relationship
    when it came to assessing the  appellant's  circumstances  outside  the
    Rules.  In paragraphs 27 and  28  the  judge  gave  sound  reasons  for
    concluding that whilst this relationship was significant and whilst his
    relationship with the  children  may  have  quickly  become  close,  it
    remained the case that  the  sister  was  the  primary  carer  and  the
    children also had a father who was separated from the  mother  but  who
    maintains contacts with them.  It was open to  the  judge  to  conclude
    that the mother would continue to care for the children and provide for
    their physical  and  emotional  needs  and  that  the  appellant  being
    required to return to Pakistan would not  significantly  disrupt  their
    lives.

15.  For the above reasons, I conclude that the  judge  did  not  materially
    err in law.  Accordingly, the decision of the judge must stand.

16.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date: 16 December 2019
             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



