

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/06395/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23 March 2018                          |  On 29 March 2018               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                       MR CHAUDHURY SHARJEEL IFTIKHAR
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Wass of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Proceedings

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 10th of February  1993.
      His appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 18th of February
      2016, to refuse to grant leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  under
      Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, was  allowed  by  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Sweet sitting at Taylor  House  on  19th  of  July
      2017.  The  Respondent  appeals  with  leave  against  that  decision.
      Although this matter comes before me as an appeal by  the  Respondent,
      as I have dismissed the Respondent's appeal for the  reasons  which  I
      set out below, I shall continue to refer to the parties as  they  were
      known at first instance for the sake of convenience.


   2. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2012 as a Tier 4 (general)
      student with leave until 12th of August 2013  which  was  subsequently
      extended on two occasions until 8th of April 2016.  In  November  2012
      the Appellant met his wife Sauda Talawi Abubakr, a person present  and
      settled in the United Kingdom  ("the  Sponsor").  She  is  a  Filipino
      national born on 14th of October 1969  who  has  indefinite  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom. The couple married on  26th  of  October
      2015 and the Appellant applied for leave to remain as  the  spouse  of
      his Sponsor on  19th  of  November  2015.  They  attended  a  marriage
      interview with the Respondent on 10th of February 2016.


   3. The Respondent refused the application partly because there were  said
      to be discrepancies in the marriage interviews and partly  because  of
      the age gap between the parties of some 23 years.  As  a  result,  the
      Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  marriage  was   genuine   and
      subsisting. She refused  the  application  on  the  grounds  that  the
      Appellant could not meet section E-LTRP 1.10 of Appendix  FM  (of  the
      Immigration Rules (the requirement to demonstrate an intention to live
      together permanently in the United Kingdom). There were no exceptional
      circumstances justifying the claim to be  allowed  outside  the  Rules
      under Article 8.


   4. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal both the  Appellant  and
      Sponsor attended and gave oral testimony. They also relied on the oral
      evidence of a witness Mr Naveed Ahmed a friend of the Appellant's  who
      had known the Appellant since 2012 and the Sponsor since 2013.


   5.  The  Respondent  argued  that  there  were  no  statements  from  the
      Appellant's relatives in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  Sponsor  had
      produced no witnesses of her own to confirm  the  relationship.  There
      was also said to be a lack  of  evidence  regarding  the  relationship
      prior to the marriage. The Appellant and the Sponsor  told  the  Judge
      that they  conversed  in  English  with  each  other  and  had  common
      religious beliefs. They argued that there were no  inconsistencies  in
      their evidence.


   6. At [28] to [32] the Judge gave his reasons why  he  was  allowing  the
      appeal. He had some sympathy for the Respondent's concerns  about  the
      genuineness of the relationship finding the age gap of over  23  years
      to be significant. At [31] and [32] the  Judge  wrote:  "while  I  can
      understand why the Respondent concluded that this was  a  marriage  of
      convenience because of the  apparent  discrepancies  in  the  marriage
      interview,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  those  discrepancies  are  of
      sufficient magnitude for that  conclusion  to  be  reached.  There  is
      evidence of their relationship before their marriage, by way  of  text
      messages but there is also independent evidence from Naveed Ahmed (who
      gave evidence before me) but  also  from  Lalaine  Pineda  and  Feliza
      Cabaong as to their ongoing relationship.  Taking  all  these  factors
      into account, I conclude that this was not a marriage  of  convenience
      and  therefore  the  Appellant  can  meet  the  requirements  of   the
      Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  eligibility.  The  appeal  should
      therefore be allowed."


   7. The  Respondent  appealed  against  that  decision  arguing  that  the
      Respondent had merely concluded  that  the  relationship  between  the
      Appellant and Sponsor was not genuine and subsisting on the  basis  of
      the interview between the parties. The Respondent only had the  burden
      of proof in an EEA case whereas in an application for leave under  the
      Immigration Rules the burden of proof was on  the  Appellant  to  show
      that the marriage was genuine. The Judge had reversed  the  burden  of
      proof in this case. Had the Judge directed  himself  properly  he  may
      well have come to a different conclusion.

   8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Robertson on 17th of January 2018. She found  arguable  merit  in  the
      grounds because the Judge appeared to have accepted  that  the  burden
      was  on  the  Respondent  to  prove  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
      convenience when the burden of  proof  was  on  the  Appellant.  Judge
      Robertson suggested that Judge  Sweet  had  not  been  helped  by  the
      submissions made by the Presenting Officer that the  burden  of  proof
      was on the Respondent as to the genuineness of  the  relationship  but
      thereafter the burden shifted onto the Appellant.


   9. I note here that that is in fact the correct  test.  Judge  Sweet  had
      gone on to say that the burden  of  proof  was  on  the  Appellant  in
      respect of the application. The burden of proof (I  assume  the  Judge
      meant the initial burden) in respect of a marriage of convenience  was
      on the Respondent but once that burden had been satisfied  the  burden
      of proof then reverted to the Appellant.


  10. The Appellant replied to the grant pursuant to rule  24  arguing  that
      Judge Sweet had commenced his findings at [28]  of  the  determination
      with  the  acknowledgement  that  the  burden  of  proof  was  on  the
      Appellant. The determination made no further reference  thereafter  to
      the burden being on  the  Respondent.  The  Judge  had  supported  his
      conclusions that the marriage was genuine by reference to the couple's
      shared language, evidence of their relationship before marriage,  text
      messages and independent  evidence.  The  Judge  made  clear  positive
      finding which did not indicate an error of law.

Findings

  11. As a result of the grant of permission the matter came  before  me  to
      determine in the first place whether there was a material error of law
      in the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal such that it fell to be set
      aside. If there was not then the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      would stand. For the Respondent the  Presenting  Officer  acknowledged
      that the argument in the grounds as to the burden of proof applied  by
      the Judge was not a strong one.


  12. I indicated to the parties that although the decision of the Judge was
      not particularly detailed, it was sufficient to  support  the  Judge's
      view that the marriage was genuine and subsisting and I did not find a
      material error of law in the determination. I was therefore  proposing
      to dismiss the Respondent's appeal and  uphold  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal. There was no objection to this course  of  action
      from the Respondent.


  13. The Judge correctly identified that the initial  burden  of  proof  of
      establishing  a  prima  facie  case  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
      convenience rested on the Respondent. That burden had been  discharged
      by the Respondent's concerns over the text of the interviews  and  the
      age gap. The burden thereafter shifted onto the Appellant to  show  on
      the balance of probabilities that this was a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship. The Judge gave his reasons at [31] and  these,  I  find,
      were sufficient to indicate to the losing party (the  Respondent)  why
      she had lost.


  14. It was a matter for the Judge to decide what weight should  be  placed
      on the evidence of the supporting witnesses, two of whom were  not  in
      fact called to give evidence but made statements in  support.  Another
      Judge might have placed less weight on that evidence  but  that  would
      not of itself indicate a material error of law  on  the  part  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal. I remind myself that the Judge had the benefit of
      hearing the oral evidence of the Appellant, Sponsor and Mr  Ahmed  and
      that it was a matter for him to decide whether that  evidence  crossed
      the appropriate threshold of the standard of proof.  The  Respondent's
      appeal in this case is a mere disagreement with the  result  and  does
      not indicate a material error of law in the determination. I therefore
      dismiss the Respondent's appeal against the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Respondent's
    appeal

Respondent's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Signed this 26th of March 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed  the  appeal  the  fee  award  made  by  the  First-Tier
Tribunal will stand.


Signed this 26th of March 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
