
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06251/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 April 2018                      |On 20 April 2018                   |
|                                          |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                BHAJAN SINGH
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bukhari a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Ahmed a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The brevity of this decision is due to the commendable focus of  the
       Representatives and narrowness of the issue. It is not necessary  to
       go into the detail of the case. In summary it concerned  an  elderly
       man with "ailments of age" who had family here and said  he  had  no
       family or adequate support available to him should he have to return
       to India, such that there were very  significant  obstacles  to  him
       doing so.

 Background

    2. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
       remain on 19 February 2016. His appeal against this was dismissed by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi ("the Judge") following a hearing  on
       13 October 2017.

The grant of permission


   3. Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley granted permission to appeal (16 January
      2018) as it is arguable that the Judge materially erred in;

          1) Misrepresenting the Appellant's daughter's  evidence  regarding
             when the family decided he should stay here,


          2) Speculating as to the support he would have from the  community
             and extended family in India,


          3) Failing to consider evidence of his deteriorating health,


          4) Failing to consider evidence of him having a safer  quality  of
             life here, and accordingly


          5) Failing to adequately assess issues of insurmountable  or  very
             significant  obstacles  on  return,  the   proportionality   of
             removal, and whether he qualified under [276ADE  (1)  (vi)]  of
             the Immigration Rules.



Respondent's position

    4. No rule 24 notice was filed.


    5. Miss Z Ahmed conceded (after at her request  I  read  out  the  oral
       evidence of the Appellant's daughter that it was not  the  intention
       he should remain here when he applied to come)  that  ground  1  was
       made out. However, it was not material to the decision.


    6. She also conceded that she had difficulties regarding ground 2 where
       the Judge stated at [27]

             "I also know from my experience of dealing with cases of  this
             type that village life in India is based around community  and
             that members of the community rally  round  and  assist  older
             people - particularly those who  are  left  on  their  own  if
             indeed the appellant is left alone as he claims."

   7. This was plainly speculation and had not been put to the Appellant  or
      his daughter for their comments.


    8. She also conceded that she had difficulties regarding  ground  3  as
       there was evidence of deteriorating health  after  he  arrived  here
       which fed into the issue of his safety on return in ground 4.

Discussion

    9. Given the concessions made by the Respondent, and having  considered
       it myself, I am satisfied that a material error of law occurred with
       regards grounds 2, 3, and 4 as referred to above.  They  go  to  the
       heart of the assessment of the difficulties the Appellant  may  have
       on his return to India in ground 5, and it cannot  be  said  that  a
       different Judge would inevitably reach the same  conclusion  as  did
       Judge Obhi.


   10. I do not accept  the  error  in  ground  1  materially  affects  the
       decision.


   11. Given these findings, I am also  satisfied  having  heard  from  the
       representatives that it is appropriate to remit the matter for a new
       hearing, as the errors of fact  and  speculation,  go  beyond  those
       contained within the Presidential  Guidance  for  retention  in  the
       Upper Tribunal.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a new hearing with no
    findings being preserved, but not before Judge Obhi.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
19 April 2018
