
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/06662/2018
     HU/10201/2018
     HU/10204/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On February 12, 2019                         |On February 19, 2019          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  IHSAM [U]
                                 AFSHAN [I]
                                    [S U]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by Ilford Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first-named appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student on
    February 17, 2007 with leave to remain until November 30, 2009. His
    leave was subsequently extended to remain both as a student and as a
    Tier 4 student until July 31, 2010. On July 30, 2010 the appellant was
    granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 Highly Skilled (Post-Study Worker)
    migrant until July 30, 2012 and his leave was extended until June 20,
    2016 by subsequent applications.


 2. On June 16, 2016 the first-named appellant applied for indefinite leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (General) migrant but subsequently varied this
    application on March 30, 2017 to leave to remain based on 10 years
    continuous long residence.

 3. The second and third-named appellants originally joined the first-named
    appellant as his dependants on March 1, 2008 before returning to
    Pakistan in 2011 albeit they then returned to be with the appellant in
    the United Kingdom. Their leave has been extended in line with the
    first-named appellant leave.

 4. The respondent refused their applications on March 9, 2018 (first-named
    appellant) and April 18, 2018 (remaining appellants) respectively. The
    appellants appealed their decisions on May 8, 2018 under section 82(1)
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 arguing the decisions were
    flawed and that the decision to reject the first-named appellant's
    application under paragraph 322(5) HC 395 was wrong.

 5. Their appeals came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal White on
    October 11, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on November 23, 2018 the
    Judge refused their appeals. The appellant appealed those decisions on
    December 6, 2018 raising procedural unfairness, improper application of
    the burden of proof irrational findings and a failure to consider
    material facts and failing to properly consider the best interests of
    the child.

 6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parkes granted permission to appeal on
    the basis  it  was  arguable  there  had  been  procedural  unfairness.
    Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds although Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Parkes observed  that  the  remaining  grounds  had
    "considerably less merit" as the Judge had properly directed himself as
    to the correct burden of proof and the guidance issued by the  Tribunal
    in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.

    SUBMISSIONS


 7. Mr Gajjar adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted there had been  a
    material  error.  He  argued  that  at   the   original   hearing   the
    representatives indicated to the Judge that there were no questions  to
    be put to the appellant by either party. By drawing adverse findings on
    the appellant's failure to give evidence and address concerns that  the
    Judge had, there had been procedural unfairness.  The  Tribunal  in  AM
    (fair hearing) Sudan  [2015]  UKUT  00656  stated  that  "fairness  may
    require a Tribunal to canvas an issue which has not been ventilated  by
    the parties or their representatives, in  fulfilment  of  each  party's
    right to a fair hearing." His findings at paragraph  12  amount  to  an
    error in law because by  not  raising  his  concerns  with  either  the
    appellant or the representative there had  been  procedural  unfairness
    especially as the Judge had allowed the appellant  to  clarify  another
    matter with his representative during the hearing.


 8. Mr Gajjar further argued that the Judge had materially erred in finding
    the appellant's family left the United Kingdom on March 1, 2012 when in
    fact she had left later. The Judge had also made irrational findings in
    relation the appellant's mental health or make adequate findings on the
    issue of his first  tax  return.  Finally,  he  submitted  the  Judge's
    article 8 assessment was flawed and he had failed to properly  consider
    the best interests of the child.

 9. Mr Avery opposed the application. He submitted there was no  procedural
    irregularity because the  appellant  had  never  been  called  to  give
    evidence. The respondent was relying on the decision letter and had  no
    questions to put to the appellant. It was a matter for counsel  whether
    to tender the appellant  to  the  Tribunal  or  not.  The  findings  in
    paragraph 20 had been especially following the decision in Khan  [2018]
    UKUT 384. The actual date was not material to  the  case  in  hand  and
    following the decision in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC  53  the  Judge  had
    reached findings that were open to him on where it was proportionate to
    require the appellants to leave the United Kingdom.

10. I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS

11. In granting permission to appeal the Judge primarily found it  arguable
    there had been  procedural  unfairness when  the  Judge  made  adverse
    findings without giving the first-named  appellant  an  opportunity  to
    address those concerns.

12. In SSHD v Balasingham Maheshwaran [2002] EWCA  Civ  173  the  Court  of
    Appeal said that it was going too far to say that, if the Secretary  of
    State does not challenge an assertion of fact made by the appellant and
    if the adjudicator does not raise with the appellant any  doubts  about
    his veracity, then the adjudicator is bound to accept that assertion as
    true, although fairness may sometimes require the adjudicator to put an
    inconsistency to the appellant - for example if an adjudicator  had  in
    mind to go behind an express concession.

13. How the appellant presented his case was ultimately a  matter  for  him
    and his legal advisers. At the hearing before me I expressed  the  view
    that it is good practice for a party to call the appellant as a witness
    to adopt a statement and make himself  available  for  questions.  When
    this case came before the First-tier Tribunal it appears that following
    a discussion between the two representatives, counsel for the appellant
    took the decision not to call the  appellant  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent had no questions for the witness. There does not  appear  to
    have been any discussion with the First-tier Judge over whether he  may
    have had questions for witness.

14. Mr Avery submitted the decision not to call the appellant to give  oral
    evidence was not through any  intervention  by  the  Judge  but  was  a
    decision taken by the appellant and his counsel. The Judge  should  not
    be criticised for not asking questions in circumstances  where  he  has
    demonstrated that he had engaged with the relevant factors in the  case
    and then made findings that were open to him.

15. Neither the Court of Appeal in SSHD v Balasingham Maheshwaran  nor  the
    Tribunal in AM require the  Judge  to  specifically  ask  questions  in
    circumstances where  the  respondent  relied  on  the  content  of  the
    decision letter in closing submissions but both decisions stressed  the
    need to put inconsistencies to witnesses where necessary.

16. I accept Mr Gajjar's submission that by failing to take up either  with
    the appellant or his representative  matters  which  clearly  played  a
    significant role in the  Judge's  decision  there  was  an  element  of
    procedural unfairness. It is possible that if the  Judge  had  received
    answers to those areas of evidence  where  he  had  concerns  that  his
    ultimate findings with regard to the appellant's tax affairs  may  have
    been different. The decision to make a finding under  paragraph  322(5)
    HC 395 directly affected the decision under paragraph 276B HC 395.

17. The other grounds advanced in  respect  of  matters  other  than  "best
    interests of the children" do not add anything to the above finding.

18. In finding an error in law, I am satisfied that this case will  require
    a de novo hearing and it would be inappropriate, in such circumstances,
    to retain any of the findings with regard to article 8.

19. I therefore remit this matter back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under
    section 12(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007

Notice of Decision

There is an error in law.  I set aside the original decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date     13/02/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
