
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01614/2018
                                                               HU/01624/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 April 2019                     |On 1st May 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                          JAYRAM BATUKBHAI THAKKAR
                          POONAM BATUKBHAI THAKKUR
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:               Mr. A. Rehman of counsel, instructed by
                      London Imperial Immigration Services Ltd
For the Respondent:          Ms B. Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellants are nationals of India, who were both  under  18  on  26
    August 2017 when they applied for entry clearance to join their  mother
    in the United Kingdom. The basis of their applications was  that  their
    mother had retained sole responsibility for them for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The Appellants' mother had previously registered as a  British  citizen
    on 31 August 2010 and entered the United Kingdom on 12 May  2011.   The
    Appellants had remained in India with their father.

3.   The Applicants' applications were refused on  29  November  2017.  They
    appealed against this decision and First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Seelhof
    dismissed their appeal in a decision promulgated on 18  December  2018.
    They appealed against this decision and Deputy High Court Judge Gullick
    granted them permission to appeal on 26 March 2019.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   The Appellants' Bundle contained some  evidence  which  post-dated  the
    decision under challenge and this will only become relevant if an error
    of law is find.  Therefore,  I  did  not  consider  their  Rule  15(2A)
    application at the start of the hearing. Both counsel for the Appellant
    and the Home Office Presenting Officer made oral submissions and I have
    referred to the content of these submissions,  where  relevant,  in  my
    decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   The grounds of appeal did  not  give  any  particulars  about  why  the
    decision reached by the Respondent in relation to paragraph 297 of  the
    Immigration Rules was said to be unlawful but Deputy High  Court  Judge
    Gullick gave permission to  appeal  in  relation  to  both  grounds  of
    appeal. In considering this appeal, I note that the  basis  upon  which
    the Appellants' appeal could be allowed  was  whether  the  refusal  to
    grant them entry clearance gave rise to a breach of Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights. The Appellants'  ability  to  show
    that they met the requirements of  paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules was relevant to assessing whether  the  requirements  of  Article
    8(2) had been met but was not determinative on its own of the appeal.

6.   Paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules states that:

         "The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave to
         enter the United Kingdom as the  child  of  a  parent,  parents  or
         relative present and settled or being admitted  for  settlement  in
         the United Kingdom are that he:


         (i)   he  is  seeking  leave  to  enter  to  accompany  or  join  a
             parent...in one of the following circumstances:


         (e)  one parent is present and settled on the United  Kingdom...and
             has had sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or


         (f)  one parent is present and settled in the United  Kingdom...and
             there   are   serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
             considerations which make exclusion of the  child  undesirable
             and suitable arrangements  have  been  made  for  the  child's
             care..."

7.   In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049 the Upper Tribunal held that:

         "Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be  decided  upon  all
         the evidence.  Where one parent is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life.  However, where both parents are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have "sole responsibility".

8.   It is clear from the  Appellants'  application  forms  that  they  were
    living at the same address as their father in India. In  their  grounds
    of appeal, it was said that their father's job had  changed  and  that,
    therefore, he had to spend more time away from the family home. It  was
    not clear from the evidence before me how much time he spent away  from
    the home.  At paragraph 9 of her witness statement, dated  22  November
    2018, the Appellants' mother said that their  father  was  out  of  the
    house most of the day. Later in her evidence she said that he was  only
    at home once a week. There is  also  a  letter  from  RASNA,  dated  25
    November 2016, which stated that he  now  had  responsibility  for  the
    Rajasthan region as well as the Gujarat region,  where  they  live  and
    that he was required to spend 15 days in each of these regions.

9.   Therefore,  it  was  not  surprising  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Seelhoff found in paragraph 24 of his decision:

         "The children's father lives with them and although it is said that
         he travels regularly for work, the evidence of that it lacking.  It
         was however accepted that he is at home at least one day a week and
         that reflects significantly more direct contact with  the  children
         than their mother has".

10.  This finding has not been challenged. The Judge also noted that it  was
    accepted that the children's father received  copies  of  their  school
    reports and that he also provided them with some financial support  and
    a home. It was also the sponsor's own evidence that she  discussed  the
    Appellants with their father every day, which  indicated  that  he  was
    involved with their welfare and care even when he  was  travelling  for
    work. In her oral evidence the Appellants' mother also stated that  she
    only started to send the Appellants money by  money  transfer  about  a
    year and a half before the hearing and that was because  her  solicitor
    had advised her to do so.  Prior to that she gave them money  when  she
    visited them.

11.  The photographs in  the  Appellants'  Bundle  indicate  that  when  the
    Appellants' mother visits India she is part of a family unit  with  the
    Appellants and their father. In the light of this evidence, it was  not
    irrational or unlawful for First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill to find  that
    the Appellants' mother did not have sole responsibility  for  them.  It
    was clear from the particular facts of this appeal that  their  parents
    had made a joint decision that the sponsor should travel here in  order
    to work and provide the family with financial support and that she  and
    the Appellants' father continued  to  share  responsibility  for  them.
    There was no basis upon which it could be concluded that the father had
    abdicated responsibility for the Appellants or was totally uninvolved.

12.  I have also taken into account  that  in  the  case  of  TD  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that where  both  parents  are  involved  in  a  child's
    upbringing, it will be exceptional that one of  them  will  have  "sole
    responsibility". There was no evidence of any such exceptionality.

13.  In relation to  paragraph  297(i)(f)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
    evidence taken at its highest was that the  Appellants  were  depressed
    because they had to look after themselves and prepare for  school  when
    their father  was  at  work  and  that  sometimes  he  missed  parents'
    evenings. It was not said that the Appellants had any  health  problems
    or other vulnerabilities. Therefore, there was no basis upon which  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge could rationally have found that  there  were
    serious or other compelling family or other considerations  which  made
    their exclusion undesirable.

14.  However, the principle reason given by Deputy High Court Judge  Gullick
    for granting leave was that First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff had  not
    treated the Appellants best interests as a primary consideration.

15.  I accept that it was not correct for the Judge to find that  "the  best
    interests of children  do  not  directly  apply  [to]  cases  of  entry
    clearance". It  may  be  that  he  was  confusing  the  best  interests
    principle with the duty arising from section 55 of the UK  Borders  Act
    2007 which only applies directly to children within the jurisdiction of
    the United Kingdom. In the case of  Mundeba  (s.55  ad  para  297(i)(f)
    [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal did find that:

         "Where an immigration decision engages Article 8 rights, due regard
         must be had to the UN Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child.  An
         entry clearance decision for admission of a child under 18  is  "an
         action   concerning    children...undertaken    by...administrative
         authorities" and so by Article 3 "the best interests of  the  child
         shall be a primary consideration".

16.  However, in paragraph 29 of his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Seelhoff did directly address the  question  of  whether  refusing  the
    Appellants entry clearance would be in their best interests. He  relied
    on the fact that the Appellants' mother and father had decided that she
    move to the United Kingdom and live separately  from  them  some  eight
    years previously and  that  family  life  was  then  continued  from  a
    distance and through visits and other forms of contact. He  also  noted
    that the Appellants had continued to live with their father  for  those
    years.

17.  As discussed above, there was  nothing  in  the  evidence  provided  on
    behalf of the Appellants to show that they were not  provided  with  an
    adequate home or financial support in  India  or  that  they  were  not
    receiving suitable education. Whilst, it was true that their father was
    away from home working, there was nothing to suggest that they suffered
    abuse or neglect on account of his absence.  There was also no  medical
    evidence to show that his absences had  any  adverse  effect  on  their
    physical or mental health. Reading the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Seelhoff  as  a  whole,  it  is  clear  that  he  did  treat  the
    Appellants' best interests as a primary consideration.

18.  The grounds relied upon by the Appellants  failed  to  address  why  it
    would be in the children's best interests to live with their mother, as
    opposed to their father, and this was an important omission when  their
    best interests were an essential part of the proportionality assessment
    to be carried out under Article 8(2)  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights and the Judge had  made  clear  findings  in  relation  to
    section 297 of the Immigration Rules.

19.  In paragraph 38 of Mundeba the Upper Tribunal found that:

         "As a starting point the best interests of a child are usually best
         served by being with  both  or  at  least  one  of  their  parents.
         Continuity of residence is another factor; change in the  place  of
         residence where a child has grown up for a  number  of  years  when
         socially aware is important..."

20.  In paragraph 50 the Upper Tribunal also found that:

         "...The material advantages of life in the United  Kingdom  is  not
         the test; the loss of his cultural roots in the society in which he
         had grown up to date is a relevant factor.  There  is  no  evidence
         that he is at risk of harm where he is..."

21.  As a consequence, there was no material error of  law  in  relation  to
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff's approach  to  the  Appellants'
    best interests within the proportionality assessment.

DECISION
(1)  There were no material errors  of  law  in  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Seelhoff's decision and his decision is not set aside.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 29 April 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


