
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06601/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 October 2019                            |On 22 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                Mmatlala [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     The sponsor (the appellant's mother - [MJP])
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                  Decision given orally on 25 October 2019

 1. The appellant is national of South Africa, born on 10  July  1999.  She
    is, therefore, now aged 20. Shortly prior  to  her  18th  birthday  the
    appellant applied for entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    child of a person present and settled in the UK (the sponsor), pursuant
    to paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules. This application was refused
    by an Entry Clearance Officer on 2  May  2017,  a  decision  which  the
    appellant subsequently appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal on 5 June 2018  and  was
    dismissed in a decision authored by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Garbett
    on 19 June 2018.  At that hearing  the  appellant  was  represented  by
    counsel and the sponsor provided oral evidence to the Tribunal.

 3. Although the appellant was only entitled  to  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds, a central issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether the
    requirements of  paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration  Rules  had  been
    satisfied. Paragraph 297(e) provides that one requirement of  the  rule
    is that "one parent is present and settled in the  United  Kingdom  ...
    and has had sole responsibility for the child's upbringing".

 4. There is no dispute that the appellant is seeking to  join  her  mother
    and that the appellant's mother is present and settled in the  UK.  The
    core issue in dispute before the First-tier Tribunal  was  whether  the
    appellant's mother has had  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant's
    upbringing.

 5. The term "sole responsibility" in the instant context was considered in
    TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e):  "sole  responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049, a decision the First-tier  Tribunal  took  cognisance  of.   The
    headnote to TD reads:


         "'Sole responsibility' is a factual matter to be decided  upon  all
         the evidence.  Where one parent is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life.  However, where both parents are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have 'sole responsibility'."

 6. The First-tier Tribunal records the appellant's case on this  issue  as
    follows:

         "[24] Ms Phahlamohlaka's evidence is that she has had daily contact
         with her daughter by  telephone  since  her  departure  from  South
         Africa in 2001; that she has always made the important decisions in
         her daughter's life, for  example  schooling  and  has  financially
         supported her daughter either by money transfers or  by  cash  when
         visiting.  She stated she has visited South Africa 24  times  since
         departure and  during  those  visits  has  spent  time  taking  her
         daughter on holiday, on day trips and  discussing  current  issues.
         On occasion she has also taken her sons with her."

 7. The ECO accepted that the sponsor had visited the  appellant  in  South
    Africa 24 times since 2002, which were for periods of between  10  days
    and  138  days.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  go  behind  this
    concession.  It,  nevertheless,  concluded  that  it   had   not   been
    demonstrated to  the  relevant  standard  that  the  sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant's upbringing. In doing so, the  First-
    tier Tribunal found the sponsor's evidence to  be  vague  and  confused
    [26], with specific examples being detailed therein.   It  was  further
    observed [26] that there was an absence of evidence  that  the  sponsor
    had made important decisions  in  the  appellant's  life.   As  to  the
    documents produced by the appellant, the First-tier Tribunal found  the
    money remittal receipts to be of little value, given the limited nature
    of the documentation that had been provided [27] and, in any event,  it
    was found that little weight could be attached to such  documents  when
    considering the issue of sole responsibility. The  First-tier  Tribunal
    further observed the absence of evidence (i) supporting the  contention
    that there had been daily phone calls between the appellant and sponsor
    (having checked the file I can find no such  evidence  other  than  the
    sponsor's own assertions in this regard); (ii) of school invoices being
    addressed to and paid by the  sponsor;  or,  (iii)  of  school  reports
    addressed to the sponsor.




 8. At [28] the First-tier Tribunal  further  observed  that  although  the
    appellant had provided evidence by way of a written statement, this did
    not contain detail  regarding  the  issue  of  responsibility  for  her
    upbringing.


 9. At [29] to [31] the First-tier Tribunal considered affidavits from  the
    appellant's aunt and appellant's father (found at pages 92  and  93  of
    the bundle), identifying the confusing and contradictory nature of  the
    evidence.

10. The First-tier Tribunal ultimately concluded as follows at [32]:

         "Having considered all of the evidence  in  the  round,  I  am  not
         satisfied that the sponsor has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
         appellant's  upbringing.   The  appellant  has  lived  without  the
         sponsor in South Africa since 2001.  Although I  accept  they  have
         kept in touch through telephone calls and visits and some financial
         support has been given I do not accept that  the  sponsor  has  had
         continuing control and direction over  the  appellant's  upbringing
         including making all the important decisions in her  life.   Indeed
         the only decision cited by the  sponsor  related  to  her  choosing
         schools.  I also find the appellant's father has until recently had
         some involvement in the appellant's life and it  follows  that  the
         sponsor cannot be said  to  face  sole  responsibility  during  the
         period."

11. What one can deduce from paragraph 32 is that the First-tier  Tribunal,
    despite having reservations, accepted evidence of the visits,  accepted
    evidence of the payment of some  sums  of  money  by  the  sponsor  and
    accepted evidence of contact but, nevertheless, concluded that  on  the
    available evidence it had not  been  demonstrated  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities  that  the  sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for   the
    appellant's upbringing.

12. I am required to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
    in its decision, not to determine whether I agree or disagree with  the
    conclusion reached.  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  properly
    directed itself in law and applied such self-direction. It took account
    of  all  relevant  evidence  and  did  not  take  account  of  anything
    irrelevant.  It cannot be said that the First-tier Tribunal  unlawfully
    discounted any of the  evidence  before  it,  indeed  on  occasion  the
    Tribunal  drew  inferences,  even  in   the   absence   of   supporting
    documentation, in favour of the appellant.

13. The difficulty for the appellant,  as  highlighted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, is that there was a lack  of  evidence  supporting  the  core
    requirement of sole responsibility i.e. that the appellant's mother had
    continuing control and direction over the child's upbringing  including
    making all important decisions  in  the  child's  life.  The  reasoning
    provided by the First-tier Tribunal at [26] onwards amply supports  the
    conclusion reached and, consequently, in my conclusion the  finding  at
    [32] is a finding that was open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    available evidence.  That being so, in  my  conclusion  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in  law  in  reaching  the  conclusions  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules had not been met, which feeds  in
    to the ultimate, and lawful, conclusion that the  ECO's  decision  does
    not lead to a breach of Article 8 ECHR - the  reasoning  for  which  is
    found in [33] to [36] of its decision.

14. For these  reasons  the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  must  be
    dismissed.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed


Signed
Mark O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

21 November 2019
