
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06290/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 6 November 2017                   |On: 10 November 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     SC
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, instructed by Makka Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on [ ]  1975.  She  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Black dismissing her appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision of 23 September 2015 to refuse her human rights claim.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 29 August 2005 with  entry
      clearance as a visitor, valid  until  February  2006,  and  thereafter
      became an overstayer. On 23 September 2015 she made an application for
      leave to  remain  on  private  life  grounds,  on  the  basis  of  her
      dependency upon her sister and her exceptional circumstances.


   3. It was stated in the appellant's application that she came to  the  UK
      in August 2005 with her mother who was subsequently granted indefinite
      leave to remain in September 2009, her father had died  in  Bangladesh
      in 1998, her eldest brother lived in the US, three other brothers  and
      a sister lived in Bangladesh and four brothers and two  sisters  lived
      in the UK. It was submitted that there were significant  obstacles  to
      the  appellant's  integration  in  Bangladesh  as  she  had   learning
      disabilities and had been entirely dependent upon her mother since her
      father's death. The appellant's mother was now elderly  and  could  no
      longer cope with her needs and the appellant was looked after  by  her
      sister with whom she and her mother resided. Six  of  the  appellant's
      siblings were settled in the UK with their  families.  Three  brothers
      remained in Bangladesh but one was intending to join his son in the US
      and another had bowel cancer. With regard to the  third  brother,  his
      wife had subjected his mother to harassment in Bangladesh forcing  her
      to leave the country and he could not look after  the  appellant.  The
      appellant could not live with her sister as she was married and living
      with her husband's family and it was not culturally acceptable for her
      to live there.


   4. The respondent refused the application, rejecting the claim that there
      were very significant obstacles to integration in Bangladesh  for  the
      purposes  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the  immigration   rules   and
      concluding that there were no exceptional or compelling  circumstances
      justifying a grant of leave outside the rules as there was no evidence
      that the appellant would not be assisted or accommodated by her  three
      brothers and one sister remaining in Bangladesh.


   5. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Black on
      22 May 2017 and was dismissed in a  decision  promulgated  on  1  June
      2017. The judge noted that the appellant had attended the hearing  but
      did not give evidence. She heard  from  the  appellant's  sister.  The
      judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  not  capable   of   living
      independently, that she required full-time supervision  and  that  she
      was a vulnerable person. She noted that the appellant had had no leave
      to remain in the UK since the expiry of her visa in 2006, but accepted
      that that was not through any fault of hers as she was not capable  of
      initiating a process to regularise her stay. However the  judge  found
      that the appellant could adjust to life in Bangladesh with appropriate
      support. She accepted that there was a bond of dependence between  the
      appellant and her sister, but she found that the  appellant  could  be
      accommodated and  cared  for  by  her  three  brothers  or  sister  in
      Bangladesh  and  she  rejected  the  claim  that   it   was   socially
      unacceptable for her to be able to do so. The  judge  found  that  the
      appellant's sister in the UK could also provide financial support  and
      she considered that there had been an exaggeration in the evidence  of
      the appellant's siblings to enhance the chance of success  on  appeal.
      The judge considered that the appellant had a limited private life  in
      the UK and that her lifestyle could be continued  in  Bangladesh.  She
      did not accept that there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
      appellant's integration into Bangladesh and she did  not  accept  that
      there were exceptional or compelling circumstances justifying a  grant
      of leave outside the rules. She dismissed the appeal.


   6. Permission to appeal was  sought  on  the  grounds  that  the  judge's
      findings at [17] were  incomplete,  that  the  judge  had  erroneously
      approached the case like a dependent relative under Appendix FM,  that
      the judge  had  wrongly  rejected  the  cultural  limitations  on  the
      appellant's siblings providing her with care  and  a  home,  that  the
      judge had belittled the impact of the appellant's separation from  her
      mother and that  the  judge's  conclusions  on  paragraph  276ADE  and
      Article 8 outside the rules were therefore flawed.


   7. Permission was granted on 24 August 2017.

Appeal Hearing

   8. At the hearing both parties made submissions before me.

   9. Mr Blundell submitted that the judge had in  effect  put  a  gloss  on
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) by approaching the matter on the basis of  the
      test for adult dependent relatives, rather than by  reference  to  the
      appropriate  considerations  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
      Department v Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813.  He  submitted  that  the
      appellant met the  test  in  Kamara  in  regard  to  very  significant
      obstacles to integration.  Mr  Blundell  said  that  the  judge  erred
      further by failing to consider the background  material  referring  to
      the approach of the Bangladesh authorities to those with mental health
      problems and the widespread stigma against such people.  He  submitted
      that, in finding that the appellant would receive adequate  care  from
      her  family  in  Bangladesh  the  judge   overlooked   five   relevant
      considerations namely: that it was clear from the  witness  statements
      that there was no close relationship between  the  appellant  and  her
      siblings given in particular the age  gap;  that  the  support  system
      suggested by the judge from the appellant's  siblings  had  previously
      been tried and tested but  had  been  unsuccessful;  that  the  social
      stigma attached to people with mental health  problems  in  Bangladesh
      would cause problems for the appellant; that the  background  material
      suggested that it would be difficult to  find  a  paid  carer  or  any
      mental health assistance in Bangladesh due  to  the  stigma;  and  the
      effect on the appellant's mother and sister of  having  the  appellant
      taken from them. Mr Blundell submitted  further  that  the  judge  had
      erred by weighing against the appellant the fact that her  immigration
      status was precarious and unlawful, whereas the cases of MA (Pakistan)
      & Ors, R (on the application of) v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and
      Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and Zoumbas v Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC  74,  albeit  dealing  with
      children, made it clear that it was not correct to weigh  an  unlawful
      immigration status against a person  with  no  understanding  of  such
      concepts. Mr Blundell asked me to find that the  judge  had  therefore
      erred in law in her assessment  within  and  outside  the  immigration
      rules.

  10. Ms Pal asked me to find that the judge  had  considered  all  relevant
      matters and had taken account of all the evidence  and  had  concluded
      that the appellant's family had exaggerated the lack of care available
      to her in Bangladesh. The judge  had  balanced  all  relevant  factors
      against the public interest and had been entitled to conclude  as  she
      did.


Consideration and findings

  11.  It is important, in particular in a case such as this  which  invokes
      considerable sympathy, not to lose sight of the  fact  that  the  task
      before me is to consider whether the judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
      made errors of law requiring her decision to be set aside and re-made,
      bearing in mind the evidence  before  her  and  the  submissions  made
      before her. It appeared to  me that Mr Blundell's submissions were, to
      a large extent, an attempt  to  re-argue  the  appellant's  case  with
      emphasis on matters not specifically put to the judge.

  12. I note that Mr Blundell did not specifically pursue the  point  raised
      at [3] of the grounds in regard to [17] of the judge's decision  which
      was clearly incomplete. It seems to me that it was  quite  clear  what
      the judge was saying,  namely  that  the  appellant's  brothers  could
      accommodate and care for the appellant in Bangladesh, and I cannot see
      how the unfortunate omission of the remainder of the last sentence was
      material.


  13. Mr Blundell's first  submission  was  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
      approach to the test for "very significant obstacles to  integration",
      that her approach was more akin to that of adult  dependent  relatives
      and that she failed to consider the test as set out in Kamara.  It  is
      relevant to note, however, that the appellant's skeleton  argument  at
      [4], which was produced to the judge, specifically relied upon a  case
      relating to an adult dependent relative, namely Dasgupta (error of law
      - proportionality - correct approach) [2016] UKUT 28  and  that  there
      was no reference to, or reliance upon, the case of Kamara  before  the
      judge as far as I am aware. That is an argument which was only  raised
      before me. The judge clearly  had  full  and  careful  regard  to  the
      interpretation of "very significant obstacles to integration"  on  the
      evidence presented to  her,  namely  the  respondent's  guidance,  and
      applied that to the appellant's circumstances at [22] and [23]. In any
      event I do not consider that  the  appellant's  circumstances  can  be
      compared to those in Kamara where reliance was  placed  in  particular
      upon Mr Kamara's lack of family, social and cultural  ties  to  Sierra
      Leone, matters not at all  applicable  to  the  appellant  before  me.
      Furthermore Mr Blundell's reliance on the references in Kamara at [14]
      to a person's capacity  to  participate  in  society  and  ability  to
      operate on a day-to-day basis fails to take account of the  fact  that
      the same considerations would equally apply to the appellant in the UK
      as a result of her learning difficulties. Accordingly I  do  not  find
      merit in the submissions made in that regard and I find  no  error  of
      law in the  judge's  approach  to  the  test  for  establishing  "very
      significant obstacles".

  14. Mr Blundell's subsequent submission  was  that  the  judge  failed  to
      consider the background evidence relating to mental health  issues  in
      Bangladesh when considering the appellant's capacity to participate in
      life in that country. However, again, it is relevant to note that that
      was not a matter particularly pursued before the judge  and  was  only
      expanded  before  me  with  specific  references  to  the   background
      materials. Whilst the grounds of appeal before  the  judge,  at  [18],
      referred to social stigma,  neither  the  skeleton  argument  nor  the
      submissions  made  before  the  judge  emphasised   that   matter   or
      specifically directed her to the background material. Clearly  it  was
      not open to the judge to simply ignore the background evidence  before
      her, but neither was she required to make detailed findings on matters
      not raised before her. The judge clearly had regard to the  background
      material before her, referring to it at [6]  and  confirming  at  [10]
      that she had taken it into account. She  therefore  plainly  had  that
      evidence in mind when making her findings. However her  focus  was  on
      the care available to the appellant within her own family, as that was
      the case put to her. There had been no suggestion that  the  appellant
      experienced problems within her own family as a result of  her  mental
      health and the judge plainly had regard to the fact that the appellant
      would not have access to the same facilities in Bangladesh as she  had
      in the UK, as she mentioned at [20]. Accordingly I find  no  merit  in
      the submissions in that regard and no error of law on the part of  the
      judge.

  15. Mr Blundell then submitted that the judge had overlooked five relevant
      considerations when concluding that the appellant could  be  supported
      by her family in Bangladesh together with paid care. I have set  those
      out above. However I do not consider that to be the  case.  The  judge
      had full regard to all the evidence and addressed the statements  from
      the appellant's siblings. She was perfectly aware that  the  appellant
      was not as close to her other siblings as she was to her sister in the
      UK and that she had grown up with her mother and relied latterly  upon
      her sister and she specifically mentioned that at [23]. She considered
      the circumstances of all three brothers in Bangladesh and  her  sister
      and was aware of the feelings of her sister's husband, as mentioned at
      [18]. She found that there had been an exaggeration of the evidence in
      regard to the position of the appellants' siblings and did not  accept
      that there would be no support for her within her  own  family,  which
      was clearly a finding open  to  her.  As  already  stated,  the  judge
      plainly had the background material in mind when making her assessment
      and was aware of the limitations of mental health care in  Bangladesh,
      but she was entitled to  conclude  that  that  did  not  preclude  the
      possibility of a paid carer to supervise the appellant whilst she  was
      accommodated by her family members, bearing in mind  her  findings  at
      [14] that the appellant was  capable  of  undertaking  activities  but
      required supervision. In regard to Mr Blundell's submission  that  the
      judge had failed to consider the effect of the  appellant's  departure
      on her mother and sister, that was not  a  matter  raised  before  the
      judge  or  supported  by  evidence  and  the  judge  could  only  have
      speculated in that  regard.  The  judge  plainly  concluded  that  the
      transition would not be an easy  one,  and  had  full  regard  to  the
      evidence of the social worker, but she provided  detailed  and  cogent
      reasons for concluding that that  was  not  sufficient  to  amount  to
      exceptional or compelling circumstances justifying a  grant  of  leave
      outside the immigration rules, when  taking  account  of  the  various
      other factors addressed at [27] to [29].

  16. A final point made by Mr Blundell was that  the  judge  had  erred  by
      weighing against the appellant the fact that  her  immigration  status
      was precarious or unlawful, when she had no concept of the matter.  He
      submitted that the appellant's position was akin to that  of  a  child
      who was not to be  held  responsible  for  their  immigration  status.
      However it is relevant  to  note  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA
      considered that to be the case when  initially  considering  the  best
      interests of the child, but not when going on to  consider  the  wider
      proportionality balance and the question of reasonableness. The judge,
      in any event, specifically accepted that the appellant was not  to  be
      held responsible for her status and thus accorded  no  weight  on  the
      basis of  adverse  intentions.  She  was,  nevertheless,  entitled  to
      consider in the balance the fact that  the  appellant  had  no  lawful
      basis of stay in the UK, her relatives having taken no steps  to  seek
      to regularise her position. That was clearly a matter of relevance  to
      the public interest.


  17. For all of these reasons I do  not  find  merit  in  the  grounds  and
      submissions challenging the judge's decision. It may be  that  another
      judge would have reached a different decision, but equally others  may
      have reached the same decision and it was open to Judge Black to reach
      the decision that she did on the evidence before her. Her decision was
      made upon a full and detailed assessment of all the  evidence,  taking
      all relevant matters into account and properly applying  the  law  and
      the immigration rules. She did not make any error of law and  she  was
      fully and properly entitled to reach the decision that she did.

  18. For all of these reasons I find  no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
      decision and I uphold the decision.

DECISION

  19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.





    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for  anonymity.  I  continue  the
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.






Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  6 November
2017
