
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06510/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th October 2019                  |On 18th October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                Imran Sarker
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, instructed by Shah Jalal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 9 November 1990.  He
appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge G D Davison,
promulgated on 10 July 2019, dismissing his appeal against the refusal of
leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge G Wilson
for the following reasons: "The grounds assert that the judge erred as he
failed to identify and properly apply material law. It is at least arguable
that the judge did not apply the dicta set out in R (Razgar) [2004] UKHL.
This is arguably a material error."


Submissions

3.   Mr Karim submitted that the judge materially erred in law at paragraph
18 of his decision, in which he stated: "I do not find any exceptional
reasons to consider the appeal outside the framework of the Rules." The
judge erred in failing to consider Article 8 outside the Rules and failing
to consider the injustice caused to the Appellant by the allegation of
submitting a false English language test certificate. The judge found in
the Appellant's favour in relation to the ETS issue.

4.   Mr Karim relied on paragraph 6 of the Appellant's witness statement,
which stated:

"I sought employment with many companies. Some of them selected me but
asked me about the Test of English for International Communication, TOEIC,
whether or not I had attended the test. Due to this no longer recognised
test, I was not assigned a certificate of Sponsor, COS, as the Home Office
is now very critical of TOEIC.

5.   Mr Karim submitted that any further application the Appellant
attempted to make had been tainted because of the previous allegation of
submitting a false ETS certificate.  The judge should have considered any
injustice caused to the Appellant in relation to the ETS issue. The
Appellant should be able to make a fresh application with his name cleared.
There was evidence that he had been unable to obtain employment which the
judge had failed to take into account in an Article 8 assessment outside
the Immigration Rules. Mr Karim accepted that the Appellant's appeal under
the Rules had no prospect of success, but the judge should have made
findings in accordance with Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009.

6.   Mr Bramble submitted that the judge set out Razgar at paragraph 7 and
Section 117B at paragraph 8.  He relied on counsel's submission at
paragraph 16:

"The Appellant stated the thrust of this claim was to clear his name. The
ETS allegation, if held up, would haunt future applications. It was stated
that there is a 'high threshold' in Article 8 claims but I was invited to
find the Appellant has some private life here. But counsel realistically
submitted 'I can't make too many points on this'."

7.   Mr Bramble submitted there was insufficient evidence, other than that
referred to at paragraph 6 of the witness statement, to show that the
Appellant's private life had been affected by the allegation of dishonesty.
In any event, the judge did go on to consider Article 8 outside the
Immigration Rules and found that the Appellant's private life was not of a
significant nature such that his removal would be disproportionate.  The
judge's findings at paragraph 18 were sufficient.  The judge had addressed
all relevant issues.

8.   Mr Karim submitted that the Appellant was found to be a credible
witness and therefore there was no reason to reject the matters relied on
in the witness statement.  The Appellant had been a victim of a wrongful
allegation of dishonesty and had been deprived of obtaining a certificate
of sponsorship. It was not lawful to remove the Appellant because of a
wrongful allegation of dishonesty. The Appellant should be given a period
of leave to make a fresh application. He should not be required to return
to Bangladesh and obtain entry clearance because of the injustice caused.
The judge had failed to deal with the injustice in this case in his Article
8 assessment.


Conclusions and reasons

9.   At paragraph 18 the judge made the following findings:

"Counsel on behalf of the Appellant was fair and realistic in her
submissions regarding Article 8. Given the Appellant's family in
Bangladesh, his level of education and that he only came to the UK on a
temporary student visa he has not established very significant obstacles to
his reintegration. No such significant obstacles were raised.  I accept the
Appellant may be lacking some practical work experience, but he would be
returning with international qualifications. If these qualification (sic)
in any way hindered a person's opportunity in gaining employment there
would be very little point in families spending the vast sums of money that
they do to have their children educated in the UK. I do not accept that he
would be disadvantaged and precluded from finding employment. I find that
he could reside with his family, as he did before he came to the UK, until
he was in a position to set himself up. The papers do not advance any very
significant obstacles to reintegration. I find that none exist. I do not
find any exceptional reasons to consider the appeal outside of the
framework of the Rules.  The Appellant has studied in the UK, he has family
back home to whom he could return to (sic). The public interest provisions
of maintaining effective immigration control weigh against the Appellant. I
do not find requiring him to leave to be disproportionate. I accept, as
counsel submitted, that he has an element of private life in the UK. But
this private life is far from being of such a significant nature that it
requires protection under Article 8."

10.  I find that, having cited Razgar at paragraph 7 and Section 117B at
paragraph 8, the judge was well aware of his requirement to assess the
Article 8 application under the Immigration Rules and outside the
Immigration Rules. It was conceded there were no very significant obstacles
to reintegration in Bangladesh and there was no challenge to the judge's
finding that the Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules.

11.  At paragraph 18 the judge assessed the Appellant's private life and
his finding that there were no exceptional circumstances to consider the
appeal outside the Rules did not mean that he did not do so. The judge
clearly went on, in paragraph 18, to assess Article 8 outside the Rules,
dealing with the public interests of maintaining immigration control and
the precariousness of the Appellant's private life.

12.  Mr Karim submitted the judge failed to take into account the injustice
caused by the false allegation of dishonesty. I find that this was not
material. On the facts, the Appellant came to the UK as a student in 2009.
He was granted a further period of leave until 31 May 2014. On 22 May 2014
he applied for further leave which was refused and his appeal dismissed in
February 2017.  He applied for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds on 21
February 2017. Any opportunity to gain employment does not alter the nature
of his private life, which has been precarious throughout his residence in
the UK. The Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules and there
were no exceptional circumstances.

13.  The injustice referred to by Mr Karim does not enhance the Appellant's
private life in any way. It may reduce the weight to be attached to the
public interest. However, little weight should be attached to the
Appellant's private life on a proper application of Section 117B because
his residence in the UK has been precarious throughout. There was no error
of law in the balancing exercise because the refusal of leave to remain on
the facts of this case was proportionate.

14.  The submission that the Appellant should be granted a period of leave
in order to make a fresh application on the basis that he has was not
dishonest does not engage Article 8. It is not appropriate to use Article 8
as a vehicle for remaining in the UK in order to make further applications.

15.  I find that, on the facts before the First-tier Tribunal, the refusal
of leave to remain was proportionate. Any private life which the Appellant
would have been able to rely on had he not been accused of dishonesty was
insufficient to outweigh the public interest in maintaining immigration
control because the Appellant could not satisfy the Article 8 provisions of
the Rules and there were no exceptional circumstances which would warrant a
grant of leave outside the Rules.

16.  The wrongful allegation of dishonesty was not an exceptional
circumstance. It did not enhance the Appellant's private life and did not
reduce the weight to be attached to the public interest to the extent that
the Appellant's private life was capable of outweighing the public
interest. I find that there was no material error of law in the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.

         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 14 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 14 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

