
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/06688/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26th May 2017                          | On 19th  June 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                           MRS Shakila Eliyas Khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Vatish of Counsel, Westbrook Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India whose date of birth is recorded  as
    11th April 1985.  On 29th April 2015 she made application for leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a spouse.   On  9th  September  2015  a
    decision was made to refuse the application.  The  Appellant  appealed.
    Her appeal was heard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  Judge  Bartlett
    sitting at Taylor House on 19th October 2016.  Judge  Bartlett  made  a
    number of significant findings,  not  least  of  which  were  that  the
    Immigration Rules were not met because the English language requirement
    was not satisfied.  Exceptions within the rules were looked at but  the
    judge  made  specific  findings  that  there  were  no   insurmountable
    obstacles to the Appellant's return.

 2. The judge went on to consider the appeal, having regard  to  the  wider
    application of Article 8 and appears to have allowed the appeal only on
    the basis that there had been an earlier appeal made out of country  in
    which the Appellant was successful and  allowed  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom. Based therefore, it would  appear,  upon  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was now present  with  her  spouse,  the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal.

 3. Not content with that decision by Notice dated 17th November  2016  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. This was granted by Judge Pooler on 12th April 2017.

 4. The appeal before me focused on the English  language  requirement  and
    whether or not it was open to the judge, without  more,  to  allow  the
    appeal in the First-tier simply because the Appellant  was  already  in
    the United Kingdom.  In her opening submissions to me Ms Vatish  sought
    to persuade me that in any event the Appellant met the English language
    requirement.  If that was to have been contended then there should have
    been a cross-appeal but in any event the certificate relied upon  dated
    27th January 2011, which the Appellant  passed  with  an  overall  band
    score of 5, was not sufficient notwithstanding the  pass  to  meet  the
    pass grade required, in order for her to have met the Rules.

 5. The issue then is whether it was open to the judge simply to allow  the
    appeal on the basis that the Appellant was in the United Kingdom.   The
    judge clearly took into account the fact  that  her  partner  has  been
    recognised as a refugee and may well have found some sympathy  for  the
    Appellant on that basis.  But in my judgment there  was  no  sufficient
    basis to allow the appeal simply because the Appellant was  already  in
    the United Kingdom.  Many applicants are already in the United  Kingdom
    who have partners here.  The Rules require a level of English for  good
    reason.  Section 117B of the 2002 Act sets it out.   Those  people  who
    can speak English are better able to integrate into the  society  as  a
    whole.

 6. There was in my judgment therefore an error of law and I set aside  the
    decision of Judge Bartlett.  It is open to me either to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal or to remake the decision.  In this case  it
    seems to me entirely appropriate that I should remake the decision.

 7. Application was made to me at the last moment and without proper notice
    to  admit  further  evidence.   The  Rules,  both  Procedure  and   the
    Immigration Rules, are there for a purpose and it is disappointing that
    if further evidence is to be put before the Tribunal representatives do
    not adhere to those Procedure Rules.  Nevertheless I do not think  that
    it would be either right or fair to hold that against the Appellant  in
    this case.

 8. The evidence which I was invited to admit were certificates  evidencing
    academic qualifications and language  proficiency.  Mr  Duffy  did  not
    object, As it happens the Appellant gave evidence also  to  the  effect
    that her academic qualification at the University of Madras was  taught
    in English such that the requirements of the Immigration Rules would be
    met in any event.  Based on the certificates and the  evidence  that  I
    have heard and without Mr Duffy  seeking  to  persuade  me  to  take  a
    different course it seems to me that whilst one might have taken a view
    that the Appellant should be required to make fresh application no real
    benefit to anyone comes from that because  this  unusually  is  one  of
    those cases in which all parties agree that a fresh  application  would
    inevitably succeed.

 9. Mr Duffy's real objection to me simply remaking the appeal was that the
    Secretary of State would be deprived of a fee. The Secretary  of  State
    may have been deprived of a fee but on balance it seems to me  that  it
    would be unjust taking into account all of the circumstances, including
    as I do, the fact that the Appellant's partner is a refugee  and  might
    be said to have suffered enough.  I am able to address  that  issue  in
    some measure by no making a fee award.

10. In all the circumstances I  allow  the  appeal  having  regard  to  the
    evidence now admitted as well as the wider application of Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is set aside and is remade.   The  appeal  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 8 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Given the late production of the  documents  I  do  not  think  that  it  is
appropriate to make a fee award in this case and I do not make one.


Signed                              Date 8 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
