
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/06691/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th May 2017                      |On 05th June 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           elliot garikai munthali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Makunzva of the Immigration Practitioners Service


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State,  with  permission,
    against the Decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Boardman  who
    allowed Mr Munthali's appeal  on  human  rights  grounds,  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 9 September 2015 to refuse to vary his
    leave to remain brought on human rights grounds.

 2. Mr Munthali is a citizen of Zimbabwe whose date of birth is recorded as
    22 February 1972.  He first entered the United Kingdom  on  30  October
    2001 and thereafter made several successful applications for  leave  to
    remain until on 30 September 2010 his leave was said by  the  Secretary
    of State to have expired.  However, he made an application on or  about
    30th September or 1st October 2010.  The actual date of the application
    is moot but for reasons which follow is somewhat academic because it is
    common ground that if the application made at that  time  was  made  no
    less than ten days after the expiry of leave then  a  period  of  grace
    would be given such that continuity is not broken  in  calculating  the
    ten-year period of long residence.

 3. Before me, the issue in this case narrowed to one single issue. At  all
    material times the Respondent has been working alongside  a  church  in
    Brighton supported by that church.  Judge Boardman  observed  that  the
    Secretary of State's refusal of leave in 2010 was wrong  because  there
    was sufficient  evidence  before  him,  Judge  Boardman,  that  at  the
    material time not only did the church have sufficient funds but  having
    regard to the totality of the evidence, though not express but  clearly
    implicit in his decision, the church would have applied those funds for
    the benefit of Mr Munthali.

 4. Mr Duffy for the Secretary  of  State  takes  exception.   He  in  fact
    drafted the grounds in this matter.  He submits that whilst  there  was
    some evidence before Judge Boardman  of  the  means  available  to  the
    church there was no sufficient evidence that entitled the judge to find
    that those funds would have been applied for the benefit of Mr Munthali
    at the material time.

 5. I have read the decision with care.  One must  read  the  decision  and
    reasons as a piece.  The judge heard from a number  of  witnesses.   He
    found the evidence credible and it is  of  note  that  the  church  has
    supported Mr Munthali throughout.  The standard of proof  relevant  was
    and remains one of balance of probabilities.

 6. It seems to me looking at this decision that it was open to  the  judge
    to make the finding that he did.  I observe in any event that  even  if
    Mr Munthali did not strictly speaking meet the ten-year Rule this was a
    case in which  the  private  life  of  Mr  Munthali  was  deserving  of
    considerable weight.  There were many factors weighing in  his  favour.
    The starting point is the immigration rule which  provides  that  if  a
    person has been in the United  Kingdom  lawfully  for  ten  years  then
    subject to anything untoward, the public interest gives way to it.   If
    a person comes close to meeting the immigration rule then as  was  said
    in the case of Patel [2013} UKSC 72 whilst there is no such thing as  a
    "near-miss" justifying the grant of  the  relief  being  sought,  other
    factors may be sufficient to weigh in an individual's favour.

 7. There is very little in my judgment which weighs against the Respondent
    in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal. That was clearly the  view  Judge
    Boardman so that even if there is an error of law it is not material in
    this case.

 8. I find that there is no material error of law in this appeal.  If I  am
    wrong about that then in any event, I would have remade the decision in
    the favour of the Respondent to the appeal in the Upper  Tribunal  such
    that  the  decision  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would   have   been
    reaffirmed.

Notice of Decision

 9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Signed                              Date: 2 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
