
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06296/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2017                           |On 10 July 2017                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                               Fayyaz Muhammad
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Moksud, instructed by IAS
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gladstone promulgated  1.12.16,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  18.2.16,  to
    refuse his application for LTR on family and private life grounds.  The
    Judge heard the appeal on 18.11.16.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale granted permission to  appeal  on
    11.5.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 3.7.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below I found  such  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.

 5. The grounds argue that the judge's finding that  there  was  no  family
    life between the appellant and his partner, with whom he had  undergone
    an Islamic marriage, and his  step-children  is  unsustainable  on  the
    evidence. It is also submitted that the judge erred in finding  it  was
    reasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK, following
    SF & Ors.

 6. It is clear from [77] of the decision that the judge accepted that  the
    appellant is part of the household and assists in the  running  of  the
    household in the various ways described in the evidence. As set out  in
    the judge's summary of the  evidence  between  [57]  and  [60]  of  the
    decision, it was asserted that  the  appellant  took  the  children  to
    activities, attended parents' evenings, and attended to  the  household
    chores whilst his partner was out at work.

 7. It was clear that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
    Rules and relied only on article 8 ECHR  at  the  appeal  hearing.  The
    appellant was in a relationship with RR. They were not married and  had
    not cohabited for a period of two years. In any event, RR did not  have
    settled status in the UK, but had a pending application for  LTR  as  a
    parent of a British citizen child.

 8. In considering [74], [79] and [83] of the decision, the  judge  appears
    to have been of the view that because the period  of  cohabitation  and
    involvement in the lives of the children was less  than  one  year,  it
    cannot amount to family life, within or without the Rules.

 9. Whilst it would be a period too short  to  meet  the  two-year  minimum
    cohabitation requirement of Appendix FM, it is not the case that  there
    can be no family life in a relationship of less than 12 months. That is
    an error of law, one fatal to the sustainability of the other findings.
    On the evidence accepted by the judge there must be  family  life,  but
    account must be taken as to the duration of that  family  life  in  any
    assessment.

10. The decision is also flawed in consideration of s117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act. The judge  may  have  been  hampered  by  inadequate  evidence  in
    relation to the children and was unable to resolve  whether  the  child
    not a British citizen was nevertheless a qualifying child. However, the
    judge doubted whether  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the children, but referenced her earlier findings  in
    justification, including  that  he  has  only  been  a  member  of  the
    household for less than a year. Once again, that is an  error  of  law.
    There is no reason why a period of less than 12 months  disqualifies  a
    person from having a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  the
    children, at least one of whom was a qualifying child.

11. Complaint is also made that the judge erred in finding at [87] that  it
    would be reasonable to expect the children, including a British citizen
    child, to leave the UK. The Secretary of  State's  extant  policy  from
    2015 is that it is not reasonable to expect a British citizen child  to
    leave the UK and consideration has to be given to whether removal of  a
    parent would force  that  child  to  also  leave  the  UK.  The  policy
    additionally provides that without cogent grounds, such as a very  poor
    immigration history, it will not require the separation of parents of a
    British citizen child.

12. The issue of reasonableness of expecting a qualifying  child  to  leave
    the UK has also been overtaken by the Court of Appeal's decision in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, promulgated in July 2016, in  which  it
    was held that resolving this issue required account to be taken of  the
    conduct of the appellant and any other matters relevant to  the  public
    interest. The Court rejected the argument that the  best  interests  of
    the child resolves the reasonableness issue, and stated that there  was
    "nothing intrinsically illogical in the notion that whilst the  child's
    best interests are for him or her to stay, it is  not  unreasonable  to
    expect him or her to go. That is so even  if  the  reasonableness  test
    should be applied so  as  to  exclude  public  interest  considerations
    bearing upon the parents." ?

13. If the judge felt that she lacked the necessary information to  make  a
    best interests or reasonableness assessment,  because  of  insufficient
    information about the children, it was open to the Tribunal to  adjourn
    to enable such evidence to be submitted or adduced  before  making  the
    decision, an approach endorsed in MA (Pakistan),  but  acknowledged  as
    likely to be only exceptionally an error of law to fail to do  so,  and
    only if it resulted in unfairness.

14. I find that whilst an  assessment  of  reasonableness  117B(6)  in  the
    appellant's case may not, ultimately, have been of  assistance  to  his
    application for LTR, the assessment  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    flawed and  tainted  by  the  judge's  reliance  on  the  view  that  a
    relationship of less than 12 months cannot amount to family life  or  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the children of the family. In
    the circumstances, the decision cannot stand and must be set  aside  to
    be remade.

Remittal

15. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of  those  issues.
    The errors of the First-tier Tribunal vitiate  all  other  findings  of
    fact and the conclusions from those facts so that there has not been  a
    valid determination of the issues in the appeal.

16. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the appellant of a fair hearing and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside and remade.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Consequential Directions

18.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester;



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did  not  make  an  order.  Given  the  circumstances,  I  make  no
anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

