
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06491/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 August 2021                    |On 05 October 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                               Margaret Tsike
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Richards, Solicitor, instructed by Ansong
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I will refer to the parties as they were designated in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. This has been a remote hearing using Microsoft Teams.  I did not
    identify, and neither party raised, any issues or concerns with the
    technology or process.

 3. I gave my decision orally at the hearing.



Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 7 August 1950.  She came to
    the UK in November 2004 as a visitor and did not leave when her visa
    expired in May 2005.  She lives with her daughter and son-in-law (both
    of whom are citizens of Ghana) and their three children (aged 16, 11
    and 6 at the time of the First-tier Tribunal decision).  Her eldest
    grandchild is a British citizen.

 5. In February 2018 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK on
    the basis of her family and private life but the application was
    invalid due to non-payment of the required fee.  In July 2019 she made
    a further - this time valid - application. It was refused in November
    2019.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where her
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wyman ("the
    judge"). In a decision promulgated on 2 February 2021, the judge
    allowed the appeal. The respondent is now appealing against the judge's
    decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge made the following findings of fact:

      a) The appellant has been in the UK unlawfully since May 2005.

      b) Since arriving in the UK she has lived with her daughter.

      c) The appellant's daughter was granted leave to remain in 2012 but
         before then she spent six years in the UK unlawfully.

      d) It is unclear whether the appellant would have family to support
         her, and accommodation in which to live, in Ghana.

      e) The appellant has a range of health problems and it is unclear if
         she would be able to obtain treatment for them in Ghana.

      f) The appellant helps her daughter with childcare and housework and
         has a close relationship with her three grandchildren, with whom
         she has lived since they were born.

 7. The two legal questions the judge needed to determine were:

      a) whether the appellant would face very significant obstacles
         integrating into Ghana, as if so she would satisfy the conditions
         of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules; and

      b) whether the appellant's removal would breach Article 8.  The
         Article 8 assessment required the judge, inter alia, to take into
         consideration the factors stipulated in Part 5A of the Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

 8. The judge did not make an explicit finding on whether the appellant
    would face very significant obstacles integrating in Ghana.

 9. The judge's assessment of proportionality under Article 8 is set out in
    paragraphs 76 - 80, where she stated:

         "76.  Turning  to  consider  section  117B,  again  it  states  the
             maintenance of effective immigration control is in the  public
             interest.

         77.  Mrs Lartey acknowledged that she could  afford  to  visit  her
             mother in Ghana,  although  she  may  not  be  able  to  visit
             regularly with her children.

         78.  As Mrs Lartey was keen to point out it was not  the  financial
             element of the case  which  particularly  concerns  her.   She
             could afford to rent a property for her mother  in  Ghana  and
             pay for her food and other expenses.  It is more the fact that
             she is concerned that her mother  would  forget  to  take  her
             medication at the correct time and would lose the  social  and
             emotional support she receives from her family.

         79.  The age of the appellant is a factor which I acknowledge.  She
             has just turned seventy.  I fully acknowledge that at this age
             she would be too old to obtain paid  employment,  although  as
             stated above, the economic element of this matter  is  not  of
             key concern either to the appellant or the sponsor.  As stated
             above, there is little evidence of any family that she has  in
             Ghana.  Whilst she  has  stated  in  oral  evidence  that  her
             children live abroad, no documentary evidence of the same  has
             been provided.

         80.  The appellant is clearly very involved  in  the  life  of  her
             three grandchildren.  She has cared for them since  they  were
             born and indeed may have been their primary  carer  throughout
             their lives, given the fact that their father works  full-time
             and their mother has been a student and is  now  working.   As
             acknowledged by the sponsor, it is  the  grandmother  who  has
             taken the children to school, cooked for them  and  undertaken
             various domestic tasks and been the key adult in their  lives.
             It is for this reason, and for this reason only, that  I  find
             the appellant should be granted leave to remain,  outside  the
             rules on the basis of her Article 8 rights."

Grounds of Appeal

10. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal advance two arguments.

11. First, it is submitted that the judge failed to take into account that
    the private life relied upon by the appellant was established whilst
    she was in the UK unlawfully and therefore little weight should be
    attached to it.

12. Second, the grounds submit that the judge failed to identify any
    unjustifiably harsh consequences arising from the appellant's removal.

Submissions

13. I heard submissions from Mr Avery on behalf of the respondent and Mr
    Richards on behalf of the appellant.

14. Mr Avery argued that the decision is deficient in reasoning and  lacks
    any engagement with Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  He also submitted
    that there is no indication in the decision that the judge balanced the
    public interest against the appellant's private life or that she
    identified any unjustifiably harsh consequences flowing from the
    appellant's removal.

15. Mr Richards submitted that the judge addressed Section 117B of the 2002
    Act.  He noted that the relevant provisions of the 2002 Act were set
    out in full in paragraph 23 and that the Upper Tribunal case of
    Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 00013 was summarised in the decision.  This, he
    submitted, points to the judge being aware of the weight that he was
    required to give to the appellant's private life.  He noted that the
    judge on several occasions (notably at paragraphs 55, 64 and 73)
    commented on the immigration history of both the appellant and her
    daughter and submitted that it was evident from this that she took into
    consideration that both had breached the UK's immigration law.  He also
    argued that it is apparent from paragraph 80 that the judge gave proper
    consideration to the best interests of the appellant's grandchildren.
    He submitted that the evidence shows that the appellant has the role of
    a de facto parent in the life of the grandchildren and that the
    strength of their best interests is such that removal would be
    disproportionate.

Analysis

16. The judge was required, pursuant to Section 117A(2)(a) of the 2002 Act,
    when assessing whether the appellant's removal from the UK was
    justified under Article 8, to have regard to the considerations listed
    in Section 117B.  These include that little weight should be given to a
    private life established by a person when they were in the UK
    unlawfully (Section 117B(4))  and that little weight should be given to
    a private life established when a person's immigration status was
    precarious (Section 117B(5)) .

17. The appellant's relationship with all three of her grandchildren was
    established at a time when she was either in the UK unlawfully or with
    precarious immigration status.  Therefore, the judge was required by
    Sections 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act to attach little weight to the
    relationship.  This is subject to what was said by the Court of Appeal
    and approved by the Supreme Court in  Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58 about the generalised normative
    guidance in Section 117B being overridden in exceptional cases by
    particularly strong features of a private life and that, as explained
    in Kaur (children's best interests / public interest interface) [2017]
    UKUT 00014 (IAC), there is a spectrum within the self-contained
    boundaries of "little weight".

18. Although the judge set out the provisions of Section 117B (in paragraph
    23), there is nothing in the decision to indicate that she gave little
    weight to the appellant's relationship with her grandchildren (or
    addressed why there were particularly strong features of the
    relationship such that, exceptionally, more than little weight could be
    attached to it). This is an error of law. The error is material because
    the relationship between the appellant and her grandchildren was the
    central - indeed, the sole - reason the judge allowed the appeal.

19. After delivering my decision I asked Mr Avery and Mr Richards for their
    views on whether I was in a position to re-make the decision on the
    basis of the findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal; and if
    not whether the appeal should remain in the Upper Tribunal or be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Both Mr Avery and Mr Richards
    agreed that I should not re-make the appeal based on the  First-tier
    Tribunal's factual findings as there had not been findings of fact on
    key issues, such as the availability of medical care and accommodation
    in Ghana.  Mr Richards' preference was for the matter to be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal and Mr Avery expressed no objection to this
    course of action.  Having considered the extent of further fact-finding
    that will be necessary for this decision to be re-made I am satisfied
    that the appropriate course of action, having regard to paragraph
    7.2(b) of the Practice Statements of the Immigration and Asylum
    Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, is for the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be made afresh by a
different judge.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed

D. Sheridan

Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan           Date: 26 August 2021
