
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/06576/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28 November 2017                        |  On 14 February 2018            |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                     SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               miss yamuna pun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells (Counsel) instructed by N C Brothers &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, who we  will  continue  to
    refer to as the respondent, in the case  of  Yamuna  Pun.   She  sought
    entry clearance for settlement as a citizen of Nepal and  a  member  of
    the family of a former Gurkha soldier who was given indefinite leave to
    enter the United Kingdom on 5 August 2009.

2.   Her leave to enter application  was  refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer in New Delhi but that was appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and her appeal was heard on 20 January 2017,  the  determination  being
    promulgated on 7 February 2017.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  allowed
    her appeal, finding that the refusal to allow her entry was a breach of
    the appellant's Article 8 rights.   The determination, we think  it  is
    fair to say, can be described as brief.

3.   The respondent has appealed against that determination  on  one  single
    ground, namely that the judge failed to  have  regard  to  the  "public
    interest considerations" set out in Section 107B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It was argued before  us  today  that
    that amounted to an error of law.  The submission by Mr  Nath  for  the
    respondent was as commendably brief as the determination, if  not  more
    so.

4.   In reply Mr Howells, Counsel  for  the  appellant  submitted  that  the
    grounds of appeal were unarguable in terms of the  well-known  case  of
    Jitendra Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA Civ 320 and in particular paragraphs  55
    to 57 thereof.

5.   In our opinion, while the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge could have been rather fuller in terms of the assessment  of  the
    proportionality balancing exercise, when it is read as a whole it seems
    to us he has taken account of all that needed to be taken  account  of.
    In particular he found at paragraph 29 that the past historic injustice
    which came into play in this case weighed heavily  in  the  appellant's
    favour and that the refusal was a  disproportionate  interference  with
    her right to respect for family life.

6.   Jitendra Rai of course is a case  on  its  own  facts  but  nonetheless
    paragraphs 55-57 dealing with Section 107B seem to  us  to  apply  with
    equal force in the current circumstances.  That being so it  cannot  be
    said that any error of law is made out in this  case  and  we  have  no
    alternative but to dismiss the respondent's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                             Date: 12 February November 2017
