
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06392/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field  House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 May 2017                                |On 13 June 2017               |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                             mr maksudur Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by Kalam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J
    Bartlett which was promulgated on 27  October  2016.   The  appeal  was
    allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The background to this matter is that the appellant came to the UK from
    Bangladesh on 18 December  2010  with  leave  to  enter  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.  He remained here with leave in that capacity  until
    30 July 2014.  On 30 July 2014  he  made  an  application  for  further
    student leave but this was refused on 23 September 2014.  The appellant
    applied for leave to remain as a spouse on 16 April 2015 having married
    Ms Akhtar, a British national, on 12 August 2014.

 3. The respondent refused the application for leave as a spouse  as it was
    found that the appellant's presence in the UK was not conducive to  the
    public good as he had relied in a previous application on a false TOEIC
    certificate from ETS.  The respondent therefore refused the application
    under paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

 4. The appellant had also provided a Trinity College ESOL certificate  but
    the respondent did not find that this met the requirements of  Appendix
    FM-SE as it did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  O  as  the
    certificate did not state the test was taken at a "SELT Centre".

 5. Under Article 8, the respondent went onto assess whether there would be
    insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's wife  going  to  Bangladesh
    with him but concluded that there were not, after taking  into  account
    the fact that the wife was pregnant at the  time  of  the  application.
    The respondent also concluded that the appellant could not show that he
    met the requirements of the Immigration Rules concerning  private  life
    as there were no very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in
    Bangladesh,  the  country  where  he  grew  up.   The  respondent  also
    considered that there were no exceptional circumstances that could lead
    to a grant of leave under Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules.



 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett  found  for  the  appellant  on  the
    question of the ETS test.  He did not accept that  the  respondent  had
    met the burden on her to justify the allegation of reliance on a  false
    document. Judge Bartlett found as follows at [3] of the decision.

         "At the start of the hearing I pointed out to Miss  Rehman  that  I
         did not have any evidence in  support  of  the  statements  in  the
         refusal letter and Miss Rehman confirmed that she did not have  any
         additional evidence.  Miss Rehman was  not  able  to  concede  this
         issue but she agreed that she could not say anything  further  than
         what was in the refusal letter.

 7. At [18] the judge found as follows:

         "I find that the respondent has failed to discharge the  burden  of
         proof to establish that the appellant used a proxy when taking  the
         TOEIC with ETS.  The respondent has not provided  any  evidence  in
         this respect apart from  the  assertions  in  the  refusal  letter.
         Therefore I find that there are no grounds on which the appellant's
         presence in the United Kingdom can be said to not be  conducive  to
         the public good.  Therefore the appellant satisfies S-LTR.1.6".

 8. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also  concluded,  however,  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM-SE and  Appendix
    O because of the absence  of  the  correct  wording  from  the  Trinity
    College certificate.

 9. At [24] the judge went on to consider whether  paragraph  EX.1  of  the
    Immigration Rules was met.  He found that it was not reasonable for the
    appellant's child to leave the UK. The judge also found  at  [32]  that
    the appellant had  not  shown  that  he  was  without  family  ties  or
    assistance in Bangladesh so could not meet the burden of proof  on  him
    to show that he had no ties to Bangladesh or that there would  be  very
    significant obstacles  to  his  reintegration  there.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal concluded that:

         "33. As I have found that [A]'s best interests are to remain in the
         United Kingdom with both her parents and as [A] and Mrs Akhtar  are
         British citizens I find that it would be unreasonable  in  all  the
         circumstances for [A] to leave the United Kingdom  for  Bangladesh.
         Therefore  the  appellant  satisfies  paragraph  EX.1(a)   of   the
         Immigration  Rules  and  as  a  result  he  satisfies  LTRP.1.1(d).
         Therefore the appeal succeeds under the Immigration (sic).

         34.      However if I had to  consider  paragraph  EX.1(b)  of  the
         Immigration  Rules,  I  find  that  there  are  not  insurmountable
         obstacles to family life  between  the  appellant  and  Mrs  Akhtar
         continuing in Bangladesh.  As I stated above I  consider  that  the
         appellant would be able to find work there and support his  family.
         I find that is (sic) relatively short absence from Bangladesh would
         not impede his ability to find work, reintegrate or help his family
         to settle.  Mrs Akhtar follows the Muslim faith  which  would  help
         her to integrate as would her husband.

         35.   In  relation   to   Section   117B,   my   consideration   of
         reasonableness above applies to sub-paragraph  6.   In  addition  I
         find that the appellant can speak English even if it is  not  to  a
         good standard but that he is not financially independent.

         36.  Again due to my findings above, I did not  consider  paragraph
         276ADE(1) but for completeness I find  that  the  appellant  cannot
         satisfy the requirement set out therein.  The  only  sub-paragraphs
         that the appellant could  possibly  satisfy  is  (iv),  (vi)  which
         requires there to be very significant obstacles to his  integration
         into Bangladesh.  For the reasons set out above I find that not  to
         be made.

         37.  The appeal succeeds under the Immigration Rules".

10. The respondent puts forward two grounds of appeal.  The first ground is
    that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  take  into  account  material
    evidence from the respondent on the ETS point.  The  grounds  argue  in
    paragraph 5 as follows:

         "5.  While documentation may have been omitted  from  the  original
         bundle (although the PF1 indicates that there was some evidence  at
         Appendix F which the FtTJ fails to address), the Presenting Officer
         sought to rectify this - PO note  attached  below.   A  bundle  was
         provided to the FtTJ shortly after the hearing which  the  Tribunal
         refused to accept.  No reasons are provided  in  the  determination
         for the rejection of this relevant evidence, indeed the  matter  is
         not even mentioned.  Clearly the evidence was  submitted  prior  to
         the determination of the appeal and the written reasons provided.

         6.    The  material  would  not  have  taken  the  appellant,   his
         representative, or  the  Tribunal  by  much  surprise  and  limited
         supplementary evidence would have been required  on  this  discrete
         point.  The use of deception was a live  issue  and  while  it  was
         unfortunate that the respondent's evidence was initially incomplete
         the SSHD took steps to rectify this and assist the Tribunal in  the
         determination of all issues.  The refusal to even  acknowledge  the
         request to  adduce  this  evidence  and  provide  any  reasons  for
         rejecting the highly relevant evidence is a material error of law".



11. I am in some difficulty in establishing what  the  additional  "bundle"
    referred to grounds are referring to here.  There is nothing on file to
    indicate that the respondent sought to rely  on  a  further  bundle  of
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal. Such a suggestion is very much
    at odds with the record of the statements of the Presenting Officer  at
    [3] of the decision.  Mr Nath was unable to assist and,  sensibly,  did
    not seek to take this aspect of the challenge further. I do not  accept
    that an application to admit further evidence was made  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal so this aspect of the grounds is not made out.

12. It remains the case, as  indicated  in  the  grounds,  that  there  was
    material relevant to the ETS issue at Appendix F  of  the  respondent's
    bundle. Those pages contain information slips from ETS.  At F2 there is
    an  ETS  document  stating  that  a  test  was  taken   at   Portsmouth
    International College by  the  appellant  and  declared  invalid.   The
    document at F3 sets out a document concerning an ETS speaking  test  in
    which the score was 180 points for a test taken on 20  March  2012  and
    the writing score was 170.  At F4 there is what appears to be a  repeat
    of F2.

13. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  refer  to  these
    documents at any point.  On the contrary there is a  finding  that  the
    respondent had not provided anything at all to support  the  assertions
    in the refusal letter as to reliance on a false document. That was  not
    correct and the materials in Appendix F of the respondent's bundle have
    the potential to have  led  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  a  different
    decision had they been considered. This amounts to a material error  on
    a point of law.

14. The respondent's second ground  challenges  the  appeal  being  allowed
    under Article 8 as it was unreasonable for the child to be expected  to
    go to Bangladesh with the appellant and her mother.

15. Firstly, it is unarguable that the First-tier Tribunal was not entitled
    to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules on the  basis  that  it
    was not reasonable for the child to leave the UK as the child here  was
    not born when the application was made and her circumstances  were  not
    relevant to the assessment under the Immigration Rules.  To that extent
    the decision is also in error.

16. Although the child's circumstances did fall to  be  considered  in  the
    Article 8 assessment outside the Immigration Rules  that  part  of  the
    decision is not sustainable as the decision does not appear to weigh in
    the "reasonableness" consideration the public interest in removal where
    the appellant has been here illegally, where the Immigration Rules  are
    not met and where there is nothing unusual  in  a  very  young  British
    child going to Bangladesh with her parents. The judge refers at [26] to
    better economic circumstances, more stability and  less  corruption  in
    the UK. Nevertheless,  the  judge  found  that  the  parents  could  be
    expected to live there without difficulty. The appellant would be  able
    to support the family. The child's best interests were found to  be  in
    remaining with her parents and nothing in the  decision  shows  why  it
    would be unreasonable for the child to go to Bangladesh if her  parents
    could live there without serious difficulties. In error  of  law  terms
    this was an irrational or perverse conclusion.

17. There was agreement before me that if errors of law were found in these
    terms, there was nothing remaining from the decision  to  be  preserved
    and that it should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  remade
    de novo.



Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.

The decision will be remitted to be heard at Taylor House by a  judge  other
than Judge J Bartlett.

Signed: [pic]                                Dated: 12 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

