
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/06600/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 October 2019                 |On 5 November 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                             Ronald Migiro Ombui
                          (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Rehman, of Counsel, instructed by Lawfare
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge  S  Smith  on  9  September  2019,
          against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose. Judge
          Rose heard the appeal at Hatton Cross on 4 June 2019 and dismissed
          it in a determination promulgated on 25 June 2019.


       2. The appellant is a Kenyan national born on 14  December  1985.  He
          appeals against the respondent's refusal to grant  him  indefinite
          leave to remain on the basis of ten  years  of  continuous  lawful
          residence. For that reason, his immigration history  is  important
          and is set out in detail below.


       3. The appellant entered the UK as a student  on  30  May  2008  with
          leave until 31 October 2011. An in-time  application  made  on  27
          October 2011 was refused on 31 January 2012. It  is  then  unclear
          whether or  not  the  appellant  was  given  a  right  of  appeal.
          According to the respondent he was given a limited right of appeal
          under s.82(1) because he  had  sought  leave  for  a  purpose  not
          covered by the rules. The  appellant's  representatives,  however,
          maintain that there was no right of appeal at all. At the  hearing
          before me, Ms Everett was able to confirm from  the  January  2012
          decision notice that there had been a limited right of appeal. The
          appellant chose not to  exercise  that  and,  instead,  asked  for
          reconsideration of the decision on 19 March 2012 (not on 10  April
          2012 as the respondent  claimed  but  perhaps  processed  on  that
          date). That request was refused on 2 or 6 May 2014, this time with
          an in country right of appeal.  The appellant  lodged  an  appeal,
          but it was dismissed on 6 February 2015, permission to appeal  was
          refused on 14 April  2015  (served  on  23  April  2015)  and  the
          appellant's appeal rights were exhausted on 11 May 2015. On 29 May
          2015, he made a further application for leave which was granted on
          23 July 2015 with leave to remain until  22  January  2018.  On  6
          January 2018, the respondent received the appellant's  application
          for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  based  on  ten  years'  lawful
          residence. This was refused on 15 November 2018 as  the  appellant
          had not accrued ten years at the time he  made  that  application.
          The appellant then made a further application on the same basis on
          21 November 2018. This was refused on 27 March 2019. On  the  same
          date, he was granted immigration bail.


       4. The respondent's case is that  the  appellant  was  without  leave
          between 31 January 2012 and 23 July 2015 and that he did not  have
          3C leave during that period. The appellant's case is that  he  had
          temporary admission between January 2012 and July 2015 and that is
          lawful  residence  under  paragraph   276A(b)(ii).   Evidence   of
          reporting for temporary admission has been adduced  to  cover  the
          period from 7 May 2014 until the grant  of  leave  in  July  2015.
          Additionally, he argues that the fact that the respondent gave him
          an in country right of appeal when she agreed to his  request  for
          reconsideration means that the original decision of  January  2012
          was defective and superseded by the later decision in May 2014 and
          that he therefore had 3C leave during that period of time.


       5. Judge Rose, in deciding the appeal, found that the appellant's  3C
          leave ended in January 2012 and that he  had  been  without  leave
          until 23 July 2015 when he had  been  granted  further  leave.  He
          found that the appellant had not accrued ten years  of  continuous
          lawful residence.


       6. The appellant sought permission to appeal and his application  was
          granted on the basis that the judge  had  arguably  erred  by  not
          taking account of the period during which the  appellant  had  had
          temporary admission which  should  have  been  classed  as  lawful
          residence under  the  terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  was
          clarified at the hearing before me, that the rule referred  to  by
          the appellant's representatives in  the  grounds  was  incorrectly
          stated and that the definition of lawful residence  was  contained
          in paragraph 276A(b)(ii). The repeated references to  Pakistan  in
          the skeleton argument (for eg. at paragraph 14) are  plainly  also
          careless errors by his representatives.


          The Hearing


       7. The appellant attended the hearing at which  I  heard  submissions
          from the parties. For the appellant, Mr  Rehman  relied  upon  the
          grounds.  He argued that after  the  appellant's  application  was
          refused under paragraph 322(1) on 31 January 2012,  the  appellant
          sought reconsideration of his application on  19  March  2012.  He
          submitted that the respondent, whilst refusing the application  in
          May 2014, gave the appellant an in-country right of  appeal  which
          meant  that  she  had  considered  the  original  decision  to  be
          defective. For that reason, he argued,  this  decision  superseded
          the earlier one and 3C leave continued. I pointed out to Mr Rehman
          that the request for reconsideration was made some 7  weeks  after
          the January 2012 refusal but he submitted that the respondent  had
          not raised any issue over that gap when  she  made  her  May  2014
          decision. he maintained that meant she had used her discretion and
          so the gap should be overlooked when the period of long  residence
          was calculated.


       8. As an alternative argument, Mr Rehman submitted that the appellant
          had been on temporary admission since 2012. He submitted that that
          claim had not been challenged by the Secretary  of  State  at  the
          hearing as could be seen from paragraph 14 of the determination. I
          suggested to Mr Rehman that the absence of challenge  was  to  the
          appellant's oral testimony as set out at paragraphs 11-13  of  the
          determination and there was  no  reference  therein  to  temporary
          admission. Mr  Rehman  then  pointed  to  paragraph  7(a)  of  the
          determination where the respondent's case had been  summarised  by
          the judge. I suggested to Mr Rehman that in fact that demonstrated
          that the respondent had directly challenged the appellant's status
          between 31 January 2012 and  23  July  2015.  Mr  Rehman  made  no
          response to that but submitted  instead  that  there  had  been  a
          failure to consider s.117 and article 8.


       9. I then heard from Ms Everett. She stated  that  the  Secretary  of
          State's position was as set out in the decision letter. There  was
          no basis  in  law  for  the  assertion  that  the  reconsideration
          decision superseded the original decision and nothing  to  suggest
          that such a view had been taken in this case. No evidence  of  any
          grant of temporary  admission  between  2012  and  2014  had  been
          adduced.  The  submissions  on  discretion   were   unclear.   The
          respondent had applied the policy. Ms Everett  accepted  that  the
          judge had erred in failing to  consider  the  issue  of  temporary
          admission but she took the view that the error was not material as
          there was no evidence to show that the appellant had had temporary
          admission for 2012-2014.


      10. In response, Mr Rehman conceded there was no  further  documentary
          evidence available  to  show  any  temporary  admission  had  been
          granted between 1 February 2012 and May 2014. He  referred  me  to
          pages 15-17 of the respondent's policy on long  residence  and  to
          exceptional reasons being required to extend the permitted gap  of
          28 days. He submitted that the exceptional  circumstance  in  this
          case was that the appellant had been granted  a  right  of  appeal
          even though that appeal had been dismissed.


      11. That completed submissions. The parties agreed that were I to find
          a material error of law, I could proceed to re-make  the  decision
          without any further hearing or further submissions from them.    I
          then reserved my decision which I now give with reasons.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      12. Having considered all the evidence and  the  submissions  made,  I
          make the following findings.


      13. The crucial issue in this  case  was  whether  the  appellant  had
          accrued ten  years  of  continuous  lawful  residence.  The  judge
          clearly had that in mind (at 16-18) and I shall come to that point
          later.


      14. The article 8 claim, which Mr Rehman raised almost as a  throwaway
          point at the very end of his oral submissions, was not expanded on
          and there is limited  evidence  on  any  private/family  life  the
          appellant has established here. The appellant's  evidence  to  the
          judge was that all his close family remained  in  Kenya  (at  12),
          that although he  had  been  in  a  relationship  with  a  Turkish
          national that had come  to  an  end  (at  11),  that  he  had  not
          completed his university studies (at 11) and that he worked as  an
          Uber driver and in a care home and lived in  rented  accommodation
          (ibid). On those facts it was open to the judge to find  that  the
          appellant  would  not  face  very   significant   obstacles   with
          reintegration to Kenya on return and that  removal  would  not  be
          disproportionate. The grounds fail  to  put  forward  any  factors
          which the judge is alleged to have overlooked  and  apart  from  a
          general  criticism  in  the  grounds  that  the  matter  was   not
          adequately considered, there is no attempt to set out  the  nature
          of the claim at all. For all these reasons,  I  am  not  satisfied
          that there is any error  of  law  in  the  judge's  assessment  of
          article 8. It is brief because of the limited oral and documentary
          evidence available. I also note that  in  granting  permission  to
          appeal, Judge Smith observed that there was a  lack  of  merit  in
          that ground.


      15. I turn  then  to  the  key  issue  which  is  the  nature  of  the
          appellant's leave. The argument is that he  had  either  temporary
          admission or 3C leave to cover any gaps in his  leave.  The  judge
          considered the issue of 3C leave in his determination (at 17)  but
          found that the appellant did  not  have  such  leave  because  the
          request for  reconsideration  did  not  confer  it.  He  did  not,
          however, consider the temporary admission argument.


      16. Mr Rehman argued, as he had before the  judge,  that  because  the
          Secretary of State reconsidered her decision of  31  January  2012
          and gave the appellant an in country right of appeal in May  2014,
          that decision superseded the earlier refusal  and  meant  that  3C
          leave had continued between 31 January 2012 and continued until he
          exhausted his appeal rights on 11 May 2015. The judge set out  the
          provisions of s. 3C  of  the  1971  Act  at  paragraph  6  of  his
          determination. He also considered the  respondent's  guidance  and
          concluded that a reconsideration did not carry 3C leave.


      17. It is the case that for 3C leave to be operative, a person has  to
          make an application for variation of  leave  to  enter  or  remain
          before the expiry  of  his/her  existing  limited  leave.  If  the
          existing leave  expires  without  the  application  for  variation
          having been decided the person's leave is  extended  by  s.3C.  It
          also comes into operation for the period when an appeal under  the
          Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  could  be  brought
          whilst the person is in the UK or for the period during  which  an
          appeal that has  been  brought  is  pending.   Not  one  of  those
          scenarios applies to  the  application  made  by  the  appellant's
          representatives on 19 March 2012. Indeed, by  that  time,  it  had
          been 48 days since the appellant's application  had  been  refused
          and several weeks since the time limit for appealing had passed.


      18. Moreover, the Home Office guidance on reconsideration specifically
          provides: "If an applicant makes  a  reconsideration  request,  it
          does not: give them 3C or 3D leave: a reconsideration  request  is
          not an application for variation of leave or an appeal so it  does
          not extend the applicant's leave under section 3C  or  3D  of  the
          Immigration Act 1971 whilst you are reconsidering the  decision  "
          (at p.16, version 10.0. 30 July 2018).


      19. The whole purpose of s.118 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
          Asylum Act 2002 which added s.3C to the Immigration Act  1971  was
          to prevent an applicant from becoming an overstayer  by  extending
          their leave while they were awaiting a  decision  on  an  in  time
          application, or exercising a right of appeal against  the  refusal
          of such an application. The appellant's situation  does  not  fall
          into either of these categories and I do not accept that the  GCID
          record sheet adduced by the appellant (at p.30) is  evidence  that
          the application for reconsideration can be treated as an  in  time
          application  for  leave.  The  letter  from  the   representatives
          repeatedly states that reconsideration of the  refusal  is  sought
          (at 24, 28 and 29). Mr Rehman submitted that the subsequent  grant
          of appeal meant that the earlier decision was defective however in
          the  absence  of  any  information  as  to  the  nature  of   that
          application and whether  it  differed  from  the  application  for
          reconsideration, I am not able to express a view on that argument.
          It may be that a different set of  facts  were  presented  to  the
          respondent which  generated  appeal  rights  whereas  the  earlier
          application did not. In any event, there  is  no  legal  authority
          before me to support  Mr  Rehman's  contention.  It  is  merely  a
          submission without any justification in law.


      20. Mr Rehman referred  me  to  the  section  of  the  Long  Residence
          guidance on breaks  in  lawful  residence.  That  allows  for  the
          exercise  of  discretion  to  overlook  short  breaks  in   lawful
          residence where the gap is less than 28 days. That does not  apply
          to the appellant. There is also provision for the consideration of
          any exceptional circumstances which prevented  an  applicant  from
          making an application within the first 28 days of overstaying.  Mr
          Rehman argued that the exceptional circumstance to  be  considered
          was the fact that a right of appeal was provided but that  has  no
          bearing  on  why  there  was  a  delay  in  the  making   of   the
          reconsideration request. Indeed, no explanation for that delay has
          been provided.


      21. Mr Rehman also argued that there was no  evidence  that  paragraph
          39E had been considered or that a senior caseworker had considered
          the exercise of discretion but this was not raised as a ground  of
          appeal and no application to amend the grounds was  made.  In  any
          event, I was not referred to any evidence that a good  reason  for
          the late application was provided to the respondent  and  further,
          that does not resolve the question of  any  gaps  in  leave  as  a
          result of applications made before 24 November 2016.


      22. It follows that I  find  that  the  judge  reached  a  sustainable
          conclusion with regard to his consideration and conclusions on the
          matter of whether the appellant had 3C leave as a  result  of  his
          request for reconsideration. No error of law is identifiable.


      23. That leaves only the matter of temporary admission.


      24. The appellant's skeleton argument  clearly  raises  the  issue  of
          temporary admission and the fact that it is defined as a period of
          lawful residence within the terms of paragraph 276A(b)(ii) of  the
          Immigration Rules. That skeleton argument was  before  the  judge,
          but he  makes  no  reference  at  all  to  this  argument  in  his
          determination. Instead, when considering  whether  the  period  of
          lawful residence  had  been  established,  he  focused  solely  on
          whether or not the appellant had 3C  leave.  That  is  plainly  an
          error as temporary admission also constitutes lawful residence and
          in reaching his decision the judge disregarded a substantial  part
          of the appellant's submissions.


      25. The question then is whether the error  is  material.  Ms  Everett
          submitted it was not as there was no evidence to support the claim
          that the  appellant  had  had  temporary  admission  for  all  the
          required gaps in his leave. Mr Rehman was unable  to  provide  any
          evidence for the period between 2012 and 2014 and  confirmed  that
          no further evidence would be forthcoming. On that  basis,  I  find
          that although the judge erred in failing to address the  issue  of
          temporary admission, there was insufficient evidence before him to
          make a finding in favour of the appellant.


      26. The appellant entered the UK on 30 May 2008 with leave  from  that
          date until 31 October 2011. He made an in time  application  which
          was refused on 31 January 2012 with a  limited  right  of  appeal.
          That decision notice is not before me but assuming that  he  would
          have had 14 days to exercise his appeal rights, which  Ms  Everett
          confirmed he had, albeit limited, he would have been covered by 3C
          leave until 14 February 2012. If I am mistaken and  there  was  no
          right of appeal, as his representatives maintain,  then  3C  leave
          ended with the refusal on 31 January 2012. Either way, there was a
          gap in his leave of more than 28 days when, on 19 March 2012,  his
          representatives forwarded a request  for  reconsideration  to  the
          Secretary of State.


      27. It is  the  appellant's  case  that  he  had  temporary  admission
          throughout this time, from 1 February 2012 until July 2015 when he
          was granted further leave. To support this claim, he  has  adduced
          evidence in the form of Home Office notes  to  show  that  he  was
          granted TA and required to report to an Immigration Officer  on  a
          fortnightly basis from 7 May 2014 with  the  last  reporting  date
          being 15  July  2015.  That  ties  in  with  the  refusal  of  his
          application for reconsideration in  May  2014  and  the  grant  of
          further leave in July 2015. On that basis, I accept  that  he  had
          lawful leave during that time. The difficulty for  the  appellant,
          however, is that he is  unable  to  show  that  he  had  temporary
          admission or any other kind of leave between February 2012 and May
          2014. Indeed, there was no basis  on  which  he  could  have  been
          granted temporary admission as he was an overstayer by the time he
          made  his  request  for  reconsideration.   He   has   failed   to
          demonstrate that he has accrued ten  years  of  continuous  lawful
          residence and the judge was entitled to dismiss the appeal.


          Decision


      28. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  any
          material errors of law and the decision to dismiss the  appeal  on
          all grounds stands.


          Anonymity


      29. No request for an anonymity order was made.


    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 31 October 2019










