
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06350/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 March 2018                              |On 06 April 2018              |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                 JAVED ANWAR
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  11  February  1976.  He
    first entered the UK on 7 June 2003. On 7 October 2015 he  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of his  long  residence.  His
    application was refused on 17 February 2016. In brief,  the  respondent
    did not consider the appellant had demonstrated ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence, as defined, to meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276B(i)(a) of the rules. The appellant did not currently have a partner
    or any children under the age of 18 so he could not qualify  under  the
    partner or  parent  routes.  As  for  his  private  life,  it  was  not
    considered  there  would  be  very   significant   obstacles   to   his
    reintegration in Pakistan. There were no exceptional  circumstances  to
    justify a grant of leave outside the rules on article 8 grounds.

 2. The grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  challenged  the
    decision and maintained the appellant had had over  ten  years'  lawful
    residence, including leave extended by section 3C  of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971. Furthermore,  the  respondent  had  failed  to  exercise  her
    discretion or apply her published policy.

 3. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Moore  on  8
    December 2017 at Taylor House. The judge noted the appeal  was  brought
    on human rights grounds. He further noted the history in detail,  which
    showed that the appellant had entered the  UK  on  7  June  2003  after
    arriving with a transit  visa.  Having  done  so,  he  married  an  EEA
    national on 2 December 2003. However, his application for  a  residence
    card was  refused  over  concerns  regarding  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship. The appellant left the UK but returned on 17 October 2005
    with a family permit as an EEA family member, which he had obtained  in
    Pakistan. He was granted a residence card  from  September  2007  until
    December 2012. However, his application for a permanent residence  card
    was refused and his appeal was dismissed. A further application  for  a
    residence card was also refused. Again he appealed  but  this  time  he
    withdrew his appeal, instead  lodging  an  application  for  settlement
    based on long residence, which he did on 7 October 2015.

 4. The appellant told the judge his marriage had been genuine but  he  had
    since divorced his wife. He claimed she had given evidence at an appeal
    hearing in December 2013. He said he had  never  "overstayed"  but  had
    always made applications in-time or within 28 days of  becoming  appeal
    rights exhausted.

 5. The  appellant's  counsel,  Mr  Ahmed,  accepted  it  was  "technically
    correct" that the appellant  had  not  accrued  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence but the respondent should have had regard to  her  own
    policy. The respondent's Modernised Guidance on Long Residence explains
    that time spent in the UK as the spouse of an EEA national is not leave
    and therefore does not count for the purposes  of  paragraph  276B.  It
    continues:

         "However, you must apply discretion and count time spent in the  UK
         as lawful residence for an EU  or  EEA  national  or  their  family
         members exercising their treaty rights to reside in the UK.

         Sufficient evidence  must  be  provided  to  demonstrate  that  the
         applicant has been exercising treaty rights throughout  any  period
         that they are seeking to rely on for the purposes  of  meeting  the
         long residence rules."

 6. Mr Ahmed argued this was  relevant  to  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise.

 7. In paragraph 22 of his decision, the judge made it clear that he agreed
    with Mr Ahmed that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the
    rules.  However,  he  noted,  the  respondent  was  required  in  those
    circumstances to apply discretion and count time spent  in  the  UK  as
    lawful residence. He dealt with this at paragraph 24 in  the  following
    way:

         "Regarding the issue of discretion, it was submitted  by  Mr  Ahmed
         that no such discretion had been exercised by the  Respondent,  and
         even if it had, reference to the refusal letter did not demonstrate
         that a proper consideration had been  given  to  discretion  taking
         into account all the facts. I do not agree. The Respondent  in  the
         refusal letter (page 5 of 10) stated that  the  appellant  did  not
         meet the fundamental requirements of the Immigration rules and that
         it was considered not appropriate to  exercise  discretion  in  the
         appellant's case. A full and detailed consideration of the  grounds
         stated in that refusal letter satisfies me that the Respondent  did
         in fact exercise discretion,  but  refused  having  exercised  such
         discretion to find  in  favour  of  this  appellant.  The  guidance
         document on long residence states that  the  Respondent  "...  must
         apply discretion ..." I am satisfied the Respondent has done so and
         within the refusal letter has given reasons  in  relation  to  time
         spent in the UK, and what constituted continuous lawful  residence,
         and having considered these issues and the appellant's  immigration
         history, determined not to exercise discretion in  the  appellant's
         favour."

 8. The grounds seeking permission to appeal complained that this paragraph
    failed to explain how the respondent  had  applied  discretion  to  the
    appellant's case, which was relevant to the human rights claim.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal because  it
    was arguable the judge had failed to make findings about the periods in
    which the appellant had had leave  and  the  periods  he  was  lawfully
    residing as the family member of an  EEA  national.  It  was  therefore
    arguable the judge had failed  to  explain  the  extent  to  which  the
    appellant had failed to meet  the  rules  or  how  the  respondent  had
    applied her policy. It was also arguable the judge erred in relation to
    article 8 outside the rules.

10. The respondent has not filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal.

11. I heard submissions from the representatives on  the  question  whether
    the Judge made a  material  error  of  law  in  his  decision.  Neither
    representative had checked whether the policy was in force at the  date
    of decision. The document which had been  provided  to  the  judge  was
    dated 3 April 2017. However, both parties were content  to  proceed  on
    the basis an earlier version of the policy was in force at the date  of
    decision in the same terms as that set out in paragraph 5 above.

12. Mr Ahmed expanded on his written grounds. He criticised the  manner  in
    which the respondent had looked at her policy guidance  and  he  argued
    the judge had fallen into the  same  error.  The  real  issue  was  the
    relevance of the time spent by the appellant lawfully in the UK  within
    the proportionality balancing exercise.

13. Mr Ahmed also argued the judge's fact-finding was  inadequate.  He  had
    not addressed the appellant's circumstances in Pakistan or the  private
    life ties he had formed during his 13-year residence in the UK.

14. Mr Avery said it was difficult to  see  how  the  correct  exercise  of
    discretion under the policy was relevant in a human rights  appeal.  He
    argued there was no evidence the appellant had been  exercising  Treaty
    rights. If he had been, he would have claimed to have had  a  permanent
    right  of  residence.  He  argued  the  judge  had  made  a  reasonable
    assessment of the appellant's private life.

15. In reply, Mr Ahmed argued the decision  did  not  contain  an  adequate
    balancing of the relevant factors. He relied on the case  of  Greenwood
    (No.  2)  (para  398  considered)  [2015]  UKUT  00629  (IAC)  for  the
    proposition that the Tribunal retains a power to declare a decision  of
    the Secretary of State to be unlawful,  although  there  is  no  longer
    power to remit the case for a lawful decision to be made.

16. I reserved my decision  on  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    material error of law. Having done so, I have decided it  did  not  and
    its decision shall stand. My reasons are as follows.

17. I note that the refusal letter states that the appellant  last  applied
    for a residence card on the basis that  he  had  retained  a  right  of
    residence on the dissolution of  his  marriage.  This  application  was
    refused on 11 May 2015. The refusal letter states that the  reason  for
    that refusal was that the appellant's marriage was considered  to  have
    been one of convenience. The letter continued,

         "With this in mind, it has been determined that  the  whole  period
         upon which you have relied upon (sic) in your  current  application
         whilst being the spouse or family member of an EEA national is  not
         accepted to contribute to the ten year  legal  leave  period  as  a
         whole."

18. The clear meaning of this paragraph is  that  the  respondent  did  not
    consider the appellant had demonstrated he had genuinely resided in the
    UK as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national.  Therefore,  the  exercise  of
    discretion on which the appellant sought to rely did not arise. This is
    clear from the second paragraph in the extract at paragraph 5 above.

19. The judge noted that the appellant refuted the allegation that his  was
    a marriage of convenience in his witness statement. The judge noted the
    appellant had withdrawn his appeal against the decision  which  alleged
    his was a marriage of convenience.  As Mr Avery said, had the appellant
    continued to reside in accordance with the EEA  Regulations,  he  would
    have argued he had a permanent right of residence. There was  no  basis
    on which it could be said the respondent's  decision  was  unlawful  or
    wrong.

20. In the  light  of  the  above,  the  appellant's  case  that,  had  the
    respondent exercised discretion correctly, residence in  the  UK  would
    have been counted as lawful and this would weigh in his favour  in  the
    balancing exercise falls away.

21. I note what is said in the grant of permission to appeal  about  making
    clear findings on the appellant's periods of leave and residence  under
    the EEA Regulations. However, the judge was not put in  a  position  to
    make those findings  because  the  appellant  had  not  provided  clear
    evidence of such matters as when he left the UK after his marriage  and
    when he divorced his wife. He has never had leave to enter  or  remain.
    If his marriage was one of convenience he has never enjoyed a right  of
    residence either, notwithstanding the subsequent issuance of  a  family
    permit and residence card. It follows  the  judge  was  right  to  give
    little weight to the appellant's private life.

22.  I  note  the  appeal  was  argued  outside  the  rules  and  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the rules was not expressly raised in the  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. In any event, the  judge  gave  this
    matter adequate consideration in paragraph 27 of the decision. All  the
    appellant says in his witness statement is  that  he  has  no  ties  or
    connections in Pakistan. That is not the test: see SSHD  v  AK  (Sierra
    Leone) [2016] EWCA Civ 813. The judge correctly directed  his  mind  to
    the question of whether the appellant would be able to reintegrate  and
    gave reasons why he considered he would be able to  do  so.  I  see  no
    error in his approach and he was plainly entitled  to  conclude  as  he
    did. The test provides an elevated  threshold  (Treebhawon  and  Others
    (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling circumstances test) [2017]  UKUT  00013
    (IAC)) which was plainly not met on any view.

23. As for the appellant's private life ties in the UK  considered  outside
    the rules, all the judge had before him was witness evidence  from  his
    friends and the length of his residence.  Given  his  previous  finding
    that the appellant's stay had been unlawful, the  judge  was  bound  to
    give these matters little weight in the balancing exercise. The judge's
    conclusions in paragraphs 28 and 29 do not contain any error of law.

24. The appellant's appeal  is  dismissed  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to dismiss the appeal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and his decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 27 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom



