
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06497/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 April 2019                     |On 29 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 SHERYLL [S]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Maggino of Queen's Park Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of the  Philippines  who  was  born  on  13
    February 1979.  On 22 November 2014, she  married  a  British  citizen,
    [JG] in the United Kingdom.  She was  granted  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse from 14 January 2015 until 14 July 2017.

 2. On 21 June 2017, the appellant made a human rights claim seeking  leave
    to remain on the basis of her family life with her spouse.

 3. On 19 February 2018, the Secretary of State refused her application for
    leave.  The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the appellant met
    the relevant requirements of the 'partner' provisions in Appendix FM of
    the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  Further, the  Secretary  of
    State was not satisfied that there were any "exceptional circumstances"
    such that there would be  "unjustifiably  harsh  consequences"  if  the
    appellant were not granted leave to remain.

 4. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Povey
    accepted that  the  appellant  and  her  husband  had  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting relationship" even though he had been imprisoned  for  seven
    years in March 2016 having been convicted of a number of offences.   It
    was, however, accepted by the appellant's  (then)  representative  that
    the appellant could not meet the financial requirements of Appendix FM.
     In the light of that, the judge considered whether the appellant could
    succeed under the 'partner' provisions in Appendix FM on the basis that
    there were "insurmountable obstacles to [their] family life" continuing
    in the Philippines.  The judge rejected the appellant's  argument  that
    her spouse's imprisonment amounted  to  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to
    their family life continuing in the Philippines.  The judge found, as a
    consequence, that the appellant had not met  the  requirements  of  the
    'partner'  provisions  in  Appendix  FM.   Going  on  to  consider  the
    appellant's case outside the Rules, the judge found that there were  no
    "compelling circumstances" sufficient to outweigh the  public  interest
    so as to make the respondent's decision a disproportionate interference
    with the appellant (and her spouse's) family life.  As  a  consequence,
    he dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mailer) on 22 October 2018.  On 28  November
    2018, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 notice seeking to maintain
    the judge's decision.

 6. At the hearing before us, Mr Mills, who represented  the  Secretary  of
    State, indicated that he took a different view to that expressed in the
    rule 24 notice.  He accepted that the judge had erred  in  law  in  his
    approach to determining, and finding against the appellant, that  there
    were not "insurmountable obstacles" to their family life continuing  in
    the Philippines.  Further, in all the circumstances  of  the  case  and
    despite the continued imprisonment of the appellant's  spouse,  who  is
    due to be released in  September  2019,  Mr  Mills  indicated  that  he
    accepted  that  the  appellant  had   established   that   there   were
    "insurmountable obstacles", such that the requirements of para EX.1  of
    Appendix FM were met and that, accordingly, the appellant satisfied the
    requirements of Appendix FM as a 'partner' under  the  ten-year  route.
    He indicated that it  would  be  appropriate  for  us  to  re-make  the
    decision allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 7. In the light of the position taken on behalf of the Secretary of State,
    we are satisfied that the  decision  of  Judge  Povey  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 involved the making of an error  of  law
    and we set it aside.

 8. We re-make the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8  on
    the basis that the appellant meets the requirements of Appendix FM as a
    'partner' under the ten-year route and that, as Mr Mills concedes,  the
    decision to refuse her leave is a  disproportionate  interference  with
    her family life with her spouse.

Decision

 9. The appeal is allowed under Art 8 of the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                 29 May 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have allowed the appeal, we consider it  appropriate  to  make  a  fee
award of any fee paid or payable in respect of the appellant's  application.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                           Dated 29 May 2019


