
[pic]
IAC-fH-ck-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06172/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 July 2017                               |On 27 July 2017                      |
|                                             |                                     |


                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE JEREMY BAKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     PA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel, instructed by G Singh
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Herlihy)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 25 February 2016  refusing  his  human  rights
    claim following a decision to deport him dated 12 February 2015.


Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  23  November  1960.   He
    entered the UK on 9 June 1996 for a  two-week  business  trip  and  was
    granted six months' limited leave to remain.  He overstayed but  on  27
    October 1997 he made an out of time application as a visitor for  leave
    to remain for medical treatment and was granted leave on 13 March  1998
    for five months.  On 18 August 1998 he applied  for  residence  as  the
    spouse of a Portuguese national,  exercising  Treaty  rights  but  this
    application was refused on 1 May 2001.

3.   On 15 May 2004  the  appellant  married  his  wife,  a  naturalised  UK
    citizen who had entered the UK from Nigeria in  1996.   On  15  October
    2004 he applied for leave to remain as her spouse and on 15 April  2005
    their eldest child, a daughter, was born.  Subsequently, they have  had
    two further children, a son born on 14 March 2008 and a daughter  on  8
    January 2010.

4.   On 23 May 2005 the appellant was convicted  of  conspiracy  to  defraud
    the Secretary of State by arranging or  assisting  in  arranging  false
    applications for residence documentation by providing  false  documents
    to support a claim that EEA nationals had been and were working in  the
    UK when they were not.  When passing sentence, the judge described  the
    offence as a  sophisticated  conspiracy  requiring  a  high  degree  of
    planning.  Evidence had been produced to show some 27 instances over  a
    period of two years when this conspiracy  was  carried  out  and  on  a
    number of occasions the Home Office was deceived and acted in  the  way
    they would not have done had they  known  the  truth.   The  judge  was
    satisfied that the appellant  must  have  committed  this  offence  for
    financial gain and that it was an offence which was  operated  for  the
    benefit  of  strangers.   The  judge  concluded   that   in   all   the
    circumstances the least sentence that he could properly pass was one of
    five years' imprisonment.

5.   On 23 February 2007 the respondent decided to make a deportation  order
    under s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.   The  appellant  appealed
    against this decision but his appeal was dismissed by  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal following a hearing on 27 June 2007.  An order for
    reconsideration was made on 3 August 2007 and at the first stage of the
    reconsideration on 22 February 2007 the respondent  conceded  that  the
    decision contained material errors of law and following a hearing on  6
    May 2008 the Tribunal found that the appellant had a valid  outstanding
    appeal in respect of his EEA application, having married a national  of
    Portugal on 13 December 1999,  even  though  he  had  divorced  her  in
    September 2003.  The Tribunal concluded that the  respondent's  failure
    to address the original EEA appeal impacted upon how  the  decision  to
    deport was implemented and the appeal was allowed to the extent that it
    was returned to the respondent to address the EEA appeal.

6.   On 8 October 2009 the respondent made a fresh decision  to  deport  the
    appellant.   A  subsequent  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   was
    dismissed in May 2010. Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in November 2010.  At a hearing before the Upper Tribunal
    on 16 February 2012 the decision of the First-tier Tribunal of May 2010
    was found by consent to contain an error of law and was set aside.   It
    was conceded that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to  deal  properly
    with the EEA aspect of the appeal.  Directions  were  given  to  ensure
    that all relevant issues could be properly dealt with when the decision
    was remade by the Upper Tribunal.

7.   That appeal was heard on 22 June 2012.  The appellant did not  seek  to
    pursue the EEA appeal given difficulties in contacting  his  Portuguese
    former spouse and, therefore, the issue for the Tribunal was whether it
    would be a violation of article 8 for  him  to  be  deported.   It  was
    argued that the new Immigration Rules ("the Rules") due  to  come  into
    force on 9 July 2012 should be applied.  At [9]  of  his  decision  the
    judge recorded that, although Mr Melvin (who was also representing  the
    respondent at that appeal) acknowledged that  the  new  Rules  did  not
    apply to the appellant, he argued that the judge should take account of
    Parliament's  view  of  where  the  public  interest  lay.   The  judge
    acknowledged that the public interest in deporting a  person  convicted
    of an offence of the kind committed by the appellant  was  very  strong
    irrespective of the provisions of the new  Rules.   However,  he  found
    that the article 8 factors weighing on  the  appellant's  side  of  the
    balance, although significantly involving the rights  of  others,  were
    strong and cumulatively were such as to outweigh the interests  of  the
    respondent.

8.   Having set out this finding the judge went on to say that he would  not
    speculate on whether the appellant would have failed in his appeal  had
    his case fallen to be decided by reference to the Rules which came into
    force on 9 July 2012 and emphasised that his decision  was  not  to  be
    taken by the appellant or his family as any permanent  adjudication  of
    his ability to resist deportation from the UK.

9.   Following the Upper Tribunal's decision the  respondent  wrote  to  the
    appellant's solicitors indicating that she had decided not to take  any
    deportation action against him on this occasion and that the  appellant
    should clearly understand that the provisions of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971 as amended by the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999  relating  to
    deportation continued to apply to him.  The letter went on to say:

         "Under these provisions a person who does not  have  the  right  of
         abode is liable to deportation if the Secretary of State deems  his
         deportation to be  conducive  to  the  public  good  or  if  he  is
         convicted of an offence and is recommended  for  deportation  by  a
         court.


         I should warn your client therefore  that  if  he  should  come  to
         adverse notice in the  future,  the  Secretary  of  State  will  be
         obliged to give further consideration to the  question  of  whether
         you should be deported.  If  he  commits  a  further  offence,  the
         Secretary of State  would  also  need  to  consider  the  automatic
         deportation provisions of the UK Borders  Act  2007.   Your  client
         should be aware that under  such  circumstances  the  Secretary  of
         State may be legally obliged to make a  deportation  order  against
         him."


10.  The appellant was then granted two periods of  discretionary  leave  on
    23 April 2013 and 25 November 2013 covering the period 23 April 2013 to
    25 May 2014.  On 24 May 2014 the appellant applied for further leave to
    remain on article 8  grounds.   On  12  February  2015  the  respondent
    decided to make a deportation order under s.3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act and
    on 25 February 2016 the appellant's human rights claim was refused.  It
    was the respondent's view that the  application  should  be  considered
    under the provisions of paras A398 - 399 of the Rules in force  at  the
    date of decision.  The respondent was not  satisfied  that  there  were
    very compelling circumstances over and  above  those  set  out  in  the
    Rules.  The respondent went on to  consider  whether  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances why the appellant should not be  deported  and
    found  that  there  none  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   his
    deportation.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

11.  The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    by the First-tier Tribunal on 3 October 2016, the decision being issued
    on 14 November 2016.  The judge heard oral evidence from the  appellant
    and  his  wife.   It  was  argued  that  the  starting  point  for  the
    consideration of the appeal was the  previous  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the judge commented at [32] that there had been no  direct
    challenge to the findings made by the Tribunal that the  appellant  had
    been a model prisoner, he was the main carer for his children to  allow
    his wife to work full-time and he had not re-offended since  the  index
    offence.  There had been  no  challenge  by  the  respondent  to  those
    findings and no changes to the appellant's family life  save  that  the
    relationships had become more entrenched [34].

12.  The judge, however, said  that  there  had  been  a  change  since  the
    previous Upper Tribunal decision in that  there  was  a  new  statutory
    landscape  with  the  introduction  of  s.117   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") and the amendments  to
    the Rules.  She was required to look at the case through  the  lens  of
    para 398 and she added that the respondent was  perfectly  entitled  to
    assess the position in the light of the current  Rules  notwithstanding
    the previous grant of discretionary leave.   The  appellant  sought  to
    claim that the decision was in breach of para 398 and that  there  were
    very compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paras
    399 and 399A which outweighed the public interest  in  his  deportation
    and that removal would be a breach of article 8.

13.  The judge found that the appellant had failed to  establish  that  very
    compelling reasons existed to outweigh the public  interest  given  the
    seriousness of his crime.  At [37] she said  that  the  two  grants  of
    discretionary leave were plainly factors  capable  of  bearing  on  the
    weight to be given to the public interest as facts which  might  reduce
    it but there could be no  legitimate  expectation  that  the  appellant
    would not face deportation or removal in  the  future  as  clearly  any
    further offending by him or the loss of discretionary  leave  in  other
    circumstances might lead to a decision to deport or remove him.

14.  The judge went on to consider the appellant's close  relationship  with
    his children, his level of integration into the UK and  the  length  of
    time that the various appeal proceedings had been continuing.  She took
    into account s.117B of the 2002 Act summarising her findings at [43] by
    saying that, having considered the totality of the evidence before  her
    including the strong evidence of the extent of the appellant's ties  to
    the United Kingdom and his family life, she found  that  the  appellant
    had not established the  existence  of  compelling  circumstances  that
    would outweigh the public interest in maintaining the decision to  seek
    his deportation.  The appeal was therefore dismissed.

The Grounds of Appeal

15.  The grounds of appeal raise three issues.  It is argued  firstly,  that
    the judge failed to make  a  finding  on  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's three children and failed to explain why she  had  departed
    from the undisputed factual findings of  the  previous  Upper  Tribunal
    decision; secondly, she misdirected herself in law by failing to  carry
    out an article 8(2) compliant proportionality assessment  and  thirdly,
    she failed adequately to consider the effect of  delay  and  apply  the
    relevant  principles  under  article  8(2)   in   her   proportionality
    assessment.

16.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    follows:

         "2    The  appellant  has  had  a  previous  appeal  under   number
             IA/29772/2009.  By way of background the appellant had in 2005
             been convicted of offences relating to a conspiracy to defraud
             by arranging and assisting in arranging false applications  by
             EEA nationals to remain in the United Kingdom.  As a result of
             that conviction the appellant had been given a five year  term
             of imprisonment.  With that conviction as a basis, a  decision
             to make a deportation order had been made in  or  about  2008.
             There are then various appeals but ultimately the  appellant's
             appeal was heard in the Upper Tribunal on 22 June 2012 by  UTJ
             Peter Lane.  Judge Lane  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
             reason of the appellant's pivotal status and importance to his
             children.


         3    Subsequent to  that  application  the  appellant  was  granted
             various periods of leave for short periods of time.  On 24 May
             2014 the appellant applied for leave to remain  on  article  8
             grounds.  A new decision to  deport  the  appellant  was  made
             again apparently based upon the conviction set out  above  and
             the fact that the  provision  of  the  Immigration  Rules  had
             changed and that section 117B had to be applied.  The judge in
             considering  the  appeal  indicated  that  the  legal  changes
             identified were a basis for the refusal of  the  appeal.   The
             case of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 specifically paragraphs 39 -
             45 has given guidance how to approach the issues in respect of
             deportation and the new statutory landscape.


         4    It is submitted in the grounds of  the  application  that  the
             judge has failed properly to assess the best interests of  the
             children.  In the light of the guidance given  in  Hesham  Ali
             the grounds may be argued.  Leave to appeal is granted."


Submissions

17.  Mr Harding focused his submissions  initially  on  the  issues  arising
    from the fact that the appeal was  dismissed  despite  the  appellant's
    previous appeal being allowed, the appellant had committed  no  further
    offences and his family life had strengthened in the period  since  the
    hearing in 2012.  He submitted that the judge had failed to  take  into
    account that the respondent, when granting  discretionary  leave,  must
    have considered that the appellant at that stage met  the  requirements
    of the Rules that there were exceptional circumstances outweighing  the
    public interest in deportation.

18.   He submitted that the appellant was not covered by para  339C  of  the
    Rules (set out at [26] below) as his leave had not been  granted  under
    Part 13 but was simply discretionary leave.   The  respondent  had  not
    been under an obligation to make a deportation order and  her  decision
    was therefore discretionary.  That fact should  have  been  taken  into
    account when assessing proportionality.  In the light of  the  previous
    decision by the Upper Tribunal and the fact that the appellant had been
    granted discretionary  leave  it  followed,  so  he  argued,  that  the
    respondent must have accepted that there were exceptional circumstances
    and it was hard to see that what  change  of  circumstances  had  taken
    place to justify dismissing the appeal.  He accepted that the  Tribunal
    had to apply the Rules in force at the date of  hearing  but  submitted
    that there had been a failure  properly  to  apply  the  principles  in
    Devaseelan v Secretary of State [2002] UKAIT 702, or  to  consider  the
    exceptional circumstances and the fact that the  respondent  must  have
    considered  that  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  by  granting
    discretionary leave.

19.  Mr Harding confirmed that he adopted the  grounds,  which  argued  that
    the judge had failed to consider properly the interests  of  the  three
    children as a primary consideration.   The  appellant's  children  were
    British citizens and the starting point should have been the undisputed
    findings of UTJ Lane that the appellant's removal could not possibly be
    said to be in their best interests.  The grounds also  argue  that  the
    judge's description of the appellant's family life  fell  short  of  an
    assessment of the children's best interests and the judge's  conclusion
    that the appellant and  his  wife  could  decide  whether  or  not  the
    appellant returned to Nigeria with his family disclosed  a  failure  to
    inquire how each child would be affected.  The judge had not  addressed
    the effect on the children of splitting the family as  opposed  to  the
    effect on the appellant's wife and her work commitments.

20.  The second ground argues that the judge was wrong to  apply  article  8
    through the prism of the Rules and by holding that  the  Rules  were  a
    complete code.  The Supreme Court in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 had held
    that proportionality in foreign criminal cases should not be  conducted
    only through the prism of the Rules.  The judge had  failed  to  attach
    sufficient weight to the appellant's circumstances  and  in  particular
    the position of his children  and  his  post-conviction  conduct.   The
    judge had failed to take into account the  appellant's  rehabilitation,
    so the grounds argue, when assessing the weight to the public  interest
    in the protection of the public.  She  had  applied  a  proportionality
    assessment which was insufficiently flexible and had failed to consider
    the wider proportionality factors in Maslov v Austria  [2007]  47  EHRR
    496.   In  consequence,  so  it  is   argued,   no   full   article   8
    proportionality assessment was conducted.  The third ground argues that
    the judge failed to consider adequately the effect  of  delay  and  the
    applicable principles  under  article  8(2).   The  judge  had  wrongly
    characterised the argument  as  amounting  to  whether  the  delay  had
    prejudiced him in pursuing his family and private life.

21.  Mr Melvin submitted that the judge  had  been  right  to  approach  the
    appeal on the basis that where the  person  to  be  deported  has  been
    sentenced to four years' imprisonment or more, the weight  attached  to
    the public interest remained very great despite the  factors  to  which
    para 399 referred.  Neither the British nationality of the  appellant's
    children nor the likely separation from their father was an exceptional
    circumstance which outweighed the public  interest.   In  the  previous
    decision the judge had identified that the new Rules might make a great
    difference to the outcome of the appeal. The Supreme  Court  in  Hesham
    Ali had confirmed that  factors  outweighing  the  public  interest  in
    deportation would need to be very compelling.  In summary, he submitted
    that the decision by the First-tier Tribunal was sustainable in law and
    that the judge had reached a decision  properly  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.

Assessment of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in Law

22.  There is no dispute between the parties  that  an  appeal  against  the
    decision to make a deportation order must  be  assessed  in  accordance
    with the Rules at the date of hearing: YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.  This appeal therefore had to  be  determined  in
    accordance with the provisions of A398 - 399.   These  provisions  were
    set out by the First-tier Tribunal at [31] and need  not  be  repeated.
    So far as the appellant is concerned he falls within the provisions  of
    para 398(a), which reads as follows:

         "(a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of at least four years."

    The provisions of para 399 do not apply to the appellant as  they  only
    apply to those falling within paragraphs 398(b) or (c).  Paragraph  398
    then provides that "the public interest in  deportation  will  only  be
    outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in paras 399 and 399A".

23.  In the light of Mr Harding's submissions, we note that the  wording  of
    para 398 from 9 July 2012 was that where the provisions of para 399  or
    399A did not apply "it will only be in exceptional  circumstances  that
    the  public  interest  in  deportation  will  be  outweighed  by  other
    factors."  The current wording was substituted from 28  July  2014  and
    applies to article 8 claims from foreign criminals decided on or  after
    that date.

24.  The issue for the judge when considering the  appeal  under  the  Rules
    was therefore whether there were very compelling circumstances over and
    above those described in paragraphs 399 and  399A.   We  are  satisfied
    that the judge correctly identified the approach required by the  Rules
    in [14] and [37] of her decision.  In this context it is  important  to
    note that the requirements of para 399 are themselves stringent in that
    where a person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
    a child under 18 it must be shown both that it would  be  unduly  harsh
    for the child to live in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
    deported and unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the
    person who is to be deported and in respect of a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner that the relationship was formed
    at a  time  when  the  deportee  was  in  the  UK  lawfully  and  their
    immigration status was not precarious and it would be unduly harsh  for
    that partner to live in the country to which the appellant  was  to  be
    deported.

25.  Mr Harding argued that weight should have been given to the  fact  that
    the  respondent's  decision  to  make  a  deportation   order   was   a
    discretionary  decision  and  not  a  mandatory  decision   under   the
    provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The appellant had been  granted
    discretionary leave rather than leave under the provisions of para 399B
    and therefore the provisions of para 399C did not apply to  him.   Para
    399C provides as follows:

         "Where a foreign criminal who has previously been granted a  period
         of limited leave under this Part applies for further limited  leave
         or indefinite leave to remain his deportation remains conducive  to
         the public good and in  the  public  interest  notwithstanding  the
         previous grant of leave."


26.  We accept that the respondent's decision  was  discretionary  and  that
    the appellant did not fall within the provisions of para 399C as he was
    granted discretionary leave rather than limited leave under Part 13  of
    the Rules.  However, we are not satisfied that these matters  have  any
    material bearing on the outcome of the appeal.   Whether  the  decision
    was mandatory or discretionary does not without more affect the  issues
    to be considered under the Rules and the fact that the  appellant  does
    not fall within the  provisions  of  para  399C  does  not  affect  his
    position.  His deportation remains conducive to the public good and  in
    the public interest because of the provisions not only of para 398  but
    also of s.117C of the 2002 Act.

27.  It is further argued that the judge  erred  by  failing  to  take  into
    account the fact that by granting discretionary leave for six months in
    April and November 2013, the respondent had  by  necessary  implication
    accepted  that  the  appellant's  circumstances  were  exceptional   as
    required by the Rules in force at that time.   However,  even  assuming
    that to be the case, the fact remains that the Rules were amended  with
    effect from 28 July 2014 requiring an appellant to meet the higher test
    of showing very compelling circumstances over and above those described
    in paragraphs 399 and 399A  as  opposed  to  showing  that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in  deportation  was
    outweighed by other factors. The amendments to s.117 of  the  2002  Act
    also came into force on 28 July 2014,  S.117C(6) providing that in  the
    case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the  public  interest  requires
    deportation unless there are very compelling  circumstances,  over  and
    above those  described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2,  which  reflect  the
    provisions of para 399 of the Rules.

28.  It was therefore for the judge to assess on  the  evidence  before  her
    whether the appellant was able to meet the test of  showing  compelling
    circumstances within para 398.  There is no reason to believe that  the
    judge did not take into account the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    2012: she specifically refers to that decision  when  setting  out  the
    background to the appeal and, when setting out her findings,  that  the
    change since that decision was the new  statutory  landscape  with  the
    introduction of s.117 and the amendments to the Rules.  So far  as  any
    argument based on Devaseelan is concerned the judge  accepted  at  [32]
    that there had been no direct challenge to the  findings  made  in  the
    previous decision including the fact that  the  appellant  had  been  a
    model prisoner, had been the main carer of his children so as to  allow
    his wife to work full-time and  had  not  reoffended  since  the  index
    offence.

29.  The judge also took into account  the  grants  of  discretionary  leave
    after the appeal was  allowed,  describing  them  in  [37]  as  plainly
    factors capable of bearing on the weight to  be  given  to  the  public
    interest.  She went on  to  say  that  there  could  be  no  legitimate
    expectation that the appellant would not face deportation or removal in
    the future as clearly any further offending  by  him  or  the  loss  of
    discretionary leave in other circumstances might lead to a decision  to
    deport or remove him.

30.  We were referred to the letter the  appellant  received  prior  to  the
    grant of discretionary leave warning him that if  he  came  to  adverse
    notice in the respondent would be obliged to give further consideration
    to the question of whether he should be deported but again that  letter
    written on 6 October 2012 pre-dated the amendments  to  the  Rules  but
    even so contains a reminder that a person who does not have  the  right
    of abode is liable to deportation if the Secretary of State  deems  his
    deportation to be conducive to the public good or if he is convicted of
    an offence and is recommended for deportation by a court.  In the light
    of the current law and Rules the respondent has deemed his  deportation
    to be conducive to the public good in  accordance  with  the  terms  of
    statute.

31.  In assessing whether  there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  the
    judge had to consider all relevant matters.  It is clear that  she  was
    fully  aware  of  the  previous  appeal,  the  subsequent   grants   of
    discretionary leave and the fact that the appellant had not  reoffended
    and took them into account. Mr Harding submitted that the judge  failed
    to give proper weight to the fact that the appellant's appeal had  been
    allowed by the Upper Tribunal in  2012,  the  judge  finding  that  the
    article 8 factors weighing on the appellant's side of the balance  were
    sufficiently strong to outweigh  the  public  interest.   There  is  no
    substance in this argument or in the submission that the  judge  failed
    to follow the approach in Devaseelan.  The judge was fully aware of the
    basis on which the appeal had  previously  been  allowed  and  was  the
    context in which she made the point that there was now a new  statutory
    landscape.

32.  Mr Harding also sought to rely on the issues  raised  in  the  grounds.
    The first ground argues that the judge failed properly to consider  the
    best interests of the children as the  appellant's  removal  could  not
    possibly be said to be in their best interests.  We are satisfied  that
    the judge did consider these factors in [38] of her determination.  She
    found that the appellant's relationship with his children and the level
    of support he provided was not so exceptional that it  should  outweigh
    the public interest in his deportation.

33.  There can be little doubt that the children's best interests  would  be
    for them to remain living with both parents in the UK.  However, as the
    Court of Appeal said in EJA v Secretary of State [2017] EWCA Civ 10  at
    [30]:

         "There must be relatively few cases in which there is a  meaningful
         relationship between a parent and children where deportation of the
         parent, with consequent physical  separation,  would  not  have  an
         adverse impact on the children."


    We are satisfied that the judge did consider the best interests of  the
    children and there is nothing to indicate that  she  took  a  different
    view from the previous Tribunal but, nonetheless, it was open to her to
    find the appellant had failed to  show  very  compelling  circumstances
    over and above those described in pars 399 and 399A.


34.  Secondly, it is argued  that  the  judge  misdirected  herself  on  the
    assessment of proportionality.  The judgment of the  Supreme  Court  in
    Hesham Ali has confirmed  that  the  Rules  cannot  be  regarded  as  a
    complete code and in consequence do not alone govern appellate decision-
    making (see [51] and [52]).   If  an  appellant  cannot  bring  himself
    within the provisions of the Rules, the Tribunal is still  required  to
    assess whether the respondent's decision to make a deportation order is
    proportionate to a legitimate aim within article 8(2).

35.  In [46] of his judgment Lord Reed said:

         "These observations apply a fortiori to Tribunals  hearing  appeals
         against deportation decisions.  The special feature in that context
         is that the decision under review has involved the  application  of
         Rules which have been  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
         exercise of a responsibility entrusted to her  by  Parliament,  and
         which Parliament  has  approved.   It  is  the  duty  of  Appellate
         Tribunals, as  independent  judicial  bodies,  to  make  their  own
         assessment of the findings of proportionality of deportation in any
         particular case on the basis of their own findings as to the  facts
         and their  understanding  of  the  relevant  law.   But  where  the
         Secretary of  State  has  adopted  a  policy  based  on  a  general
         assessment of proportionality, as in the present case, they  should
         attach considerable weight to that assessment: in particular,  that
         a custodial sentence of  four  years  or  more  represents  such  a
         serious  level  of  offending  that  the  public  interest  in  the
         offender's  deportation  almost  always  outweighs   countervailing
         considerations of private  or  family  life;  that  greater  weight
         should generally be given to the public interest in the deportation
         of a foreign offender who has received a custodial sentence of more
         than twelve months; and that, where the circumstances do  not  fall
         within Rules 399 or 399A, the public interest in the deportation of
         such offenders can generally be outweighed only  by  countervailing
         factors which are very compelling, as explained in paras  37  -  38
         above."


36.  In [38] Lord Reed had said that the implication of the  new  Rules  was
    that Rules 399 and 399A identified particular  categories  of  case  in
    which the Secretary of State accepted that the public interest  in  the
    deportation  of  the  offender  is  outweighed  under  article   8   by
    countervailing factors.  Cases not falling  within  para  399,  foreign
    offenders who have received sentences of at least four years, would  be
    dealt with on the basis that great weight should generally be given  to
    the public interest in the deportation of such offenders but  it  could
    be outweighed, applying a  proportionality  test,  by  very  compelling
    circumstances,  in  other  words,  a  very  strong  claim  indeed.  The
    countervailing considerations must be very compelling to  outweigh  the
    public interest in the deportation of such offenders,  as  assessed  by
    Parliament and the Secretary of State.

37.  We are not satisfied that the  judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  the
    assessment of proportionality.  She referred to  looking  at  the  case
    through the lens of the Rules but when read in context, this  can  only
    indicate that she was taking the Rules into account as setting out  the
    respondent's policy in cases of  serious  criminal  offending  and  she
    considered  whether   there   were   very   compelling   countervailing
    considerations.  Her  approach  was  consistent   with   the   approach
    subsequently set out in Hesham Ali where the Supreme Court was  dealing
    with an appeal decided before s.117 of the 2002 Act  came  into  force.
    Those provisions confirm in statutory form the provisions of the  Rules
    and add further strength to the comments of Lord Reed.

38.  We are not satisfied that the judge left any  matters  out  of  account
    when assessing proportionality  as  the  grounds  assert  or  that  her
    proportionality assessment was insufficiently  flexible  or  failed  to
    take wider issues into account as set out in  Maslov.   The  judge  was
    required to consider the provisions of s.117B and C and  did  so.   She
    was entitled to comment that the appellant  had  developed  his  family
    life after he had begun the commission of his offending  and  that,  in
    such circumstances, he should have  been  aware  that  his  immigration
    status was precarious.  She considered the length of time the appellant
    had been  living  in  the  UK  together  with  his  status.   She  also
    considered the fact that he  had  been  educated  to  degree  level  in
    Nigeria and had strong links to that country and that his wife was also
    of Nigerian ancestry.

39.  In so far as the issue of delay  is  concerned  arising  from  the  EEA
    appeal and whether it prejudiced the appellant and his  family,  in  EB
    (Kosovo) v Secretary of State [2008] UKHL 41, the House of  Lords  held
    that delay could be relevant in three ways, firstly the  applicant  may
    during the period of delay develop closer personal and social ties  and
    establish deeper roots in the community, secondly, an  applicant  in  a
    precarious situation where  there  was  a  long  delay  might  have  an
    expectation that would grow that if the  authorities  had  intended  to
    remove him they would take steps to do so and thirdly, where the  delay
    was due to a dysfunctional system yielding unpredictable,  inconsistent
    and unfair outcomes, that could impact on the weight to be accorded  to
    requirements of firm and fair immigration  control.   It  is  only  the
    first way which has any potential bearing on this appeal. The delay has
    meant that the appellant and his family have become more settled by the
    passage of time but the judge was clearly aware of that  and  took  the
    length of residence  into  account.   There  is  no  substance  in  the
    submissions based on delay.

40.  In summary, we are not satisfied that the judge erred  in  law  in  her
    assessment of this appeal either under the Rules or article 8.  We  are
    satisfied that she took all relevant matters into account and came to a
    decision properly open to her for the reasons she gave.

Decision

41.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  its  decision  stands.
    The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal  remains  in  force
    until further order.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date:  25 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


