
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06056/2018
                                                               IA/00076/2018
                                                               IA/00104/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 June 2019                      |On 21 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                            SHERSHAH [S] & OTHERS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M. Biggs, instructed by Eldons Berkley Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  first  appellant  ("the  appellant")  appealed  the  respondent's
    decision dated 07 April 2018 to refuse a human rights claim. First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Raymond ("the judge") dismissed the appeal in a decision
    promulgated on 01 March 2019.

2.    Rule 40 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  allows
    the Upper Tribunal to give a decision orally at a hearing.  Rule  40(3)
    states that the Upper Tribunal must  provide  written  reasons  with  a
    decision notice to each party as soon as reasonably  practicable  after
    making  a  decision  which  finally  disposes  of  all  issues  in  the
    proceedings. Rule 40(3) provides exceptions to the rule if the decision
    is made with the consent of the parties or the parties  have  consented
    to the Upper Tribunal not giving written reasons.  In  this  case  both
    parties consented to the decision at the hearing so it is not necessary
    to give detailed reasons.

3.    In summary, it was argued on behalf of  the  appellant  that,  despite
    the length of the decision, the judge  failed  to  follow  the  general
    guidance  outlined  in  R  (Khan)  v  SSHD  (Dishonesty;  tax  returns;
    paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 384. Although it was  accepted  that  the
    decision pre-dated the recent Court of Appeal decision in Balajigari  v
    SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 673 it was  further  submitted  that  the  judge's
    approach did not accord with the general comments made  in  that  case.
    The judge failed to follow a structured approach to the relevant burden
    and standard of proof in a  case  involving  a  serious  allegation  of
    deception. The judge made various  mistakes  of  fact  and/or  perverse
    findings, which cumulatively called into question the anxious  scrutiny
    given to the assessment. The most notable being  the  judge's  repeated
    reference to Mr J.  Gajjar  as  a  person  involved  in  the  scenarios
    outlined in the  evidence  when,  in  fact,  he  was  counsel  for  the
    appellant at the hearing. While none of those points  might  have  been
    sufficient,  taken  alone,  when  taken  together,  they  rendered  the
    decision unsustainable. It was also argued that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider material matters  and  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  to
    explain some of his findings. Mr Tufan accepted that several points had
    merit and that the decision was  not  sustainable.  I  agreed  for  the
    reasons outlined by Mr Biggs  in  his  submissions  and  made  an  oral
    decision accordingly.

4.    The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on  a
    point of law. The decision is set aside and both  parties  agreed  that
    the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing

Signed   [pic]   Date    18 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

