
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06837/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                           |On 09 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   mr m t
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Khan, instructed by Fountain Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of P since he  was
    anonymised who I will refer to hereafter as the appellant as he was  at
    that point and to the Secretary of State as the respondent allowing his
    appeal against a decision of 13 June 2017  refusing  his  human  rights
    claim following the decision to deport him dated 10 November 2016.

2.   Rather than going through what the judge had to say  at  the  outset  I
    will go straight to what was said in the challenge to the decision  and
    then relate that to the judge's findings and the submissions that  have
    been made by  the  representatives.   The  first  and  main  ground  of
    challenge was that the judge misapplied the undue harshness test  under
    section 117C of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  and
    here it was said that the judge had allowed the  appeal  based  on  the
    undue harshness effects of the appellant's deportation on his  children
    and had failed to identify anything exceptional  without  weighing  the
    compelling public interest in his removal referred to at  paragraph  46
    of the judgment.

3.   The point was also made that the judge had failed to  consider  section
    117C and had erred by going against established case law  and  also  it
    was argued that the judge had gone against the case law in stating that
    the children's best interests always take  precedence  over  the  wider
    public interest and it was argued there was nothing  exceptional  about
    the various health and education difficulties relied on by the  family.
    As regards the fact that his daughter attends a  special  school  there
    was no suggestion that social services would not provide  the  required
    support if necessary and the judge appeared to have taken the  family's
    evidence at face value.

4.   It was argued that the judge  had  incorrectly  attributed  significant
    weight to the appellant's rehabilitation and remorse when  finding  out
    that these were compelling circumstances outweighing deportation and it
    was said that this did not properly take into account  OH  (Serbia)  on
    the point of the risk of reoffending being  one  facet  of  the  public
    interest, but there were also other relevant and important matters.

5.   More importantly even in a case of very serious crime,  deterrence  and
    an expression of society's revulsion at serious crimes and in  building
    public confidence  in  the  treatment  of  foreign  citizens  who  have
    committed serious crimes were important and then it was  said  that  at
    paragraph 45 the judge had failed to cite any evidence of the long term
    effects  on  the  children's  development  and   it   was   essentially
    speculation. As a consequence the judge had misapplied the  meaning  of
    undue harshness. Permission was granted on all grounds by  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   It is relevant to mention  before  going  on  to  submissions  and  the
    details of the judge's findings that there is a  Rule  24  response  on
    behalf of the appellant where it is argued that the judge's findings on
    undue harshness are perfectly sound, are consistent with  case  law  as
    setting out in for example OH (Serbia) and that although  section  117C
    was not considered the exactly parallel provisions in paragraph 399  of
    the Immigration  Rules  were  properly  considered  and  the  balancing
    exercise had been appropriately carried out.

7.   I turn then to the judge's decision and reasons.  The index offence  in
    this case is the conviction of 31  October  for  sexual  assault  on  a
    female for  which  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  fifteen  months'
    imprisonment and required to sign the sex offenders' register for seven
    years and the judge noted the sentencing remarks at paragraph 12 of her
    decision with reference to the predatory nature of his actions and  the
    breach of trust involved given that he was a  taxi  driver  who  should
    have been providing his passenger with safe passage to  her  home  when
    she was so vulnerable.

8.   The judge had previously set out the  legal  tests  and  in  particular
    what I think is common ground is the appropriate test in a case such as
    this where the sentence is less than four years that it is  a  question
    of whether the impact of  separation  on  the  family  members  of  the
    appellant of them  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  him  being
    deported to Pakistan would be unduly harsh.  Ms Aboni says and I  think
    that is the general position of the Secretary of State that there would
    be no question of expecting the family to go to Pakistan and  join  him
    if he were deported: they are all British citizens after all.

9.   The judge then  looked  at  the  legal  tests,  having  looked  at  the
    sentencing remarks set out and the  OASys  Report  where  the  risk  of
    reoffending was assessed was low although the  level  of  harm  to  the
    public and children if he did reoffend was assessed as medium  and  the
    point was noted  that  he  is  on  the  sex  offenders'  register,  and
    therefore subject to ongoing supervision and monitoring.  He  lost  his
    taxi driver's licence and there was reference also to a message he sent
    to the victim on the following morning showing his  complete  inability
    to show any empathy to the victim of the assault.  He was still  firmly
    denying the offences at the date of the OASys Assessment,  however  his
    behaviour in custody was described  as  exemplary  and  there  were  no
    courses available while in custody to work on his attitude, skills  and
    behaviour especially towards women.

10.  There is then a letter of 12 October 2018 from a probation officer  who
    said he had been keeping his appointments,  there  was  good  and  open
    engagement from him, he was fully compliant with all the  ongoing  risk
    assessments and he was engaging in long  time  work  in  particular  in
    relation to work intended for low risk sexual offenders.  The probation
    officer's view was that he had showed clear strategies for  himself  to
    avoid and prevent further offending,  and  concluded  that  there  were
    strong protective factors in his personal circumstances, that being the
    current strong support he had from his family and him towards them.

11.  The judge then went on to set out factors  favouring  the  allowing  of
    the appeal and factors in favour  of  dismissing  the  appeal  and  the
    factors largely in favour of allowing the appeal were the circumstances
    of  the  family  members  in  particular  his  wife  who  suffers  from
    neuropathic pain, noting  also  the  circumstances  of  the  two  adult
    children, his stepson and son, and the daughter S and the  history  she
    has of anxiety, depression and self-harm. She  has  been  diagnosed  as
    being on the autistic spectrum.  She attends a special  school,  having
    been out of school for a time as  a  school  refuser,  at  a  different
    school less suited to her needs. Her school attendance has increased at
    the current school and the son who has a number of health problems  had
    become a school refuser while his father was in prison but he did  seem
    to have resumed attendance albeit not for a full school day.

12.  The judge noted that the appellant had lived in the United Kingdom  for
    eighteen years, his residence had been lawful  at  all  times,  he  had
    still some family in Pakistan whom he visited  most  recently  eighteen
    months ago.  He had been convicted of only the one offence, his  family
    knew of the incident and would play a supervisory role to ensure  there
    was no repeat of any such behaviour noting the fact of him being on the
    sex offenders' register, the risk of offending assessment including the
    engagement of probation services, the regret he expressed  as  recorded
    in a letter from the mosque and in his witness statement and  the  fact
    that it was assessed that the best interests of  the  children  lay  in
    remaining in the United Kingdom as the only home  that  they  had  ever
    known and they would not get the kind of support  that  they  would  in
    Pakistan.

13.  The judge then went on to list the factors in favour of dismissing  the
    appeal and it was  noting  the  public  interest  in  removing  foreign
    criminals thereby eliminating further risk to the public, the nature of
    the offence,  a  nasty  predatory  offence  and  abuse  of  trust,  the
    maintenance of innocence in December 2016, a lack of understanding  and
    the impact on the victim, a medium risk in the community, children  and
    the public should he reoffend albeit the risk of  reoffending  was  low
    and noting an incident in 2011 where he was  arrested  but  no  further
    action  was  taken  and  the  discriminatory  attitude  towards   women
    disclosed in the OASys Report.

14.  The judge noted then going on to the  witness  statements  from  family
    members and friends and relatives and again  reminded  herself  of  the
    legal test and then gave detailed consideration to the situation of the
    daughter.  Passing over the repetition  of  the  difficulty  she  would
    experience going to Pakistan the judge considered that  she  very  much
    needed all the support she could get from both of her parents. Wherever
    she was the evidence showed she was  very  reliant  on  her  mother  to
    function day-to-day, her routine  would  be  upset  yet  again  by  the
    removal once more of her father from the family  unit  and  this  would
    have an adverse impact on her directly and by reason of the  impact  on
    the whole family if he were required to return to Pakistan without  the
    family.   On  the  balance  of  probabilities  this  would  lead  to  a
    deterioration in her mental health, increase the risk of her  repeating
    her  self-harming  behaviour  and  would  impact   adversely   on   her
    educational performance and the decision in her regard would  therefore
    be unduly harsh taking full account of the strong  public  interest  in
    the appellant's removal from the  United  Kingdom  the  protection  the
    public from reoffending, deterrence, public revulsion and his behaviour
    towards an innocent and vulnerable individual and the breach  of  trust
    involved.

15.  The judge then went on to consider the situation of the son  and  again
    taking into account all the evidence set out above and recognising  the
    strong public interest again the protection of  the  public  deterrence
    and public revulsion it would be unduly harsh for him to remain in  the
    United Kingdom without his father or to relocate to  Pakistan  to  live
    with him there.  The appellant, she  found,  has  a  strong  subsisting
    parental relationship with both children,  they  rely  heavily  on  the
    emotional and practical stability he brings to the  household  and  the
    judge  went  on  to  accept  that  he  has  a  strong  and   subsisting
    relationship with his wife who knows of his behaviour and will  provide
    additional supervision to ensure he never again behaves  towards  other
    women as he has done in the past.  Noting her own health  problems  and
    the fact she had only briefly been to Pakistan  over  the  last  twenty
    years the judge was satisfied that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  her
    because of compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in
    EX.2 for her to relocate to Pakistan to continue her family  life  with
    him there.

16.    The challenge is essentially a challenge to the judge's  findings  on
    undue hardship and I have set out the grounds and points that were made
    there which were developed also by Ms Aboni with regard to the argument
    that there is a lack of reasoning to conclude as the  judge  did  about
    the public interest, she did not say why the family matters  outweighed
    the public interest and that therefore there was a lack of reasoning.

17.  The grounds make a point with regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children and it is a little difficult to understand ground 4 but if  it
    is said there that the judge made the best interests  of  the  children
    the determinative  factor  then  I  do  not  think  that  is  a  proper
    interpretation of the decision.  The judge  certainly  identified  what
    the children's best interests were and came  to  conclusions  on  those
    which I think are accepted on behalf of the respondent that their  best
    interests remain in staying in the United Kingdom but of course as  the
    law is clear that is not and cannot be a determinative factor.

18.  It is clearly a matter of significant weight but  it  does  not  decide
    things.  But the judge did not say that it was a decisive matter and  I
    think wisely she set out the factors in favour of allowing  the  appeal
    and the factors against  allowing  the  appeal  in  her  evaluation  of
    whether or not the appellant's removal would  be  undue  harsh  on  the
    family.   She  also  properly  considered  the  impact  on  the   three
    particular individuals, the daughter, the son and the wife and came  to
    conclusions in relation to them and in each case in each of those three
    paragraphs 43, 44 and 46 the judge properly reminded herself  not  only
    of the factor of the public interest but the detail of it.  It  is  not
    just a matter of the judge attaching weight to the risk of reoffending.
     Certainly she took that into account but she also  took  into  account
    very  clearly  in  each  of  those  paragraphs  deterrence  and  public
    revulsion at the appellant's behaviour.  There is as can be  seen  from
    the setting out of the adverse factors no sense in which the judge  can
    be said to have omitted from her  consideration  any  of  the  relevant
    issues in this case.

19.  It is not I think necessarily a decision to  which  every  judge  would
    have come but an error of law  is  not  to  be  identified  by  way  of
    disagreement only and it seems to me in the end that what is  expressed
    in the grounds of appeal in this case is no more than  a  disagreement.
    I have not been able to identify any point in which the  judge  can  be
    said to have erred in law in  her  evaluation  of  the  balance  to  be
    carried  out  in  this  case.   Undue  harshness  is  a  matter   which
    essentially has to be determined on the facts  of  each  case  and  the
    judge carried out a proper balance in this case  looking  carefully  at
    the relevant  public  interest  factors  balancing  those  against  the
    factors in the appellant's favour and  came  to  a  finding  on  unduly
    harshness in line as Mr Khan says with if not the specific  wording  as
    such or specific reference to section 117C as such she simply relied on
    the exactly parallel provisions in the Immigration Rules so  there  can
    be no error in that regard.

20.  So as a consequence I consider that it has  not  been  shown  that  the
    judge erred in law in her reasoning or conclusions in this case and  as
    a consequence her decision allowing the appeal is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 31 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

