
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06185/2016
                                                               HU/06186/2016
                                                               HU/06187/2016
                                                               HU/06188/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th February 2018                         |On 22nd March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     aOO
                                    OAMO
                                     ITO
                                    IOVO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Azni, Counsel, instructed by RBM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellants are a family of Nigerian citizens.   They  comprise  AOO
    born on [ ] 1970, OAO his wife born on [ ] 1976, and their children ITO
    born on [ ] 2003 and IOVO born on [ ] 2007.  The  first  Appellant  AOO
    last arrived in the United Kingdom on 24th  August  2007  when  he  was
    given leave to enter as a visitor.   He  had  then  joined  the  second
    Appellant who had arrived on 16th April 2005 and had  also  been  given
    leave to enter as a visitor.  The third Appellant joined them  on  24th
    August 2007 when he was likewise given leave to  enter  as  a  visitor.
    The fourth Appellant was born  in  the  UK.   None  of  the  Appellants
    embarked, and in 2014  made  unsuccessful  applications  for  leave  to
    remain under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.
     Ultimately all the  Appellants  applied  for  leave  to  remain  under
    Appendix FM of HC 395.  Those applications were  all  refused  for  the
    reasons given in a series of refusal letters all  dated  17th  February
    2016.  All the Appellants appealed, and their appeal was heard by Judge
    of the First-Tier Tribunal Lodge (the Judge) sitting at  Birmingham  on
    24th March 2017.  He decided to dismiss all the appeals for the reasons
    given in his Decision dated 1st  April  2017.   The  Appellants  sought
    leave to  appeal  that  decision,  and  on  27th  September  2017  such
    permission was granted.  The grounds of application were restricted  to
    an argument that the Judge had erred in law in considering the  Article
    8 ECHR rights of the two minor Appellants.

 2. The only issue before the  Judge  was  whether  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants met the criteria of paragraph  276ADE(i)  of  HC  395.   The
    Judge found that both the minor Appellants had resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than seven years and accepted  that  leave  to  remain
    should be granted to them unless there were  powerful  reasons  to  the
    contrary.  As the Judge wrote at paragraph 30 of the Decision he  found
    that it was not unreasonable to expect  the  Appellants  to  return  to
    Nigeria and taking into  account  the  public  interest  and  the  best
    interests  of  the  children,  the  decision  of  the  Respondent   was
    proportionate.

 3. At the hearing before me, Mr Azni argued that the Judge  had  erred  in
    law in coming to this conclusion.  Taking into account  Section  117(6)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the Judge had  not
    found any powerful reasons preventing him from  allowing  the  appeals.
    The Judge had merely referred to the immigration history of the  family
    and had speculated that they had come to the UK with  no  intention  of
    returning to Nigeria.

 4. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response  and  submitted
    that there was no such error of law.   The  Judge  had  considered  the
    private life  of  the  children  and  in  particular  their  linguistic
    abilities and had explained his reasons for finding that  the  decision
    of the Respondent was proportionate.

 5. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  I am satisfied  that  the  Judge  directed
    himself as  to  the  correct  test  to  be  applied  as  regards  minor
    Appellants residing in the UK for  seven  years  or  more.   The  Judge
    treated the best interests of the children as a primary  consideration,
    and also had due regard  to  the  public  interest  when  dealing  with
    Appellants with a poor immigration  history.   However,  as  stated  at
    paragraph 29 of the Decision, the Judge did not  make  the  mistake  of
    visiting the sins of  the  parents  upon  their  children.   The  Judge
    carried out a careful analysis of the relevant evidence  in  paragraphs
    17 to 28 inclusive of  the  Decision,  and  demonstrated  that  he  had
    carried out the balancing exercise  necessary  for  any  assessment  of
    reasonableness or proportionality.  The Judge came to a  decision  open
    to him on the basis  of  that  analysis  and  which  he  satisfactorily
    explained. That explanation included a consideration of  whether  there
    were powerful reasons why the appeals of the  minor  Appellants  should
    not succeed.

 6. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.



Anonymity

The First-Tier Tribunal made orders for anonymity which I continue  for  the
same reasons as given by the First-Tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date  21st March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
