
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/06573/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23 January 2018                        |   On 19 February 2018            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between


  PS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Burns, Legal Representative instructed by Lei
                    Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India who has been in the United  Kingdom
    since 1996.  He was notified on 17th November 2016 that  the  Secretary
    of State had decided to make a deportation order against him.   Various
    submissions were made in relation to human rights which were refused in
    a decision dated 23rd May 2017.

2.   The appeal against that  decision  was  lodged  and  came  for  hearing
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Mather on 24th July 2017.  The  appeal
    was dismissed in all respects.

3.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was,  however,  granted  on
    the issue as to whether  or  not  the  Judge  had  properly  considered
    whether or not it was unduly harsh on any of his children that  such  a
    deportation should occur.

4.   The appellant had two children by his  first  marriage  to  FS.   Those
    children were his son S born on 24th  July  2003  and  A  born  on  7th
    December 2007.  Those children live with his former wife and  there  is
    little evidence of  much  parental  responsibility  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.

5.   The appellant commenced a relationship with Ms A.  His daughter  S  was
    born on 7th December 2009 and his son Y was born on 13th August 2016.

6.   It is clear that daughter S is now a qualified child for  the  purposes
    of Section 117C of the 2002 Act.

7.   The  issue  in  those  circumstances  is  whether  the  effect  of  the
    appellant's deportation on his wife.

8.   A further consideration in this case is  whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the child S to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    person who is to be deported.

9.   Mr Burns, who represents the  appellant,  asks  me  to  note  that  the
    appellant is married to a British Muslim woman and he is a Sikh.   Thus
    there is a mixed cultural family which is a factor to be borne in  mind
    throughout.  He submits that the children have  committed  no  offences
    and that it would be unduly harsh in those circumstances for them to be
    deprived of their father.

10.  In terms of the situation facing the children, my attention  was  drawn
    to a number of reports, particularly  that  from  [........  School]and
    Nursery (undated), which speaks of S having a  high  attendance  record
    and working to the expected level.  It is said that  S  clearly  has  a
    good relationship with the appellant, who collects her from school on a
    regular basis.  He has shown  support  in  her  education.  S  is  well
    adjusted and enjoying her education. She  does  not  have  any  special
    needs or emotional difficulties, which would make the  absence  of  the
    appellant more difficult for her. Y is a baby with no special needs  or
    medical condition.

11.  There is a letter from the Ministry  of  Justice  dated  22nd  December
    2016, confirming that the appellant has been referred to Lifeline which
    he has attended regularly for support about  his  drug  misuse  issues.
    There is a letter indeed from Lifeline on 20th December 2016 confirming
    that the appellant is focused upon his recovery from drugs.

12.  The focus of this appeal is that relating to paragraph 399 of  HC  395,
    namely whether it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live  in  the
    country to which the person is to be deported and whether it  would  be
    unduly harsh on the child to remain in the United Kingdom  without  the
    person who is to be deported.

13.  This is a case in which the findings were made that the appellant is  a
    persistent offender, who has shown little  indication  that  he  is  to
    amend his behaviour.  The appellant claims that he  has  put  his  drug
    offending behind him, but it was the finding of the  Immigration  Judge
    that he tested positive for drugs in or about October 2016.

14.  It was the specific finding of  the  Judge,  at  paragraph  29  of  the
    determination that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's two
    youngest  children  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  him.
    Challenge is made to that decision which  is  that  it  is  unreasoned.
    However there is little evidence that has been presented to support the
    contention that it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain  in
    the United Kingdom without him.

15.  Accepting that it is the desire of  most  children  to  be  with  their
    parents and that there is an emotional  bond  between  them,  there  is
    nothing, however, to indicate that the  appellant's  absence  from  the
    children would be unduly harsh.

16.  The appellant claims that he is a reformed character  but  it  was  the
    finding of the Judge that he was not.  Indeed the whole  issue  of  his
    having molested or threatened his wife was a matter  concocted  between
    the two of them in order to obtain further state assistance to sort out
    his drug problem.  Indeed the appellant's wife agreed that she  had  in
    fact claimed to the authorities that he had molested  her  and  made  a
    false statement to that effect.   The appellant's  wife  had  confirmed
    that she had lied about the offences, which is  a  matter  set  out  in
    paragraph (xiv) of the determination.

17.  There is nothing before the Immigration Judge, or indeed before me,  to
    indicate that the absence of the appellant would be unduly harsh either
    for the appellant's wife or for his  relevant  children.  Even  if  the
    Judge had given more  detailed  consideration  to  the  issue  that  is
    nothing, as I so find, which would have led to a different decision  to
    the one made.  In those circumstances this appeal  is  dismissed.   The
    First-tier Tribunal decision shall therefore  stand,  namely  that  the
    appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules or Article 8  is  dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 15 February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
