

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: HU/06614/2016

                                                  HU/06612/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                             |                              |
|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 October 2017                           |On 17 October 2017            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                 UZMA AAMIR
                                    A A A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr. S. Jaisri of counsel instructed by Lee
Valley Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:                  Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The 1st Appellant, who was born on 28  July  1984,  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan. She married  Aamir  Aqeel,  who  is  a  British  citizen,  in
    Pakistan on 18 April 2014. At that time, he was still  married  to  his
    previous wife in the United Kingdom.

2.   The 2nd Appellant was born in Pakistan on 12 January 2015.  His  mother
    is the 1st Appellant and Aamir Aqeel is his father.

3.   On 2 December 2015  the  Appellants  applied  for  entry  clearance  to
    settle here with Aamir Aqeel. They were refused entry clearance  on  24
    February 2016. They appealed on 1 March 2016  but  their  appeals  were
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan in a  decision  promulgated
    on 3 July 2017.

4.   The Appellants appealed against this decision  and  they  were  granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pickup  on  27  July
    2017. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 30 August 2017.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.   Both counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

DECISION

6.   Counsel for the Appellants accepted that the  1st  Respondent  had  not
    entered into a valid marriage, as at the time of  her  marriage,  Aamir
    Aqeel was already married to another woman in the United Kingdom.  This
    was because, even though it is possible to marry more than one wife  in
    Pakistan, as Aamir Aqeel was domiciled in the  United  Kingdom  at  the
    time he married the 1st Respondent, the marriage was not valid for  the
    purposes of section 11(d) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973.

7.   Therefore, the 1st Appellant was not entitled  to  entry  clearance  as
    the wife of a British citizen. In addition, she had not  been  able  to
    provide all of the evidence  required  to  establish  that  he  was  in
    receipt of the necessary income, as a  self-employed  person,  for  the
    purposes of Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules.

8.   However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge also  had  to  consider  whether
    she was entitled to entry clearance in order to ensure that a breach of
    Article 8 of the ECHR did not occur. He gave very  brief  consideration
    to this issue in paragraph 23 of his decision but  he  did  so  on  the
    basis that the 2nd Appellant was not a British citizen.

9.   In particular, in paragraph 21 of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Khan stated that the 2nd Appellant  "is  said  to  be  a  British
    citizen, however, he does  not  currently  have  a  British  passport".
    However, a passport is merely evidence of British  citizenship.  It  is
    not a condition for exercising the rights  which  derive  from  British
    citizenship.

10.  Section 2(1) of the British Nationality Act 1981 provides that:

     "(1)     A person born outside the United  Kingdom  after  commencement
    shall be a British citizen if at the time of the birth  his  father  or
    mother-

     (a) is a British citizen otherwise than by descent".

11.  The Appellants' bundle contained a certificate  confirming  that  Aamir
    Aqeel had obtained British citizenship by naturalisation, as opposed to
    descent. The 2nd Appellant's  birth  certificate  also  confirmed  that
    Aamir Aqeel is his father and paternity has not been  disputed  by  the
    Respondent.

12.  Section 50(9A) of the British Nationality Act 1981 states that:

     "For the purposes of this Act a child's father is-section

     (a) the husband, at the time of the child's birth,  of  the  woman  who
    gives birth to the child
     (b)...
     (c)  where neither paragraph (a) nor paragraph (b) applies, any  person
    who satisfies     prescribed requirements as to proof of paternity".

13.   Regulation  2  of  the  British  Nationality  (Proof   of   Paternity)
    Regulations 2006 states that:

     "For the purposes of section 50(9A)  of  the  British  Nationality  Act
    1981, the prescribed requirements as to proof of paternity is that  the
    person must satisfy the Secretary of  State  that  he  is  the  natural
    father of the child".

14.  At the hearing before me the Home Office Presenting  Officer  confirmed
    that there was no doubt as to the 2nd  Appellant's  paternity.    As  a
    consequence, I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of
    law in relation to the 2nd Appellant's nationality.

15.  In addition, he erred in law in relation to any  entitlement  to  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules which the 1st and 2nd Appellants  may  be
    entitled to as he did not take into  account  the  fact  that  the  2nd
    Appellant is a British citizen.

16.  I accept the submissions made by the Home Office Presenting Officer  in
    relation to any jurisdiction to consider the 2nd Appellant's EEA rights
    as the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal Judge had been brought  on
    the basis of family life under the Immigration  Rules  or  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

17.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan  did  make
    material errors of law in his decision and reasons.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Khan.


Signed                                  Date 13 October 2017

Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


