

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06107/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 April 2018                     |On 30 April 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                              KAUSHILA SUNUWAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NEW DELHI)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Unrepresented
For the respondent:          Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  18  January
    2016 to refuse a human rights claim in the context  of  an  application
    for entry clearance as the dependent adult family member  of  a  former
    Gurkha.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge S. Aziz  considered  the  appeal  without  a
    hearing. The appeal was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 19 April
    2017.

3.    It is not necessary to set out the  judge's  findings  in  any  detail
    because the respondent accepted  that  the  decision  was  based  on  a
    fundamental error of fact such that it involved the making of an  error
    of law.

4.    It is unclear why the First-tier Tribunal seems to have  linked  three
    appellants who have no apparent links.  The  judge  determined  another
    appellant's appeal (Purna  Devi  Sunuwar  HU/06103/2016)  in  the  same
    decision as this appellant. Although they have the same  surnames,  and
    it appears that  they  both  have  the  same  legal  representative  in
    Kathmandu, there was in fact nothing to connect the two appeals. It  is
    not necessary to go into any detail relating to the third file  (Angila
    Limbu HU/06110/2016) because the appeal  was  allowed  by  a  different
    judge and is not the subject of an appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

5.    Although the judge might have  been  misled  into  thinking  that  the
    appeals were linked  because  the  files  had  been  physically  linked
    together, even on a cursory reading of the papers, it becomes  apparent
    that the appellants are not related and that there are  no  substantive
    links between the two cases. The fact that the judge  thought  the  two
    appellants were sisters  casts  doubt  on  whether  he  considered  the
    evidence produced in support of the appeals adequately or at  all.  The
    evidence shows that they were relying on relationships  with  different
    fathers and were clearly not related. The combination  of  an  apparent
    error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal  in  linking  two  appeals
    that were unrelated, and the judge's failure to consider the papers  in
    sufficient detail to identify the error, is sufficient to conclude that
    the decision involved the making of an error of fact that amounts to an
    error of law.

6.    The appropriate course of action is to give instructions to the  court
    administration to separate the files. The appeal will  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision

Signed   [pic]   Date 24 April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




