

                          [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06747/2016
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2018                             |On 20 March 2018              |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                       MUSHIRAH SUMAIYAH ELAHEE-DOOMUN

                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:               Mr. S. Karim of counsel, instructed by SG
Law
For the Respondent:                    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant, who was born  on  9  October  1994,  is  a  national  of
    Mauritius.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on17 December 2005 at the
    age of 11. On 14 December 2015 she applied for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom under paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules  and
    also made a human rights claim outside the Immigration Rules.

2.   Her application was refused on 5 March 2016 and  she  appealed  against
    this decision. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence dismissed her  appeal
    in a decision, promulgated on 21 June 2017.

3.   The Appellant appealed on 7 July 2017  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Alis granted her permission to appeal on 19 December 2017 on the  basis
    of her final ground of appeal.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for the  Respondent
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   Paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules states  that  leave  will
    be granted if an individual:

     "is aged 18 years or above and under 25 and has spent at least half  of
    his life in the UK...".

6.   However, the opening sentence of this paragraph  makes  it  clear  that
    this requirement must be met at the date of the application as  opposed
    to any appeal hearing and at the date of the hearing the Applicant  had
    not been in the United Kingdom for the necessary ten  years  and  seven
    months.

7.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  also  gave   detailed   and   cogent
    consideration as to whether there were very  significant  obstacles  to
    her resuming a family and private life in Mauritius and, therefore, was
    entitled to leave under paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration  Rules.
    When doing so the Judge relied on the wide definition  adopted  by  the
    Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Alis  did  not  grant
    permission to appeal in relation to any entitlement on the part of  the
    Appellant to leave under the Immigration Rules.

8.   The Appellant based her application for leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on the family life which she enjoys with her brother,
    who had been granted limited leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    under paragraph 276ADE(v) of the Immigration Rules. She  also  asserted
    that he relied on her to fill in forms for his business but the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge found that there was not a sufficient situation  of
    dependency to give rise to a family life for the  purposes  of  Article
    8(1) of  the  ECHR.  This  finding  has  not  been  challenged  by  the
    Appellant.

9.   However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge also  had  to  consider  whether
    there were any compelling circumstances which also gave rise to a right
    to remain following SS (Congo) and others v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  I have assumed that in  paragraph
    19 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  referred  to  the
    Appellant's private life rights, as in the previous paragraph the Judge
    had found that no family life rights arose.

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not go  on  to  review  what  private
    life the Appellant may have developed in the United Kingdom or  whether
    this may give rise to compelling circumstances which justified a  grant
    of leave. Furthermore, as submitted by counsel for  the  Appellant  she
    did not consider the fact that at the date of the hearing the Appellant
    had been in the United Kingdom for more than half of her life  and  was
    between 18 and 25 and that the Immigration Rules indicated  that  these
    factors potentially attracted  the  protection  of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.   This  was  a  matter  which  was
    capable of amounting to compelling circumstances.

11.  Furthermore, in paragraph  19  of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lawrence failed to apply appropriate case  law  when  considering
    whether there were compelling circumstances in the Appellant's case. In
    paragraph 58 of Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 803, Lord Justice Sales held that:

      "Reading  section  117A(2)(a)  in  conjunction  with  section  117B(5)
    produces this: "In considering the public interest question, the  court
    or tribunal must have regard to the consideration  that  little  weight
    should be given to a private life established by a  person  at  a  time
    when  the  person's  immigration  status  is  precarious".  That  is  a
    normative statement which is less definitive than those  given  by  the
    other sub-sections in section 117B and section 117C. Although  a  court
    or tribunal should have regard to the consideration that little  weight
    should be given to private life established in such  circumstances,  it
    is  possible  without  violence  to  the  language  to  say  that  such
    generalised normative guidance may be overridden in an exceptional case
    by particularly strong features of the private life in question,  where
    it is not appropriate in Article 8 terms to attach only  little  weight
    to private life. That is to say, for  a  case  falling  within  section
    117B(5) little weight should be given to private  life  established  in
    the circumstances specified, but that approach may be overridden  where
    the private life in question has a special  and  compelling  character.
    Such an interpretation is also necessary  to  prevent  section  117B(5)
    being applied in a manner which would produce  results  in  some  cases
    which would be incompatible with Article 8, i.e. is necessary  to  give
    proper effect to Parliament's intention in Part 5A".

12.  In addition, in Treebhawon and others [NIAA 2002 Part 5A  -  compelling
    circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal  held
    that:

     "(1) Where the case of a foreign national who is not an  offender  does
    not satisfy the requirements of  the  Article  8  ECHR  regime  of  the
    Immigration Rules, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of  compelling
    circumstances.
     (2) The Parliamentary intention underlying Part 5A of NIAA 2002  is  to
    give proper effect to Article 8 ECHR.  Thus a private life developed or
    established during periods of unlawful or  precarious  residence  might
    conceivably qualify to be accorded more than little weight"

13.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  did
    err in law in relation  to  his  findings  as  to  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances relating  to  the  Appellant's  private  life,
    which justified a grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.  As  he
    did not address this issue in any detail, it  is  appropriate  for  the
    issue to be re-visited.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence, for a de novo hearing.
Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 14 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
