
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06871/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 November 2019                           |On 18 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                             Zahra Hussein Saleh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, instructed by Freemans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beg promulgated  on  28  May  2019,  dismissing  on  all
    grounds her appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated
    17 January 2018 to refuse her application made on 22 December 2016  for
    entry clearance for settlement with her daughter in the UK.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal  on
    2 September 2019.

 3. In the first instance I have to decide whether  or  not  there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the  decision  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

 4. The relevant background can be  summarised  briefly  as  follows.   The
    sponsoring daughter arrived in the UK as a refugee in  2018.   In  2019
    she was granted indefinite leave to remain.  The appellant is a  Somali
    national who allegedly fled Somalia to reside in Yemen and  then  Egypt
    where she currently lives with Yemini neighbours.  It  seems  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that history.   However,  the  judge
    concluded  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules. Whilst at  paragraph  19  of  the  decision  it  was
    accepted that she did need assistance with long-term personal  care  to
    perform everyday tasks, the judge concluded on the evidence that  those
    needs could continue to be  met  with  financial  assistance  from  the
    sponsor and the appellant's  other  children,  and  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for the sponsor to arrange for the required level of care in
    Egypt, and that such care would be affordable.

 5. In granting permission to appeal Judge Hollingworth found  it  arguable
    that the judge had attached insufficient weight to the medical evidence
    of  Dr  Rania  Mohamed  and  arguably  misunderstood  the  report  when
    suggesting there was no evidence that the doctor had  actually  visited
    the appellant's residence.  It was also considered  arguable  that  the
    error was compounded at paragraph 16 of the decision  by  finding  that
    the evidence about the mother's medical  conditions  was  inconsistent.
    In the circumstances, Judge Hollingworth  considered  it  was  arguable
    that the context in which the First-tier Tribunal analysed  the  issues
    of need for and provision of required  assistance  had  been  adversely
    affected.

 6. Under the Immigration Rules the appellant can  only  be  granted  entry
    clearance as an adult dependent relative under paragraph  ECDR.2.4  and
    2.5 of Appendix FM, which requires independent evidence, from,  amongst
    others, a doctor, that the appellant requires long-term  personal  care
    to perform everyday tasks.  That aspect was accepted by the  judge,  as
    is clear, and need not consider that further.  However, it must also be
    demonstrated that the appellant is unable, even with the practical  and
    financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care  in
    the current country of residence because either it is not available and
    there is no person in the country who can reasonably provide it, or  it
    is not affordable.  There is no suggestion in this case that  necessary
    care was not affordable.

 7. It is clear that the judge may have made some mistakes in the decision,
    in particular in stating there was no  evidence  that  the  doctor  had
    visited the appellant in her residence. This is clearly  wrong  because
    that is clearly explained in the medical report, between pages 5 and 10
    of the appellant's bundle.  Another argument advanced is that the judge
    had misread the report in relation to the conditions and an  issue  was
    raised about the judge's statement at paragraph 13 of the decision:  "I
    do not find it credible that Mr Burhan and his family are looking after
    the appellant on a day-to-day basis without any financial support  from
    the appellant's children who live abroad".  Within the same  paragraph,
    the judge accepts that the appellant and her siblings are sending funds
    to their mother for her care, and it is  noted  that  in  evidence  the
    sponsor said that Mr Burhan  helps  the  appellant  by  taking  her  to
    receive the money that she sent from abroad.  It is not clear what  the
    judge meant by the first sentence of paragraph 13. It may be the  judge
    thought it not credible that Mr Burhan and his family were helping  out
    of the goodness of their heart, without financial compensation.  It  is
    the appellant's case that  he  is  indeed  being  paid  to  assist  the
    appellant.  However, this error, if it is an error, is not material  to
    the outcome of the appeal. I am also satisfied  that  the  other  error
    referred to, whether the doctor had visited the appellant in  her  home
    again, is not material for these reasons. In reality, nothing turns  on
    these statements and  they  are  not  central  to  the  findings  which
    determined the outcome of the case.

 8. Whilst the first element of the  requirements  has  been  met  and  was
    satisfied, as far as the judge was concerned, the judge did not  accept
    the  second  element  of  the  specific  evidential  requirement  under
    paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE.   This  requires  independent  evidence
    from, amongst others, a doctor that the applicant is unable, even  with
    the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK to obtain the
    required level of care in the country where they are living.  I  accept
    that this has been addressed to some extent at page 9  of  the  report,
    where it is  stated  that  in  the  doctor's  opinion  the  appellant's
    condition would not be suitable for care in  a  care  home  because  of
    difficulties in communication with her being  deaf.   However,  she  is
    obviously able to communicate with Mr Burhan's family members  who  are
    helping her.  It is also suggested that in most  care  homes  relatives
    regularly visit their elderly parents or next of kin and that she  does
    not have any relatives in Egypt, and it would, therefore, be  difficult
    to monitor the care.  None of that suggests that  appropriate  care  is
    not available, or indeed that there are no suitable care homes.  It  is
    implicit in the doctor's statement that there are such care homes  able
    to provide care to the appellant.  The doctor says it is very common in
    Egypt, elderly people in a care  home  rarely  complain  as  they  fear
    retaliation from the homecare nurse or staff. Frankly,  none  of  these
    statements are sufficient to demonstrate that the specific requirements
    of the Rules are met.

 9. It follows from all  of  the  above  that  care  homes  are  available.
    However, it is not essential that the appellant be  housed  in  a  care
    home. It has not been made clear  why  the  sponsor  and  her  siblings
    cannot continue to finance support for the appellant in her  own  home.
    As stated above, the affordability  is  not  an  issue.   It  is  being
    provided by the sponsor and her siblings at the present time  and  care
    is being provided by Mr Burhan and his relatives.  Even if that care by
    Mr Burhan and his relatives is not enough  to  obtain  or  provide  the
    required level of care, the report is woefully inadequate and does  not
    demonstrate that the appellant is unable, even with the  practical  and
    financial help of the sponsor in the UK, to obtain the  required  level
    of care in the country where she is living.

10. The judge fully addressed this issue at paragraphs 18 onwards and found
    that the sponsor would, with assistance from her siblings, be  able  to
    pay for private homecare for the appellant in Egypt to meet her  needs.
    The judge also noted he found the sponsor had very little idea  of  the
    cost of her mother's care in  the  United  Kingdom  and  found  it  not
    credible that she had made any enquiries about what it would  cost  for
    her mother in the country.  That was  one  of  the  other  reasons  the
    appeal was refused.  It was for that reason that  the  judge  concluded
    that the requirements of the Immigration Rules were not met.

11. Whilst I accept there were some errors on the part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, they are not material to the outcome and  I  find  that
    the evidence that is relied upon, namely the  doctor's  report  and  of
    course  the  sponsor's  evidence,  is  insufficient  to  discharge  the
    evidential burden  and  meet  the  specified  evidence  required  under
    paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE. It  follows  that  notwithstanding  the
    errors complained of, I am satisfied that the  outcome  of  the  appeal
    would have  been  the  same,  in  other  words  a  dismissal.   In  the
    circumstances I find no error of law in this decision.

Decision

12. The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

                    I do not set the decision aside.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal is dismissed for the reasons stated.

    No anonymity direction is made.

     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                       Dated                 13 November 2019

To the Respondent
Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




                  Signed
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 13 November 2019
