
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number HU/06293/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 May 2021                        |On 17 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           DANIEL TEKLIT MENGUSTU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by JK Law,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea, born on 27  January  2002.   His
    sister has entered the UK to be reunited with her husband, who is  here
    as a refugee.  The appellant applied for entry clearance  for  purposes
    of refuge family reunion.  The ECO refused his application on  7  March
    2019.

 2. The appellant appealed to the FtT on these grounds:

      Appellant wishes to reunite with sponsor brother-in-law and his sister
      (sponsor's wife) ... to resume  their  family  life  given  they  were
      responsible for him in Eritrea and Sudan.  As such, refusal by the ECO
      to allow appellant to join family in UK results in breach  of  sponsor
      and his wife's article 8 ECHR rights.

 3. FtT Judge Montgomery dismissed the appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    dated 27 December 2019.

 4. The appellant appeals to the UT on grounds, in summary, as follows:

      (1)  The judge found that the appellant spent only limited  time  with
      the sponsor.  This  was  due  to  the  sponsor's  compulsory  military
      service, a function of the persecution which forced him to flee.   The
      judge had regard to an irrelevant factor.

      (2)  The appellant was de  facto  adopted  by  the  sponsor  in  2014.
      Conscription and enforced separation cannot  invalidate  family  ties.
      It was irrational to hold to the contrary.

      (3)  The judge failed to have "proper regard" to the appellant's  age,
      inability safely to return to Eritrea, lack of legal status in  Sudan,
      vulnerability to removal to Eritrea  and  "conscription  into  endless
      national service".

      (4)   The judge did not have "proper  regard  to  the  requirement  to
      consider the best interests of the child as a primary factor  ...   it
      is simply wrong in law" to consider  that  the  appellant  is  "better
      placed in a country of which they are not a  national  ...  liable  to
      removal  to  their  home  country  where  they  will  certainly   face
      persecution for illegal exit, rather than with ... the sponsor in  the
      UK".

 5. The appellant's case was focused somewhat differently in  the  skeleton
    argument helpfully provided by Mr Forrest and in his oral  submissions.
    Mr Whitwell argued that the case so developed went beyond the  grounds,
    and that there had been no  application  to  amend  them.   However,  I
    consider that  the  generality  of  the  grounds  was  wide  enough  to
    accommodate the case as it was eventually put, and find  it  preferable
    to resolve it in those terms.

 6. Mr Forrest said that the judge, firstly, failed "to take  into  account
    properly the existence of family life" and,  secondly,  went  wrong  on
    whether the decision represented a proportionate interference with that
    family life.

 7. As Mr Whitwell said, the first question is decisive.

 8. At 34 (a) - (q) the judge states her primary  findings  of  fact.   She
    goes on to explain them clearly, and apart from whether there has  been
    a de facto adoption, they have not significantly been disputed.

 9. The judge observed that the appellant's mother is alive; there  was  no
    evidence that she had transferred her parental rights to  anyone  else;
    the written evidence tendered to show an adoption in fact  stated  that
    the appellant is the only caregiver to his mother;  the  evidence  from
    the appellant's sister and the sponsor was inconsistent, misleading and
    unreliable; the appellant lived with the sponsor for  no  more  than  3
    months, several years ago; he was recognised as a refugee in Sudan  and
    was "leading an independent life there".

10. The appellant's argument is that  the  three  protagonists  were  bound
    together in adversity in a family relationship; there was at  least  an
    element of dependency; and the FtT  gave  insufficient  weight  to  the
    facts that all three had been forced to flee, and that the appellant is
    at risk of deportation from Sudan to Eritrea.

11. Mr Forrest, wisely,  did  not  press  the  contention  of  a  de  facto
    adoption.  The judge gave overwhelming reasons for holding that had not
    been established.   Indeed,  the  evidence  was  so  weak  that  it  is
    difficult  to  see  that  any  tribunal  might  rationally  have  found
    otherwise.

12. Mr Forrest was correct in submitting that family  life  protection  for
    article 8 purposes is not always limited to the  core  family  unit  of
    parents and minor children.  The appellant no doubt has family life  in
    the extended sense with his sister, but there is nothing wrong  in  law
    with the judge's finding that this does not go beyond the  relationship
    normally to be expected between an adult and a minor sibling.

13. The feature that the three protagonists have all, separately, fled from
    Eritrea, might well be relevant in a proportionality exercise,  but  it
    has little to do with whether family life, in the core sense qualifying
    for protection, ever came into existence.   The  same  applies  to  the
    point about deportation from Sudan to Eritrea.

14. As there is no error on the first issue, the grounds on proportionality
    cannot lead to the decision being set aside.  I deal  with  those  only
    briefly.

15. I do not accept the contention that the public interest in applying the
    rules is less because the appellant is outside the UK.

16. I also do not agree that because the appellant accepts that  he  cannot
    meet the immigration rules, they are  irrelevant.   The  respondent  is
    entitled to set rules and policy, consistent  with  refugee  protection
    and human rights law, on refugee family reunion.  That  is  always  the
    starting  point.   If  the  case  reached  the   stage   of   a   fresh
    proportionality  exercise,  failure  to  meet  the  rules  would  be  a
    consideration against the appellant.

17. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

18. An anonymity direction is in place.

        Hugh Macleman

      6 May 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.


