
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06491/2016

                                HU/06493/2016

                                HU/06498/2016

                                HU/06500/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 February 2018                          |On 7 March 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                jahanara [b]
                             Md Anamul Haque [j]
                                Md Jabed [M]
                                    [S b]
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Noor, instructed directly
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




The appellant and proceedings

 1. The Secretary of State who is the appellant in  these  proceedings  was
    the respondent in the First-tier Tribunal, and for convenience I  refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2.  The appellants are Bangladeshi citizens. The principal appellant is  a
    twice divorced 47 years old woman, and the other appellants are her two
    sons from her first marriage and a daughter from her second marriage.

 3. They applied to visit the principal appellant's 75-year-old mother  who
    has health problems that make travel problematic  and  her  sister  who
    suffered spinal cord injuries which result in her being a  wheel  chair
    user. The Entry Clearance officer examined and refused the applications
    against the visit visa immigration rules on issues of  credibility  and
    intention to return. The ECO decided Family Life  was  not  engaged  as
    ties between the appellant and her mother and sister had not been shown
    to be out of the ordinary.  The  appellant's  appealed  contesting  the
    credibility issues and intent  to  return  and  asserted  the  decision
    breached their Article 8 rights.

 4. The Ft -T found in favour of the  appellants  on  the  credibility  and
    intention to return points and those findings are not  challenged.  The
    judge brought forward his  findings  on  the  factual  matrix,  decided
    Article 8 was engaged and concluded the  decision  breached  article  8
    rights and allowed the appeal.

 5. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission granted at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal,  on  the  ground  of  inadequate  reasoning  as  to  the
    engagement of Article 8 on family life grounds.

My consideration and findings

 6. Ms Aboni relied on the grounds  asserting  that  the  judge  failed  to
    explain why there was family life between the appellant and her  mother
    and aunt given that case law guides that family life will only exist in
    very unusual circumstances.

 7. At paragraph 15 the judge found, in the context of the appellant  being
    a divorced woman, that she is financially dependent on her  mother  and
    family in the UK having no other source of income. Further  she,  along
    with her children, are dependent on her mother for accommodation as she
    lived in her mother's house. In terms of the nature  and  character  of
    the relationships he noted not only the close blood relationships,  but
    the abundance of evidence of interactions  between  them,  including  a
    history of visits when the elders health permitted.

 8. The grounds do not challenge any of the factual findings  or  point  to
    any omissions in the factual matrix. The grounds rely on a passage from
    the case of Mostapha (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] to the point
    that unusual circumstances are required to  show  the  existence  of  a
    family life sufficient to engage Article 8 between  parents  and  adult
    children, and between adult siblings. Ms Aboni added  to  the  grounds,
    arguing that there needed to be more than financial  dependence,  there
    needed to be emotional dependence.

Discussion

 9. The case  of  Mostapha  makes  plain  very  unusual  circumstances  are
    required to result in family life relationships between adults.  It  is
    plain from the decision that the judge concluded that on the particular
    factual circumstances  operating  here,  including  of  dependence  and
    contact that this was such a case. The judge has fully explained why he
    finds the appellants to  be  dependent  on  the  principal  appellant's
    mother and sister in the UK. Those  findings  are  not  challenged.  In
    terms of the emotional element of  the  relationships  the  judge  made
    findings on the closeness of the relationship  taking  account  of  the
    principal appellant's status as a divorced  woman  living  without  the
    support of other relatives close by and as shown  by  the  evidence  of
    contact. The judge correctly self-directed in  terms  of  the  need  to
    address the threshold test in  respect  of  family  life  at  [15]  and
    concluded that the threshold was met.  It is not  suggested  that  that
    was a finding that was not open to him on the evidence, but rather than
    he had failed to adequately reason it  by  reference  to  the  case  of
    Kugathas.  However, given that the judge's consideration is  framed  in
    the context of dependence I find the challenge is formulaic rather than
    substantive. The judge  assesses  the  character  and  quality  of  the
    relationship of dependence taking account of marital  status,  lack  of
    familial relationships in the country of origin, age,  health  and  the
    financial dependence as well as the provision  of  accommodation.   The
    judge also takes account of the gravity of interference (which  is  not
    challenged). I find the ground is not made out.

10. Ms Aboni confirmed in the event that I find the judge was not in  error
    in finding that there is family life, there  is  no  challenge  to  the
    assessment of proportionality.  Bearing  in  mind  that  amongst  other
    matters the judge found that the requirements of  the  rules  were  met
    that is not surprising.

11. The decision reveals no error of law.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal reveals  no
    error of law and stands.



Signed                                  Date 15 February 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

