
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06457/2019
                                                               HU/06458/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester via Microsoft    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On 30 June 2021                      |On 13 July 2021                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    NBMN
                                    UAIOM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Plowright instructed by SC Law Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. By a decision dated 20 February 2020 the Upper Tribunal set aside a
        determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  dismissed  the
        appeals of the above appellants on human rights grounds.
     2. The first appellant, a citizen of Mauritius, was born on 7 December
        1965 and the second  appellant,  her  son,  on  13  May  2020.  The
        reference to 'M' in the decision below is to  the  first  appellant
        and 'U' to the second appellant.





Background


     3. The second appellant suffers from multiple health issues  including
        autism, ADHD, epilepsy, intellectual disability, sensory processing
        disorder, and incontinence. The second appellant also receives one-
        to-one teaching assistant support at school  together  with  speech
        therapy and assistance from other agencies. The updated  assessment
        provided of the second  appellant  provide  prior  to  the  hearing
        indicates some improvement in relation to  his  toileting  routine,
        but all other matters remaining the same.
     4. The findings in  relation  to  the  first  and  second  appellant's
        immigration   history,   first   appellant's   employment,   second
        appellants medical condition, the existence of private life in  the
        United Kingdom and the existence of family life between  the  first
        and second appellants recognised by Article 8,  are  all  preserved
        findings.
     5. Permission to appeal the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
        sought on grounds drafted by Paul Richardson of Goldsmith  Chambers
        asserting arguable legal error in the manner in  which  the  First-
        tier Tribunal had assessed the article 8 aspects of the case.
     6. It is not disputed in the appellant's addendum  skeleton  argument,
        drafted by Mr Plowright of Goldsmith Chambers  dated  29  September
        2020, that the original grounds relied solely on Article 8 ECHR but
        that he now seeks to amend the  grounds  of  appeal  to  include  a
        reference to Article 3.
     7. It is stated Article 3 was referred to in the covering letter  sent
        with  the  appellant's   application   dated   28   October   2018,
        specifically considered by the respondent in the refusal letter  of
        25 March 2019, that the  original  grounds  of  challenge  to  that
        decision referred generally to a breach of  the  appellant's  human
        rights under the ECHR, and that Article 3 was referred  to  by  the
        First-tier Tribunal at [15], meaning it is not a new matter.
     8. The appellants assert that Article 3 is relevant to the outcome  of
        the appeal and is particularly significant where the best interests
        of the child are relevant.
     9. On behalf of the Secretary  of  States  Ms  Everett  accepted  that
        whether Article 3 or 8 was engaged depended upon the  same  factual
        matrix and indicated she would not be prejudiced by either or  both
        being considered.
    10. In light of the position of the parties and the fact that Article 3
        ECHR was referred to at an earlier stage and is therefore not a new
        matter, in light of the being  no  prejudice  to  either  party  in
        considering this matter, and  in  light  of  the  decision  of  the
        Supreme  Court  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  (see  below)  not  having  been
        considered previously when assessing the merits of this appeal, the
        scope of the hearing shall include consideration of both Article  3
        on medical grounds and Article 8 ECHR.
    11. Ms Everett confirmed she  relied  upon  the  Secretary  of  State's
        written submissions to date in relation to this matter and  had  no
        cross examination of the witnesses, which  enabled  the  matter  to
        proceed by way of submissions only.



The law


    12. The leading decision on the issue of the correct test in a  medical
        case such as this is AM (Zimbabwe) (Appellant) v Secretary of State
        for the Home Department (Respondent) [2020] UKSC 17, the summary of
        which, whilst not the full judgment, reads:


        REASONS FOR THE JUDGMENT


        In D v United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 423, the ECtHR  held  that  to
        remove a man who was on his deathbed to a state where no  care  was
        available for him would violate article 3; and it referred  to  the
        exceptional    circumstances    and     compelling     humanitarian
        considerations in his case [14]. In the N case, the House of  Lords
        considered the ECtHR's decision in this case  and  others  like  it
        concerning article 3. It held that  the  test  in  such  cases  was
        whether the applicant's illness had reached such a  critical  stage
        that it would be  inhuman  to  deprive  him  of  the  care  he  was
        receiving and to send him to an early death in the receiving state,
        unless there was care available there to enable him to meet it with
        dignity [15-17].


        In N v United Kingdom (2008) 47  EHRR  39,  the  ECtHR  held  that,
        although there might be "other very exceptional cases in which  the
        humanitarian considerations are equally compelling" to those in the
        D case, a high threshold for  violation  of  article  3  should  be
        maintained [18]. In Paposhvili, the ECtHR reconsidered  what  those
        "other very exceptional cases" were. It held  (at  para  183)  that
        they should now be taken to  include  cases  in  which  there  were
        substantial grounds for believing that the applicant, while not  at
        imminent risk of dying, would face a real  risk  in  the  receiving
        country  of  being  exposed  either  to  a   serious,   rapid   and
        irreversible decline in health resulting in intense  suffering,  or
        to "a significant reduction in life expectancy" [22]. According  to
        the Court of Appeal in the present case, the test for violation  of
        article 3 following  Paposhvili  is  no  longer  whether  death  is
        imminent in the removing state, but whether  intense  suffering  or
        death is imminent in  the  receiving  state  because  treatment  is
        unavailable there [29]. The Court of Appeal was, however,  mistaken
        in taking the ECtHR's phrase,  "a  significant  reduction  in  life
        expectancy", to mean "the imminence of death" [30]. But  what  does
        the phrase mean? "Significant" here  means  "substantial":  only  a
        substantial reduction in life expectancy would reach the  level  of
        severity required by article 3. In addition, a  reduction  in  life
        expectancy to death in  the  near  future  is  more  likely  to  be
        significant than any other reduction [31].


        In Paposhvili, the ECtHR also set out requirements (at paras 186 to
        191) for the procedure to be followed in relation  to  applications
        under article 3 to resist return by reference  to  ill-health  [23,
        32]. One requirement  is  for  the  applicant  to  adduce  evidence
        "capable of demonstrating that there are  substantial  grounds  for
        believing" that, if removed, he or she would be exposed to  a  real
        risk of being subjected to treatment contrary to article 3. That is
        a demanding threshold for the applicant. His or her  evidence  must
        be capable of demonstrating  "substantial"  grounds  for  believing
        that it is a "very exceptional case" because of a  "real"  risk  of
        subjection to "inhuman" treatment. He or she  must  put  forward  a
        case which, if not  challenged  or  countered,  would  establish  a
        violation of the article [32]. If the applicant  presents  evidence
        to that standard, the returning state  can  seek  to  challenge  or
        counter it. Paposhvili states that,  in  doing  so,  the  returning
        state must "dispel any doubts raised" by  the  evidence;  but  "any
        doubts" here should be read to mean any serious doubts [33].


        The court should only refuse to follow a decision of the  ECtHR  in
        highly unusual circumstances, and  there  is  no  question  of  the
        court's refusing  to  follow  Paposhvili.  In  the  light  of  that
        judgment, the court should now depart  from  the  decision  of  the
        House of Lords in the N case [34].


        The appellant first raised his article 3  claim  in  the  Court  of
        Appeal and, having accepted that  it  could  not  succeed  at  that
        level,  he  did  not  present  evidence  to  support  it.  It   was
        inappropriate for the Court of Appeal to  extract  medical  reports
        from the evidence submitted in support  of  his  article  8  claim,
        which did not address the Paposhvili requirements [36].  The  court
        should not now determine whether the reports  cross  the  threshold
        required of an applicant under article 3 following Paposhvili.  The
        proper course is to allow the appeal and to  remit  the  article  3
        claim to be heard on up-to-date evidence [37].


    13. Two headline points from the Supreme Court decision are:


         Substantive -     in order to meet the relevant Article 3 threshold
                      there must be a real risk of  a  serious,  rapid  and
                      irreversible decline in the person's health resulting
                      in intense suffering or to a significant (defined  as
                      'substantial') reduction in life expectancy;
        Procedural -  It was for the applicant  to  prima  facie  meet  the
                      demanding  test  i.e.  to  demonstrate  "substantial"
                      grounds  for  believing   that   it   was   a   "very
                      exceptional"  case  because  of  a  "real"  risk   of
                      subjection to "inhuman" treatment.  If  an  applicant
                      presented evidence to that  standard,  the  returning
                      state could seek to counter it in the manner outlined
                      in Paposhvili.

    14. The Supreme Court set out a range  of  procedural  duties  for  the
        domestic authorities requiring a rigorous assessment of the risk as
        required by the absolute nature of the Article 3 prohibition:


        "It is for applicants to adduce evidence capable  of  demonstrating
        that there are substantial  grounds  for  believing  that,  if  the
        measure complained of were to be implemented, they would be exposed
        to a real risk of being subjected to treatment contrary to  Article
        3....In this connection it should be observed that a certain degree
        of speculation is inherent in the preventive purpose of  Article  3
        and that it is not a matter of requiring the persons  concerned  to
        provide clear proof of their claim that they would  be  exposed  to
        proscribed treatment" [186].


    15. In Savran v  Denmark  (application  no   57467/15)   the  appellant
        was a  Turkish  national  who  had   lived   since   childhood   in
        Denmark  and  had  committed  a  number  of  serious offences.  His
        progress was latterly good in an institution (he was suffering from
        schizophrenia amongst other problems) and he was  mostly  compliant
        with the regime.    He was  recommended  for   treatment   in   the
        community but the Danish authorities wanted to deport him.  He said
        that would breach his Article  3   rights.     The   evidence   was
        that   the   drugs   he   needed   for   his   schizophrenia   were
        available   in   Turkey   as   was   hospital   treatment;  however
        psychiatrists had recommended that he needed close  monitoring  and
        follow-up both for the good  of  society  to  ensure  he  took  his
        treatment (if he did not they considered he would become aggressive
        and non-compliant  again)  and  also  for  his  own  good   because
        he  needed  regular blood tests because of the  potential  toxicity
        of the medication and to help him integrate.  He averred he had  no
        family support in Turkey.  By a majority of four to three the  ECHR
        held that there would be a violation of Article  3   if   he   were
        returned  without  the  authorities  having   obtained   individual
        and     sufficient     assurances     that     the      appropriate
        treatment    including   monitoring   and   follow-up   would    be
        available  to  him  on  return.    The  minority  pointed  to   the
        fact  that  they  considered  the  high  threshold   had  not  been
        reached.  They said the  majority  had  not  assessed  whether  the
        possible  consequences  of  the  lack   of   treatment   could   be
        characterised as exposing the applicant to  a  serious,  rapid  and
        irreversible decline in his state of health  resulting  in  intense
        suffering or to a significant reduction in  life  expectancy.  They
        examined Article 8 separately (the majority had seen no  need)  but
        concluded, although they applied Maslov that there were no  reasons
         to   depart   from   the   decision   of   the   domestic   court.
             They   considered that the appellant's  mental   illness   and
        the  need   for   treatment   had   been   sufficiently   addressed
        under  Article  3  and  Article   8   could   not   provide  better
        protection in this respect.
    16. The Upper Tribunal in AXB  (Art  3  health:  obligations:  suicide)
        Jamaica [2019] UKUT  397 considered the case  of  Savran  and  held
        that:


        (i)       In  a  case  where  an  individual,  asserts   that   his
             removal  from  the   Returning   State   would   violate   his
             Article  3  ECHR  rights  because  of  the   consequences   to
             his  health,  the  obligation  on   the   authorities   of   a
             Returning   State   dealing   with   a    health    case    is
             primarily  one  of  examining  the  fears  of   an   applicant
             as to what will  occur  following  return  and  assessing  the
             evidence.   In  order  to    fulfil    its    obligations,   a
             Returning   State   must   provide "appropriate    procedures"
             to allow that examination and assessment to be carried out. In
             the UK, that is met in the first place by  an  examination  of
             the case by the Secretary of State and then by an  examination
             on appeal by the Tribunal and an assessment  of  the  evidence
             before it;


        (ii)      There is no  free-standing  procedural  obligation  on  a
             Returning State to  make  enquiries  of  the  Receiving  State
             concerning treatment in that State  or  obtain  assurances  in
             that regard. Properly understood, what is referred to at [185]
             to  [187]  of  the  Grand  Chamber's  judgment  in  Paposhvili
             concerns the discharge of respective burdens of proof;


        (iii)     The burden is on the individual  appellant  to  establish
             that, if he is removed, there is a real risk of  a  breach  of
             Article 3 ECHR to the standard and threshold which apply.   If
             the  appellant  provides  evidence   which   is   capable   of
             proving  his  case  to  the  standard   which   applies,   the
             Secretary  of  State  will  be  precluded  from  removing  the
             appellant unless she is able to  provide  evidence  countering
             the  appellant's  evidence  or   dispelling   doubts   arising
             from    that    evidence.   Depending   on   the    particular
             circumstances of the case, such evidence might include general
             evidence, specific evidence from the Receiving State following
             enquiries  made  or  assurances  from  the   Receiving   State
             concerning the treatment of the appellant following return.




The medical evidence

    17. A number of reports have ben provided in  relation  to  the  second
        appellants needs.
    18. The second appellant places particular emphasis upon the reports of
        Dr Olivia Fiertag, a Consultant Child & Adolescent Psychiatrist. Dr
        Fiertag's initial report of 14 August 2019, was before  the  First-
        tier Tribunal, which is has been updated in  an  addendum  to  that
        report, dated 19 March 2020.
    19. Although not specifically  referred  to  below  all  the  evidence,
        medical and otherwise, provided from whatever source by the parties
        has been considered with the required degree of anxious scrutiny.
    20. In Dr Fiertag's  earlier  report  it  was  noted  that  the  second
        appellants current medication was:

        a. Guanfacine 3mg once a day
        b. Sodium Valporate 300mg twice a day.
        c. Lamotrigine 25mg 1 tablet twice a day.


    21. In relation to the second appellants current treatment  regime,  it
        was written:

        16.1      Behavioural  treatment:  M  has  attended  Triple  P  and
             Stepping Stones, parenting courses for support in managing U's
             challenging  behaviour  relating  to  his  Attention   Deficit
             Hyperactive Disorder (ADHD) and Autism. U  also  receives  1:1
             support in school from a teaching staff  trained  in  managing
             behavioural problems relating to Autism and ADHD.

        16.2 Speech and Language Therapy:  U  access  this  in  school  and
             outside of school.

16.3     Occupational Therapy: U access this in school.

        16.4       Overall  Learning  Support:  U  receives  continual  1:1
             support in school to enable him  to  access  his  personalised
             curriculum to help him with his academic,  speech  and  social
             development.

16.5     Aggression  management:  U  teachers  have  been  trained  in  safe
restraint.

        16.6      Medication: U receives Consultant Paediatric reviews  and
             is prescribed Sodium Valporate and Lamotrigine to  manage  his
             epilepsy. U  receives  Consultant  Child  Psychiatric  reviews
             regularly in CAMHS  regarding  his  Autism  and  ADHD  and  is
             prescribed  Guanfacine  3mg   nocte   for   his   inattention,
             hyperactivity, impulsivity and challenging behaviour.

        16.7 Social support: U's teachers encourage him  to  interact  with
             his peers in school. U will be going  on  one  weeks  activity
             holidays this summer. He also attends a Saturday club  once  a
             week and is learning to ride a bike. He has  been  advised  by
             CAMHS to liaise with  social  care  for  housing  and  respite
             support as part of his care.

        16.8       Incontinence  clinic:  U  is  under  the  care  of   the
             incontinence clinic. He needs to be  prompted  to  go  to  the
             toilet. He is able to urinate in the toilet with prompting  to
             go. He is not able to open his bowels in the  toilet  yet  and
             requires nappies.

        16.9      Physiotherapy and  orthotics:  U  has  been  referred  to
             address concerns with his balance and motor skills.

    22. In relation to the effect of withdrawing U's medication Dr  Fiertag
        wrote:

        19.1       If  U's  epilepsy  medication  (Lamotrigine  and  Sodium
             Valporate) is withdrawn I would expect his epileptic  seizures
             to return and if he experiences further untreated seizures, he
             is likely to develop a further brain injury which could impact
             on his learning ability, social skills and overall mental  and
             physical health.

        19.2      If U's ADHD medication (Guanfacine) is withdrawn I  would
             expect  his  ADHD  symptoms  to  return.  This  would  include
             increasing   levels   of   impulsivity,   hyperactivity    and
             inattention. The impact would be he would be unable to  engage
             with education and learning, as he has been, as he  has  been;
             he would be unlikely to be able to  remain  in  the  classroom
             environment. He would  be  vulnerable  to  developing  sudden,
             aggressive  and  impulsive  outbursts,  to  running  off   and
             encountering dangerous situations and be unable to utilise his
             speech and social skills he has learnt as  his  ADHD  symptoms
             would make it too difficult for him to focus and  engage  with
             this. I would expect his  aggression  and  severe  challenging
             behaviour  to  return.  He  would  likely   require   physical
             restraint. His quality-of-life would be reduced.

    23. In relation to the long-term prognosis and quality of life  without
        medication Dr Fiertag indicates that long-term  prognosis  will  be
        very poor with likely increased morbidity and  premature  mortality
        and that without ADHD medication U is unlikely to be able to manage
        his  ADHD  symptoms  sufficiently  to  be  able  to  access  public
        environments, school, social situations, and learning.
    24. In the addendum report Dr Fiertag addresses one of the core  issues
        in this appeal, namely the availability of Guanfacine in Mauritius,
        and other issues relating to the availability of care to  meet  U's
        needs in the following terms:

7.0  Is the medication Guanfacine available in Mauritius:

        7.1  Guanfacine is not available in Mauritius.  Other  long  acting
             ADHD drugs commonly prescribed in the UK such  as  Atomexetine
             are also not available. The only ADHD drugs available is short
             acting Ritalin (methylphenidate hydrochloride). U  requires  a
             longer  acting  drug  with  24-hour  cover  in  view  of   his
             difficulties, and thus Ritalin  would  not  be  sufficient  in
             managing his ADHD symptoms. Ritalin lasts 4-6 hours and cannot
             be taken in the late afternoon or evening as it affects sleep.
              Whereas Guanfacine provides approximately 24-hour cover  when
             taken daily  for  ADHD  symptoms.  U  requires  Guanfacine  to
             control his  ADHD  symptoms  (hyperactivity,  inattention  and
             impulsivity). Left  untreated,  U's  impulsive  outbursts  are
             likely to have potentially  very  dangerous  consequences  for
             himself and his overall behaviour will become more  aggressive
             and challenging to manage.

        7.2  Risperidone although available in Mauritius is not a drug U is
             taking. It is not licensed to treat ADHD and his  licenced  as
             an antipsychotic or for challenging behaviour in  autism.  U's
             ADHD requires treatment with Guanfacine and Risperidone is not
             an appropriate alternative for treating his ADHD.  Risperidone
             can also affect the seizure threshold and as U as epilepsy  it
             could worsen his epilepsy. Risperidone  also  commonly  causes
             obesity and can induce a metabolic syndrome. At the time of my
             initial assessment  of  U,  his  autism  symptoms  were  being
             managed adequately therapeutically with the existing  therapy,
             educational and parental support in place  and  there  was  no
             indication for prescribing Risperidone.

        7.3  I have reviewed the documents provided  to  me  regarding  the
             international pharmacy which imports drugs. I have  also  been
             informed by information from a member of the Royal College  of
             Psychiatrists  who  worked  in  Mauritius  recently,  that  if
             specific  medications  that  are  not  licensed  for  use   or
             available in Mauritius are required for treatment, there is  a
             minimum 6 months governmental process to be undertaken  to  be
             able to see if they can be imported over from another country.
             It is not known whether this can be done in  order  to  obtain
             Guanfacine from abroad for U.

8.0  Guanfacine review and monitoring:

        8.1  Guanfacine is used as a  treatment  for  ADHD  where  a  short
             acting  stimulant  is  not  suitable  and  its  use  in  these
             situations is supported by the  NICE  (National  Institute  of
             Clinical Excellence) guidance. The NICE guidance  states  that
             during the first year on  Guanfacine  the  patient  should  be
             assessed every 3 months and 6 monthly monitoring should follow
             thereafter, with more frequent monitoring following  any  dose
             adjustments.

        8.2  In the case of U, who has been on Guanfacine more than a  year
             and who has complex ADHD, comorbid Autism and  other  learning
             and  neurodevelopment  needs,  good  medical  practice   would
             require a Child and  Adolescent  Psychiatrist  overseeing  his
             care for review every 6 months when the situation stable,  and
             he may require more frequent reviews at other  times.  If  his
             symptoms change over time, which can  happen  in  the  natural
             course of development through childhood and adolescence,  then
             further  reviews  may  be  needed   to   consider   medication
             adjustments in addition to the 6 monthly reviews.

        8.3  Prior to  initiation  of  treatment,  patients  cardiovascular
             status, including heart rate and  blood  pressure  parameters,
             family history of sudden  cardiac  deaths/unexplained  deaths,
             are  assessed  to  identify  patients  at  increased  risk  of
             hypertension,   bradycardia,   and   QT/prolongation/risk   of
             arrhythmia.  Monitoring  of  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure
             parameters should continue  on  a  weekly  basis  during  dose
             titration and stabilisation and at least every  3  months  for
             the first year, taking into consideration clinical  judgement.
             6 monthly  monitoring  should  follow  thereafter,  with  more
             frequent monitoring following any dose adjustment.

        8.4  U psychiatric reviews are required to establish whether  there
             has been an adequate response to the  medication  and  if  any
             side  effects  have  developed  (this  medication  can   cause
             somnolence and sedation,  syncope,  hypotension,  bradycardia,
             weight increase/obesity). The following physical  measurements
             need to be made: height, weight, blood  pressure,  heart  rate
             and BMI (body mass index). The results  indicate  whether  any
             further change in medication dosage or type needs to  be  made
             and if  any  further  investigations/treatments  needs  to  be
             undertaken in respect of any side effects.

        8.5  Very careful monitoring of blood pressure is vital in patients
             taking Guanfacine, especially during times of dose adjustments
             as it can cause significantly low changes in blood pressure.

        8.6  If U moves abroad he will need a Psychiatrist with  experience
             of prescribing Guanfacine in children with  autism,  epilepsy,
             ADHD and other  neurodevelopmental  difficulties,  to  monitor
             this 6 monthly (or more frequently depending on need).

             ...

10.0     Child Psychiatrist provisions in Mauritius

        10.1      In order to answer this  question  accurately  I  liaised
             with the Royal College of Psychiatrists and was provided  with
             feedback from a Consultant Child and  Adolescent  Psychiatrist
             and Royal College Psychiatrist member who had recently  worked
             in Mauritius (Dr Mohungoo).

        10.2      There are no current Child and  Adolescent  Psychiatrists
             practising in Mauritius. There is no plan from the Ministry of
             Health to set up an  appropriate  child  psychiatric  service.
             There is no  multidisciplinary  CAMHS  (Child  and  Adolescent
             Mental Health Service).

11.00    Other information

        10.3      Feedback from U's school (October  2019)  indicated  that
             U's behaviour deteriorated following  my  initial  assessment,
             including aggression, to the extent he required exclusion.  In
             order to manage his challenging behaviour, a multidisciplinary
             approach  is  advised.  This  should  include  regular   child
             psychiatric reviews to ensure U's ADHD and Autism symptoms are
             well managed and his medication optimised.  This  should  also
             include   paediatrician   reviews   of   his   epilepsy    and
             incontinence, occupational therapy  and  speech  and  language
             therapy to help his social skills and speech,  and  specialist
             teachers support to enable him to access the curriculum.

        10.4      The letter from school (March 2020) sets out U's  complex
             needs and current educational support,  which  is  in  keeping
             with my assessment of U. I also  emphasise  U's  vulnerability
             and risk of deterioration  in  mental  health  with  that  any
             change in routine, such as  the  changing  environment,  staff
             member, teacher. Secondary transition will be a  crucial  time
             for U and his school will need to advise on whether his  needs
             can be met in  a  mainstream  environment,  and  what  further
             support he will need in secondary education. Children with his
             level  of  complex  needs  may  need   a   specialist   school
             environment.

        10.5      I have reviewed the documents of the schooling provisions
             in  Mauritius.  The  information  from  Northfields  seems  to
             indicate it  caters  for  children  with  more  mild  learning
             difficulties than U and for those  without  the  multi-complex
             and severe difficulties that U displays. The list of schooling
             provisions also does not mention any provision that can  cater
             for U's multiple severe and complex difficulties. He will need
             support for severe ADHD, autism  and  learning  disability  as
             well as physical conditions, epilepsy, incontinence and speech
             and language problems. There  was  one  school  that  mentions
             autism, but that school does  not  mention  catering  for  U's
             other conditions and therefore is unlikely to be suitable.

Discussion

    25. The Secretary of States written submissions, filed in  response  to
        the Covid 19 directions issued by the Upper  Tribunal,  focused  on
        the appellant's case pursuant to Article 8  ECHR,  that  being  the
        only basis of challenge to the respondent's decision  at  the  time
        the document was drafted.
    26. In that document, which is the one relied upon by Ms Everett, it is
        written:

        10.  The preserved finding from [30] of the  FTT  J's  decision  is
             that the Second Appellant, whose tenth birthday is in a matter
             of  days,  has  multiple  health  issues   including   autism,
             attention  deficit  hyperactive  disorder  [ADHD],   epilepsy,
             intellectual  disability,  sensory  processing  disorder   and
             incontinence.

         11.  The  Respondent  accepts  that  the  medical  and  educational
             provisions in Mauritius to meet the Second Appellants  complex
             condition would  not  be  of  the  same  standard  as  he  has
             experienced in the UK. It  is  not,  however,  a  question  of
             comparing provision in the two countries. The Second Appellant
             received treatment for his medical condition before coming  to
             the UK with the First Appellant on 28 February  2016  when  he
             was aged five years and ten months.  Further,  the  Respondent
             relies on the four documents submitted on 11 March 2020. It is
             accepted that Intuniv (Guanfacine), the  medication  taken  by
             the Second Appellant in the UK to control  his  ADHD,  is  not
             available in Mauritius; the first two documents show that  two
             online pharmacies (Pharmacy Rc World and Global Care Rx) could
             potentially deliver Intuniv  (Guanfacine)  to  Mauritius.  The
             third document is about a school  in  Mauritius  which  offers
             special educational needs support,  Northfield's  school.  The
             fourth document is a list of special educational needs schools
             in Mauritius.


         12.  The consolidated bundle from SG Law Solicitors includes recent
             email  exchanges  between  the  First  Appellant  and  various
             organisations in Mauritius,  in  response  to  the  additional
             evidence submitted by the Respondent. It is noted  from  these
             exchanges:


             a)  A  pharmacist  at  Anichem  Pharmacy,   a   pharmaceutical
                distribution company in Mauritius, indicates that it  would
                be possible to apply for an exceptional import permit  from
                the  Ministry  of  Health  in  order  to   import   Intuniv
                (Guanfacine), although obtaining such  a  permit  might  be
                difficult (UT 96-97).
             b) Autisme Maurice, an NGO which caters for autistic children,
                confirms that  provision  in  Mauritius  is  limited;  that
                children  with  ADHD  and  autism  are  not   admitted   to
                mainstream schools but to specialised services run by NGOs;
                that  one  to  one  provision   is   offered   by   private
                practitioners but quite expensive and difficult to  access;
                that - although Autisme  Maurice  was  fully  booked  until
                April 2021 - it would, on application for  admission,  give
                priority to the Second Appellant as soon as a school  place
                became available (UT 165).


         13.  The consolidated bundle also includes an addendum  psychiatric
             report dated 19 March 2020 from Dr  Olivia  Fiertag  (UT  177-
             182).  Dr Fiertag confirms that the Second Appellant  requires
             the continuation of his Intuniv (Guanfacine) medication as the
             alternatives are not suitable; that she has been informed by a
             British psychiatrist that the Mauritian Government process for
             considering the importation of medication which is  unlicensed
             or unavailable takes a minimum of six months; that  withdrawal
             of Intuniv (Guanfacine) would have  adverse  effects  for  the
             Second Appellant, including return of his ADHD  symptoms;  and
             that Northfields and  Autisme  Maurice  did  not  seem  to  be
             suitable for the Second Appellant.


         14.  In the Respondent's submission, the evidence  shows  that  the
             First  Appellant  would  be  able  to  apply  to  import  into
             Mauritius the medication that the Second  Appellant  needs  to
             manage his ADHD symptoms. There does not seem to be any reason
             why the First Appellant could not initiate this  process  from
             the UK. If  the  application  was  approved,  she  could  then
             purchase this medication.


         15.  It is  not  disputed  that  the  medication  that  the  Second
             Appellant requires for his epilepsy is available in  Mauritius
             [see [20] and [31] of the FTTJ's decision].


         16.  It is also submitted that the First Appellant would be able to
             apply to enrol the Second Appellant at a school  in  Mauritius
             which supports children with special educational  needs.  This
             includes the school run by Autisme Maurice. Again, there  does
             not seem to be any reason why the First  Appellant  could  not
             initiate this process from the UK.


         17.  The First Appellant would require funds to purchase the Second
             Appellants medication and (possibly) to support his education.
             A preserved finding from [37] of the FTTJ's decision  is  that
             the First Appellant, who is well educated, had a good  job  in
             Mauritius teaching English with the British Council  prior  to
             coming to the UK; and that she had worked  in  the  UK  as  an
             administrator for City and Guilds. It is  submitted  that  the
             First Appellant should be able to obtain  a  good,  reasonably
             paid job on return to Mauritius. The First Appellant also gave
             evidence to the FTTJ that the accommodation in Mauritius where
             she lived with the Second Appellant remains  unoccupied;  that
             she has a sister and a brother  in  Mauritius;  and  that  her
             brother assisted her in the UK. On return  to  Mauritius,  the
             First Appellant could seek practical and financial  assistance
             from  her  relatives  there.  The  First  Appellant  also  has
             relatives in  the  UK  from  whom  she  could  seek  financial
             support.


         18.  The Respondent accepts that the best interests of  the  Second
             Appellant are to remain in  the  UK,  where  the  medical  and
             educational provision to meet his needs is superior to that in
             Mauritius.  Following  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]   UKSC   4   and
             subsequent case law, however, the best interests of the  child
             are a primary consideration, not the paramount  consideration;
             and they can be outweighed by  other  factors,  including  the
             public interest.


         19.  The public interest is strong. The Appellants do not meet  the
             Immigration Rules; and Section 117B (5) provides  that  little
             weight should be given to a private life established  in  such
             precarious  circumstances.  The  Appellants  are  not  British
             Citizens and have no right to reside in the UK; they have been
             in this country for four years only, having  previously  lived
             in Mauritius. They entered the UK so that the Second Appellant
             could receive privately  funded  medical  treatment  but  then
             became dependent on public funds  for  accommodation,  medical
             services and education. In circumstances where the  Appellants
             do not meet the Rules, it is appropriate to consider the  cost
             to the public purse in continuing to provide medical  services
             and supported education for the Second Appellant, as  part  of
             the public interest represented by the "economic well-being of
             the country" in ECHR Article 8(2) [see [61]  of  Lewison  LJ's
             judgement in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 974].


    27. The respondent's position is therefore  that  the  outcome  of  the
        proportionality  balancing  exercise  means  the  public   interest
        outweighs the appellants private interests and the  best  interests
        of the second appellant.
    28. The appellants rely upon the fact Dr Fiertag maintained there  were
        no  current  Child  and  Adolescent  Psychiatrists  practising   in
        Mauritius.
    29. Mr Plowright, in his submissions, focused on the four  main  issues
        arising in this appeal being:

           a. The availability of the medication  required  by  the  second
              appellant,  ADHD  Medication  -  Guanfacine,  which  it   was
              accepted by all the parties could not  be  obtained  at  this
              time in Mauritius. The key question being whether it could be
              imported.
           b. Whilst at the moment the second appellant was on a dose of  3
              mg a day, the evidence available shows that the dosage  needs
              to be monitored as a result of  physical  and  mental  health
              issues, giving rise to the question of whether  it  could  be
              adequately monitored in  Mauritius  sufficient  to  meet  the
              needs of the second appellant.
           c. The availability  of  multidisciplinary  healthcare  and  the
              presence of a Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist in Mauritius.
           d. The availability of  appropriate  schooling  for  the  second
              appellant in Mauritius.


    30. Further evidence in relation to the availability of  medication  in
        Mauritius has been provide din the form of a  letter  signed  by  a
        pharmacist based at Anichem Pharmacy in Mauritius who writes:

Please note that Intuniv 3mg is not available in Mauritius. It is  also  not
registered with our Ministry  of  Health.  However,  an  exceptional  import
permit may be obtained  from  our  Ministry  of  Health,  but  there  is  no
guarantee that it will be approved.

It is very complicated to get such approval as a medical board will have  to
be constituted to examine the child more  often  they  recommend  medication
available in Mauritius only.

    31. Intuniv is a reference to Guanfacine.
    32. There is also within the  appellant's  bundle  a  letter  from  the
        Pharmacy Board of the Ministry of Health &  Wellness  in  Mauritius
        dated 6 March 2020, confirming that Intuniv 3mg (Guanfacine) is not
        available in Mauritius with no suggestion  of  any  mechanism  that
        could be employed through the Ministry to obtain the same.
    33. I accept the appellants have established that at the  date  of  the
        hearing the drug Guanfacine required to control U's ADHD and  other
        issues referred to above is not available within the health service
        and that although the Secretary of State indicates that it  can  be
        obtained through a private personal import, there is no evidence of
        the appropriate consent to the  drug  being  imported  having  been
        granted by the Ministry of Health or any indication that this it is
        likely to occur within the foreseeable future, clearly  not  within
        the six month period referred to.
    34. In relation to U's schooling,  Ms  Everett  did  not  challenge  Mr
        Plowright's submission that although there is  schooling  available
        in Mauritius the available information  indicates  that  assistance
        can be provided to those with moderate needs but does not  indicate
        that it will be adequate for a child with severe needs such  as  U.
        This is a position supported in the addendum report of  Dr  Fiertag
        referred to above.
    35. There is  also  an  issue  of  whether  there  will  be  sufficient
        resources available to the first appellant.  In addition to the day-
        to-day costs of her and her son she will have to meet the costs  of
        importing Guanfacine from abroad and meeting the cost of schooling.
         It is a preserved finding that the first appellant will be able to
        obtain employment and there is insufficient  evidence  provided  to
        warrant a finding that meeting the needs of U in Mauritius will  be
        cost  prohibitive  or  result   in   deprivation   or   unnecessary
        difficulties being experienced by this family unit.
    36. What is also of relevance is the opinion of Dr Fiertag of the  need
        for U to be monitored by a Child and Adolescent  Psychiatrist  with
        there is no evidence of any such specialist professional practicing
        in Mauritius.
    37. It is also clear from the material provided that U benefits from  a
        multidisciplinary  approach  to  meeting   his   needs,   including
        assistance from the Child Mental Health services. It was  not  made
        out that such multidisciplinary services will be available  to  him
        in Mauritius.
    38. The Secretary of State  has not filed sufficient evidence or lodged
        any challenge to the opinion of Dr Fiertag as to the impact upon  U
        of either discontinuing Guanfacine and the resultant  deterioration
        in U's mental and physical health if he could not access equivalent
        healthcare and educational support that he is receiving in the  UK,
        although that is not however the relevant test.
    39. Dr Fiertag was asked  her  opinion  on  whether  U's  psychological
        vulnerability would exasperate his physical health condition if  he
        were returned to Mauritius, together with the psychological  impact
        and his quality of life if treatment was to be  withdrawn.  In  her
        original report dated 14 August 2019 it is written:

        25.0      To  your  knowledge,  would  psychological  vulnerability
             exasperate U's physical health condition if he were to  return
             to Mauritius.

        25.1      U's mental health and physical health  would  deteriorate
             if  he  could  not  access  the  equivalent   healthcare   and
             educational support that he is receiving in the UK. As this is
             not available in Mauritius, I  would  expect  his  mental  and
             physical health to deteriorate.

        25.2      U's physical health needs regular monitoring in  view  of
             his epilepsy and epilepsy medication and  the  AHDH  and  ADHD
             medication. He also needs regular prompting and monitoring  to
             open his bowels and urinate.

        25.3      If U's ADHD is not controlled with medication  he  is  at
             risk of being injured physically in view of his unawareness of
             danger and frequent running off and aggression towards himself
             and others (when his ADHD and Autism  is  being  treated  this
             risk is reduced drastically).

        25.4      U's diet  and  weight  is  dependent  on  having  regular
             prompting and support with eating at home and school.  If  his
             psychological health deteriorates  then  his  ability  to  eat
             properly may be impacted and this would impact on his physical
             health.

        25.5      U's ability to go to the toilet is  dependent  on  having
             regular prompting at home and  school.  If  his  psychological
             health deteriorates then this  is  likely  to  impact  on  his
             ability  with  toileting  and   potential   further   physical
             complications arising from this.

        25.6      If U were to be in  Mauritius  there  are  no  specialist
             schools that could enrol him that have the expertise to manage
             his physical needs in addition to his psychological needs.  If
             U is not able to go to school then  his  psychological  health
             would deteriorate with a subsequent detrimental impact on  his
             physical health.

        26.0 What would be the psychological impact and his quality-of-life
             if treatment is withdrawn and the impact of not  receiving  an
             education, taking into consideration his illness.

        26.1      U's quality-of-life would be significantly reduced if his
             healthcare treatment and education is withdrawn. He is  likely
             to become emotionally distressed;  his  challenging  behaviour
             and aggression will increase; he will  be  unable  to  develop
             further with his speech and learning  and  unable  to  develop
             further life independent living skills. He will be  unable  to
             access peer social situations as he currently is and  find  it
             even harder to be out of the house.  His  physical  health  is
             likely to be affected as a consequence of the physical  impact
             of not receiving this support.

    40. As found in AXB, there is no free-standing procedural obligation on
        the  UK  to  make  enquiries  of  the  Receiving  State  concerning
        treatment in that State or to obtain assurances in that regard.
    41. As also found in AXB, the burden is on the individual appellant  to
        establish that if he is removed there is a real risk of a breach of
        Article 3 ECHR to the standard  and  threshold  which  apply.  That
        standard was identified by the Supreme Court in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  as
        being the need to  show  a  real  risk  of  a  serious,  rapid  and
        irreversible decline in the person's health  resulting  in  intense
        suffering or to a significant (defined as 'substantial')  reduction
        in life expectancy.
    42. It is not made out that there will be a  significant  reduction  in
        U's life expectancy as the evidence provided does not establish  to
        the required standard that this is  a  foreseeable  consequence  of
        returning U to Mauritius.
    43. The meaning of the word 'intense' is  used  to  describe  something
        that is very great or extreme in strength or degree and 'suffering'
        as serious pain which someone feels in their body  or  their  mind.
        The appellant therefore needs to establish  a  serious,  rapid  and
        irreversible decline resulting in a significant consequence.
    44. It is accepted that if U is returned to Mauritius  at  this  stage,
        and without the key medication he  requires  being  available,  the
        evidence supports the claim that he will suffer a decline which may
        be serious and rapid, but if the medication did become available it
        has not been shown to be irreversible. I must  however  assess  the
        matter as it is at the date  of  the  hearing  where  there  is  no
        evidence of the necessary permits or permissions being  granted  to
        enable the drug U requires to be imported into Mauritius  within  a
        reasonable  time.  If  there  was  a  guarantee  that  the   health
        authorities in Mauritius would grant the necessary  permit  it  may
        have been possible to ensure U  was  able  to  take  the  necessary
        quantity of drugs back with him to cover  the  period  after  which
        they will become available, but there is no such guarantee  on  the
        evidence.
    45. I accept the appellants have established that the consequences  for
        U can be classed as "suffering". They will clearly be  serious  but
        assessing the impact of the withdrawal of the core medication  upon
        U is to effectively "throw a hand grenade" into his life structure,
        his functioning, and the progress that he has made to  date  across
        all fronts , which is more likely than not to have the consequences
        identified in the evidence.
    46. It is also the case that U requires the important assistance from a
        Consultant Child and Adult psychiatrist, not only  to  monitor  but
        also guide his treatment, the presence of which may have alleviated
        some of the consequences of suffering or reduce  the  intensity  of
        the same if one was present, but the evidence does  not  support  a
        finding that one is. Indeed, the evidence from the  appellant,  not
        contested by the Secretary of State,  is  that  there  is  no  such
        professional assistance available in Mauritius.
    47. I accept that there is other medication available  but  these  were
        discussed by Dr Fiertag in her report and although  they  may  have
        some effect will clearly not address U's needs sufficient to  avoid
        his suffering.
    48. There is  also  an  absence  of  a  multidisciplinary  approach  or
        services available in Mauritius the evidence of which is clearly  a
        material part of enabling U to properly function, without which  he
        is not likely to attain what he is capable of and to  develop  into
        as well balanced and functioning adult as he  possibly  can.  If  U
        deteriorates as indicated in  the  medical  evidence,  including  a
        return of any incontinence issues, there is  a  real  risk  of  his
        being humiliated within a school environment, particularly  by  any
        peers, which could result in isolation and psychological suffering.
    49. I find it is the combination of issues in this case that leads to a
        finding that the appellant has established that  the  Secretary  of
        State's decision to remove the second  appellant  from  the  United
        Kingdom will result in intense suffering  sufficient  to  meet  the
        required standard of proof.
    50. As found in AM (Zimbabwe), if the   appellant   provides   evidence
        which  is  capable  of   proving   his   case   to   the   standard
        which  applies,  the  Secretary  of   State   will   be   precluded
        from  removing the appellant unless she is able to provide evidence
        countering  the   appellant's   evidence   or   dispelling   doubts
        arising   from   that   evidence.  Depending  on   the   particular
        circumstances  of   the   case,   such   evidence   might   include
        general  evidence,  specific  evidence  from  the  Receiving  State
         following  enquiries  made  or  assurances  from   the   Receiving
        State  concerning the treatment of the appellant following return.
    51. The Secretary of State's position in this appeal is that the drug U
        requires can be obtained on the  Internet  but  that  is  a  matter
        discussed above and bar the genetic limited evidence  showing  that
        drugs can be purchased in this manner, there is nothing further  to
        dispel the doubts arising from the evidence that  Guanfacine  could
        not be obtained within a reasonable period of time.  There  is,  in
        particular,  no  evidence  obtained   from   Mauritius,   following
        enquiries by the Secretary of State, that a permit  to  import  the
        drug is likely to be forthcoming, and can be made available  within
        a very short period.
    52. Even if such evidence  had  been  obtained  to  show  the  required
        medication could be obtained there is clearly no evidence  provided
        to show a Consultant Adult or Child Psychiatrist, or professionally
        qualified equivalent with the required skill sets, is available  in
        Mauritius, or evidence of the availability of a suitable package to
        meet U's particular needs
    53. On the facts of this appeal I therefore find that the appellant has
        made  out  that  return  to  Mauritius  will  breach   the   second
        appellant's rights pursuant to Article 3 ECHR  on  health  grounds,
        and I allow his appeal on that basis.
    54. In the alternative, had the appeal of the second  appellant  failed
        in Article 3 grounds it  would  have  been  allowed  in  Article  8
        grounds on the basis that the interference with second  appellant's
        private life had not been shown by the Secretary  of  State  to  be
        proportionate.
    55. It is accepted that the private life the second appellant  has  was
        developed in the United Kingdom at the time  that  his  status  has
        been precarious, but it is important to recognise  that  throughout
        this time he has always been, and still is,  a  child.  The  impact
        upon a child is also  a  relevant  consideration  -  SQ  (Pakistan)
        [2013] EWCA Civ 1251 considered.
    56. The nature of the second  appellant's  private  life  includes  his
        connection with the
medical and education authorities providing  services  to  meet  his  needs,
including his physical and moral integrity, and potential to develop  in  as
near a normal manner as possible, which he will not be able to do without  a
similar support package being available, which it is not.
    57. I have taken into account the argument concerning the economic well-
        being of the United Kingdom and the substantial costs  involved  in
        providing for the  second  appellant  in  terms  of  his  care  and
        monitoring by the NHS and specialist schooling provision. I do not,
        however, find this to be the determinative issue, although  I  have
        given it considerable weight as I also do to the fact that  neither
        appellant has a legal right to remain in the United Kingdom.
    58. It is clearly the case, as conceded by the Secretary of State, that
        the best interests of the second appellant are  to  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom. Whilst not the determinative factor I find  on  the
        specific facts of this case, taken cumulatively, that  considerable
        weight can be given to the best interests' argument which  counters
        the Secretary of State economic argument referred to above.
    59. I find that as the first appellant is  the  primary  carer  of  the
        second  appellant,  being  his  mother,  it  is  not  proportionate
        pursuant to Article 8 ECHR to sever their relationship by expecting
        her to return to Mauritius alone. I find it appropriate in all  the
        circumstances for the first appellant to be granted leave  in  line
        with the second appellant.
    60. If the situation changes and the required drugs are  proved  to  be
        available at some point in the future, depending  upon  the  second
        appellant's degree of progress  (if  any)  at  that  time,  it  may
        warrant the situation being  reviewed  in  relation  to  the  leave
        granted to both the first  and  second  appellant,  but  this  will
        obviously depend upon the second appellant's needs and the presence
        of appropriate medical  professionals  to  monitor  his  situation,
        which is not present at the date of this hearing.

Decision

    61. I allow the appeals of both appellants on human rights grounds.

   Anonymity.


    62. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 9 July 2021












