
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06453/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 13 July 2017                      |on  20 July 2017                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                 [FAHRIJE R]
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, Counsel, instructed by Metrolaw
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Cockrill (FtJ), promulgated on 26 October  2016,  dismissing
       the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  of  17
       September 2015 to refuse her human rights claim which was made on the
       basis of her family life relationship with  her  husband,  a  British
       citizen.



Factual Background

    2. The Appellant is a national of Kosovo, date of birth [ ] 1978. At the
       date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal she had 2 brothers
       and a sister living in Kosovo as well as her  parents.  She  met  her
       husband, [HS], in Kosovo in April 2013. He was visiting from the  UK.
       The Appellant's husband was originally a national of Kosovo. His date
       of birth is 14 February 1970. He came to the UK in February 99 during
       the conflict in Kosovo. He sought asylum but was granted  Exceptional
       Leave to Remain and obtained Indefinite Leave to Remain in  2007.  He
       subsequently naturalised as a British citizen.  [HS]  was  previously
       married and, at the date of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, his 2
       children with his former spouse were aged 11 and 16 years  old.  [HS]
       did not however have direct contact with his children. Pursuant to  a
       Child Arrangement Order he was able to send cards, gifts and  letters
       to his children. [HS] suffered from  Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder
       (PTSD), did not  work  and  was  in  receipts  of  Disability  Living
       Allowance.

    3. The Appellant and her  husband  underwent  a  'traditional'  marriage
       ceremony in Kosovo on 23 June 2013 with the full  approval  of  their
       respective families. The Appellant remained in Kosovo  until  6  June
       2014 when she entered the UK as a visitor. In her visitor application
       form she indicated that  she  was  in  full-time  employment  with  a
       company called Standard Benz, and that her total monthly  income  was
       E318. She indicated that she was coming to visit the UK for between 5
       and 7 days in order to see her 2  brothers,  who  were  both  British
       citizens. She explained at the First-tier Tribunal hearing  that  she
       indicated in her visitor  application  form  that  she  was  "single"
       because she and  her  husband  had  only  undergone  a  'traditional'
       ceremony and were not yet legally married. The Appellant returned  to
       Kosovo on 14 July 2014 and then returned to the UK on 14 August 2014.
       She and [HS] were legally married on 30 October 2014 in the UK.

    4. After becoming an overstayer the Appellant made  an  application  for
       leave to remain on the basis of her relationship with her husband. In
       her decision refusing this application the Respondent  accepted  that
       the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  [HS].
       The Respondent  considered  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
       requirements of EX.1.(b) of the  immigration  rules  (which  requires
       there to be insurmountable  obstacles  preventing  family  life  from
       continuing with the partner outside the UK). Whilst noting that  [HS]
       suffered from PTSD the Respondent was of the view that this  did  not
       prevent them from living together in Kosovo. There were said to be no
       evidence that insurmountable  obstacles  existed,  as  understood  by
       reference to EX.2. of the immigration rules. The Respondent  said  it
       was open to the Appellant to return to Kosovo and obtain the  correct
       entry clearance to join her spouse in the UK. The Respondent went  on
       to consider whether the Appellant met the requirements  of  paragraph
       276ADE(1) in respect of her private life rights  but  concluded  that
       she did  not.  The  Respondent  finally  noted  that  there  were  no
       exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the right to respect
       for family and private life in article 8, warranted a grant of  leave
       to remain outside the immigration rules.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    5. The FtJ had before him and Appellant's bundle running to  169  pages.
       He heard oral evidence from  both  the  Appellant  (via  an  Albanian
       interpreter) and her partner (also through the Albanian interpreter).
       It was conceded by the Appellant's representative that she could  not
       succeed in her appeal under the immigration rules and  her  case  was
       advanced  on  the  basis  that  her  removal   would   constitute   a
       disproportionate interference with article 8 outside the  immigration
       rules (see [22] & [25]).

    6. Having accurately directed himself with respect to the 5  prong  test
       in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  the  FtJ  accepted  that  the  decision
       constituted an interference with article 8 but that it was  a  lawful
       decision and one made in pursuit of the  legitimate  public  interest
       considerations. The FtJ then  considered  whether  the  decision  was
       proportionate. At [27] the FtJ noted that the Appellant's husband had
       psychological difficulties, suffered from PTSD and was in receipt  of
       public funds. The FtJ noted however, at [28], that [HS] had  returned
       to Kosovo both in 2013 and then again in  July  2014  and  that  [HS]
       enjoyed a 'perfectly good' relationship with his family in Kosovo and
       with his wife's family. The FtJ concluded that [HS] could  return  to
       Kosovo to be with the Appellant while she makes  an  application  for
       entry clearance, and, at [29], found that the couple  could  maintain
       their family life in Kosovo. The FtJ noted that the Appellant came to
       the UK as a visitor and overstayed and that it was always open to her
       to return to Kosovo  and  make  an  entry  clearance  application  in
       accordance with the immigration rules. The FtJ  stated  that  he  was
       mindful of the 'Chikwamba' principle (Chikwamba [2008] UKHL  40)  but
       he was not satisfied that returning the  Appellant  to  Kosovo  would
       constitute a disproportionate interference with article 8.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

    7. The grounds, which are discursive, essentially contend that  the  FtJ
       attached insufficient weight to the psychological difficulties of the
       Appellant's husband. In granting permission Judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal P J M Hollingworth found it arguable  that  the  FtJ  should
       have considered the question  of  the  effect  upon  the  Appellant's
       husband of a return to Kosovo  for  the  period  which  it  would  be
       anticipated would be required for her to make an application. It  was
       said to be  unclear  what  this  period  would  be  and  whether  any
       consideration had been given to the impact on the Appellant's husband
       in light of the evidence from the husband's GP.

    8. At the hearing Mr Sharma expanded upon the grounds. He submitted that
       the FtJ's proportionality assessment was deficient as  there  was  no
       assessment or recognition of the adverse  impact  that  returning  or
       relocating to Kosovo would have on the Appellant's  husband  nor  had
       there been any satisfactory assessment of the difficulties  faced  by
       the Appellant's husband in being separated  from  his  children,  and
       that there had been no consideration of the factors in s.117B of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Mr Tufan submitted that
       the absence of any express reference to the  s117B  factors  did  not
       render the decision unsafe as most of the factors  went  against  the
       Appellant (there was for example, no evidence of her  proficiency  in
       English and the relationship existed when her leave was  precarious).
       Nor could the Chikwamba principle assist the Appellant as  there  was
       no certainty that entry clearance would be  granted.  I  reserved  my
       decision.

Discussion

    9. The grant of permission was primarily  premised  on  the  absence  of
       sufficient consideration of the impact on the Appellant's husband  of
       returning to Kosovo given his mental health condition.  The  evidence
       relating to the nature and extent of [HS]'s mental  health  condition
       was however considerably lacking. Mr Sharma relied on  a  GP  letter,
       dated 16 September 2016. This stated,

           "This is to confirm that this 46-year-old gentleman is a patient
           at this practice. He has a history of depression and anxiety and
           post-traumatic stress disorder. He reports  that  his  wife  has
           been a big  support  to  him  psychologically.  He  also  has  2
           children in this country."

   10. A further letter from a different GP, dated 23 June  2015,  confirmed
       in broad terms that [HS] had a  history  of  PTSD  and  anxiety  with
       depression and was on medication to help with  these  conditions.  In
       his statement [HS] stated that his PTSD was due to  the  'persecution
       and harassment' in Kosovo but I note that he was not recognised as  a
       refugee and no details have been provided  of  any  ill-treatment  he
       suffered. Whilst the FtJ did not doubt that the  Appellant's  husband
       has a history of depression, anxiety and PTSD, there was no  evidence
       before the FtJ detailing the nature or severity of his condition,  no
       evidence detailing the medication prescribed for his condition and no
       independent medical evidence on the possible impact on his  condition
       if he decided  to  relocate  to  Kosovo  in  order  to  maintain  his
       relationship with the Appellant. The FtJ noted that [HS] had  already
       returned twice to Kosovo, and that he had his mother living there was
       well as the  Appellant's  family.  Given  the  vague  nature  of  the
       evidence relating to [HS]'s medical conditions, the fact that he  had
       already returned twice to Kosovo, and the  absence  of  any  evidence
       that suitable medical treatment would not be available in Kosovo, the
       FtJ was rationally entitled to conclude that  [HS]  could  return  to
       Kosovo either to remain  with  his  wife  while  she  made  an  entry
       clearance application or permanently.  In  light  of  the  dearth  of
       medical evidence the reasoning  given  by  the  FtJ  to  support  his
       conclusion was adequate.

   11.   Mr Sharma  submitted  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  consider  whether
       returning to Kosovo for a limited period of time in order  to  enable
       the Appellant to make an entry clearance application would breach the
       'Chikwamba' principle. There was however no  acknowledgement  by  the
       Respondent that, but for her immigration status,  the  Appellant  met
       the requirements for entry clearance as a spouse, and it was not,  in
       any event, apparent  from  the  evidence  before  the  FtJ  that  the
       Appellant  did  indeed  meet  all   the   requirements.   Mr   Sharma
       acknowledged that the Appellant did not have the appropriate  English
       language qualification.  Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 indicated that  there
       'might' be no public interest in removing an individual, even if they
       resided illegally in the UK, if they were  otherwise  certain  to  be
       granted leave to enter in respect of an  application  made  overseas.
       There is however no such certainty in the facts presented to the  FtJ
       sufficient to have entitled him to  allow  an  appeal  based  on  the
       Chikwamba principle.

   12. The FtJ was demonstrably aware of [HS]'s claims  in  respect  of  his
       relationship with his children. The FtJ  recorded  the  evidence  and
       submissions that the husband could not return to Kosovo  because  his
       children were in the UK. At [24] the FtJ accepted that relocating  to
       Kosovo would mean that [HS] would lose some  opportunity  of  bumping
       into his children from time to time, but he also noted that [HS] only
       had indirect contact with his children by reference to a Court Order.
       It was accepted by Mr Sharma at the error of law hearing  that  there
       was no independent evidence before the FtJ relating to the impact  on
       the children or the relationship [HS] had with  his  children  if  he
       relocated to Kosovo. Mr Sharam submitted that the FtJ erred in law by
       failing to consider the potential  impact  on  the  children  in  the
       future, but there was simply no evidence presented by  the  Appellant
       sufficient to entitle the FtJ to reach any conclusion as to  how  the
       children may be affected in the future.

   13. The fact remains that [HS] did not enjoy, by reason of a Court Order,
       any direct contact with his children. If he decided  to  relocate  to
       Kosovo this would not have materially affected the nature or  quality
       of the relationship he had with his children at the date of the First-
       tier Tribunal hearing. An indirect relationship characterised by  the
       sending of cards, gifts and letters  can  be  effectively  replicated
       even if the father is in another country. Given  the  nature  of  the
       relationship between [HS]  and  his  children,  the  absence  of  any
       evidence speaking to the impact  on  the  children  if  their  father
       decided to relocate to Kosovo, and the absence of any  evidence  that
       [HS] would be unable to continue having  indirect  contact  with  his
       children from Kosovo, the FtJ  cannot  be  said  to  have  failed  to
       adequately take into account the relationship between the Appellant's
       husband and his children.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error of law. The appeal  is
dismissed.


[pic]    20 July 2017

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
