
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/06394/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 June 2019                                |On 12 June 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                    I D O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Adebayo (David & Vine Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  9  November  1974.   He
    appeals the decision of a First-tier Judge following a  hearing  on  21
    January 2019 against the decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  his
    application for leave to remain on Article  8  grounds  in  a  decision
    dated 22 February 2018.  The appellant had initially applied for  leave
    to remain on behalf  of  himself,  his  wife  (RK)  and  two  of  their
    children.  However subsequent to the application the appellant and  his
    wife  separated  and  Family   Court   proceedings   ensued.    Further
    representations were made solely on  behalf  of  the  appellant  on  24
    August 2015.

2.   The case did not have  an  untroubled  passage  to  the  hearing.   The
    appeal was initially submitted out of time on 9 March 2018 but time was
    extended on 5 April 2018.  Although the appeal was originally listed to
    be heard on 16 May 2018 it was adjourned as the solicitors had come  on
    record  two  days  previously  and  required  further  time   to   take
    instructions.  The appellant was directed to provide a  written  update
    as to any change to the existing  prohibited  steps  order  or  to  any
    amendment as to access.  It was further directed that the appellant was
    to file a new and updated bundle no later than fourteen days before the
    substantive hearing.

3.   In fact what happened  was  that  the  appellant's  representative  (Mr
    Adebayo, who appears before me) filed a bundle running to 60  pages  of
    the morning of the hearing.  He claimed it had been filed on  the  last
    working day before the hearing but could provide no explanation  as  to
    why the bundle was sent so late.  It was claimed  that  the  solicitors
    had not received directions.   Time  was  afforded  to  the  Presenting
    Officer (Ms Lecointe) to consider the material.   In  addition  to  the
    bundle  lodged  at  the  hearing  the  appellant  had   filed   without
    representation a folder containing documents  relating  to  the  Family
    Court proceedings dated  3  May  2018.   It  included  a  sealed  child
    arrangements and prohibitive steps order issued by the Family Court  on
    29th January 2016.

4.   The judge summarises the appellant's immigration and family history  as
    follows:

         "12. The appellant applied for entry clearance as a student  on  15
             May 2007 and was issued with entry clearance on 23  May  2007,
             valid from 1 June 2007 to 31 October 2009.


         13.  The appellant entered  this  country  on  15  June  2007.   He
             subsequently overstayed.


         14.  He made an application  for  leave  to  remain  on  article  8
             grounds by way of an  application  dated  24  May  2012.   The
             respondent rejected the application by way of a decision dated
             21 June 2012.


         15.  The appellant submitted a  second  application  for  leave  to
             remain on article 8 grounds on 6 July  2012.   The  respondent
             refused the application by way of a decision dated  23  August
             2013 and no in-country right of appeal was granted.


         16.  The appellant submitted a further  application  for  leave  to
             remain on article 8 grounds on 21 February 2014 and consequent
             to  his  separation  from   his   wife   he   served   further
             representations on 24 August 2015.  By way of the August  2015
             representations he relied upon his  length  of  residence  and
             ongoing child contact proceedings.  He further relied upon his
             children's integration into  their  local  community  and  his
             family life with his children.


         17.  The application was refused by way  of  a  decision  dated  22
             February 2018.


         Family History


         18.  The appellant is married to R. K., a Nigerian national.   They
             have three children:


                . D. O. (age 12)


                . S. O. (age 11)


                . E. O. (age 5)


         19.  The couple's daughter, G. O., was  stillborn  on  2  September
             2011.


         20.  The couple's relationship deteriorated, and  their  separation
             was marked with animosity.  Th children  continued  to  reside
             with their mother, who moved away  from  London.   The  Family
             Court at Oldham (District Judge Fox)  subsequently  considered
             the appellant's application for child arrangement  orders  and
             consequent to a final hearing ordered on 29 January 2016:


             "The children shall live with the mother


             There shall be no contact between father and the children


             Father must not attempt to remove the children from  the  care
             of the mother, nor from any other persons to whom she may have
             entrusted care.  For the  avoidance  of  doubt  this  includes
             their school or nursery."


         21.  In making the Order the court identified several  findings  of
         fact:


             "The court heard the evidence and considered record  (sic)  of
             police interviews of the children and saw a video of child  D.
             O.'s interview with the police.


             It is clear that there is insufficient evidence to  support  a
             suggestion that the child S. O. had been sexually assaulted by
             father.  Mother did not  pursue  that  allegation  before  the
             court.


             The court cannot however find  that  the  allegation  of  such
             abuse was made maliciously by mother.


             The court is satisfied that father has  subjected  the  mother
             and both children to physical abuse.


             Father's contention that mother had coached  the  children  to
             make untrue allegations is rejected.


             The court is satisfied that father poses a risk of  harm  both
             to mother and the children."


         22.  The appellant appealed this decision at an unspecified date in
             2018.  On a later, unspecified, date the  appeal  was  refused
             purportedly on the ground of delay.


         23.  On 11 January  2019  the  appellant  took  steps  to  file  an
             application for child arrangement orders under  section  8  of
             the Children Act 1989 with the Family Court at Manchester.  By
             way of a letter authored by his  family  solicitors,  David  &
             Vine,  Stratford,  London,  who  previously  represented   the
             appellant and his  wife  in  their  immigration  matters,  the
             appellant relies upon his 'certificate of  completion'  of  an
             anger management course and copies of counselling notes."

5.   At the hearing the judge observed that there  was  no  evidence  before
    him that the appellant sought and secured permission  from  the  Family
    Court to rely upon documents previously filed in proceedings before it.
     It was taken into account that the appellant had been  a  litigant  in
    person when he filed and served several of the  documents  but  he  had
    been represented for several months by those now instructed.  The judge
    ruled as follows at paragraph 26 of the decision

         "26. Save for the final order  of  District  Judge  Fox,  dated  29
             January 2016, which prohibits only the disclosure of the names
             of the persons involved in proceedings, not the order  itself,
             I indicated that I  was  minded  not  to  consider  any  other
             documents filed with the Tribunal that were before  the  Judge
             in the Family Court proceedings, though  I  confirmed  that  I
             would welcome any observations  from  the  representatives  on
             this matter.  Both  Mr.  Adebayo  and  Ms.  Lecointe  were  in
             agreement that such an approach should be adopted."

6.   The appellant relied  on  three  witness  statements  which  the  judge
    refers to in paragraph 27  of  his  decision.   In  the  third  of  his
    statements there was reference to an application for child  arrangement
    orders made in January 2019.  He claimed  that  assertions  as  to  his
    violence and abuse were false in his May 2018 statement and that he had
    lodged an appeal against the District Judge's decision in 2018.  He had
    attended an anger management course and had  sought  counselling.   The
    appellant's sister attended the hearing  and  gave  evidence  that  the
    appellant was of good character and she did  not  believe  any  of  the
    allegations  levelled  against  him.   In  submissions  the  Presenting
    Officer referred to the appellant's history of abuse and  violence  and
    the findings in the Family Court proceedings.   The  recent  filing  of
    Family Court proceedings could "be  identified  as  solely  seeking  to
    create a potential ground for this appeal..."

7.   Mr Adebayo asserted there was clear evidence  that  the  appellant  had
    lodged Family Court proceedings and the judge was required to allow the
    appeal in the light of RS (immigration/family court  liaison:  outcome)
    [2013] UKUT 00082 (IAC).  He told the judge that the  2018  appeal  had
    been dismissed on the grounds of being out of time.   The  judge  noted
    that this was not detailed in the appellant's witness statement.

8.   The judge considered the matter within the Rules  and  found  that  the
    appellant had not established that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the establishment of a private life if returned to Nigeria
    and he could not  meet  the  relevant  requirements  of  the  Rules  in
    relation to his children in paragraphs 57 to 61 of the decision.

9.   In relation to the Article 8 claim outside the Rules the judge,  having
    referred to Makhlouf v Secretary of State [2016] UKSC 59 (in a case  in
    which an appellant enjoys no contact with his children the  possibility
    of such a  relationship  developing  is  nonetheless  a  factor  to  be
    considered) found as follows:

         "64. The appellant places heavy reliance upon his recent initiation
             of Family Court proceedings.  Mr.  Adebayo  submitted  that  a
             there is clear evidence that the appellant has  lodged  Family
             Court proceedings, I am required to allow the  appeal  and  he
             relied upon RS (Immigration/family court liaison: outcome)  as
             authority  for  this  proposition.   I  do  not  accept   this
             submission, as the guidance in RS directs that the  First-tier
             Tribunal establish whether there is a  realistic  prospect  of
             the Family Court making a decision that will have  a  material
             impact on the relationship between  a  child  and  the  parent
             facing immigration measures such as removal.  The  requirement
             that there be a realistic prospect establishes that the simple
             existence of proceeding is not by itself determinative of  the
             matter.  When giving guidance the Upper Tribunal was clear  in
             enunciating  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  required  to
             consider  (a)  the  outcome   of   the   contemplated   family
             proceedings is  likely  to  be  material  to  the  immigration
             decision; (b) there are compelling public interest reasons  to
             remove the appellant from the United Kingdom  irrespective  of
             the outcome of the family proceedings or the best interest  of
             a child; (c) there is any reason to believe  that  the  family
             proceedings have been instituted by the appellant to delay  or
             frustrate removal and not to promote a  child's  welfare.   In
             assessing the above questions, it is  necessary  to  consider:
             the degree of the appellant's previous interest in and contact
             with the child, the timing  of  contact  proceedings  and  the
             commitment  with  which  they  had  been  progressed,  when  a
             decision was likely to be  reached,  and  what  materials  are
             already available to identify pointers to  where  the  child's
             welfare lay.  This approach  was  approved  by  the  Court  of
             Appeal in Mohan v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             [2012] EWCA Civ 1363; [2013] 1 WLR 922.


         65.  My starting point is the decision of District Judge Fox, which
             is clear in terms that the appellant subjected his former wife
             and children to abuse whilst the family resided  together  and
             that the levels of abuse were such that the appellant  is  not
             permitted to enjoy contact with his  children.   The  District
             Judge specifically found that the appellant posed  a  risk  of
             harm to both mother and children.  The appellant  has  enjoyed
             no contact with his children since around  2015  and  District
             Judge Fox's order has been in place  since  January  2016.   I
             note the appellant's reliance upon his not having  broken  the
             terms of the order, but this is a  neutral  factor  as  he  is
             required to abide by such terms.


         66.  I find that the appellant has endeavoured  to  keep  from  the
             Tribunal the date of when he  filed  his  appeal  against  the
             District Judge's decision.  He has failed to detail  the  date
             in his witness statement or to produce relevant  documentation
             from the Court.  I find that he has done so because  he  seeks
             to hide the fact that it was the respondent's refusal  of  his
             application for leave to remain in February 2018 that  spurred
             his efforts to resurrect his earlier  application  for  family
             arrangement orders.  I observe that in his grounds  of  appeal
             to the First-tier Tribunal the appellant detailed:  'I  wasn't
             able [to] appeal the decision as much as I tried at the  time,
             due to the toll the case and false allegations had had  on  me
             mentally and physically.'  This strongly suggests that he  had
             not filed an appeal against District Judge Fox's  decision  at
             this point in time.  I therefore find, on  balance,  that  the
             appellant only  initiated  his  appeal  against  the  District
             Judge's decision consequent to his filing his  appeal  against
             the  respondent's  decision  with  this  Tribunal.    I   have
             considered the explanation  for  not  appealing  the  decision
             sooner, which is presented by the appellant  in  very  general
             terms and not supported by medical evidence,  and  I  find  on
             balance that the appellant possessed no interest in  appealing
             the decision until he became aware that his  strongest  chance
             of staying in this country was through enjoying  contact  with
             his children.


         67.  The appellant places  significant  reliance  upon  his  recent
             initiation of a new application for child arrangement  orders,
             which he  describes  in  his  statement  as  enjoying  a  good
             prospect of success.  He further asserts: 'I contend that  the
             respondent's reasons for refusal is unreasonable.  In view  of
             the fact that I have put before the  respondent  the  relevant
             facts and evidence of my relentless effort  to  pursue  direct
             contact with my children which was only delayed whilst  I  was
             waiting for  further  advice  from  Counsel.   Notwithstanding
             this, the respondent cannot claim to be unaware of my parental
             relationship with my children.'   I  observe  that  though  he
             describes his  efforts  to  secure  direct  contact  as  being
             'relentless', the appellant has failed not only to detail when
             he filed his appeal  but  also  to  acknowledge  that  it  was
             refused, therefore denying the  Tribunal  the  opportunity  to
             consider the existence of delay between the  refusal  and  the
             filing of the new application on 14 January  2019.   The  fact
             that the appeal was dismissed was  only  acknowledged  by  Mr.
             Adebayo during the course of his submissions.  I find that the
             approach adopted by  the  appellant  is  consistent  with  his
             predisposition to seek to manipulate and obfuscate,  which  is
             further detailed below."

10.  In paragraph 68 of the decision the judge deals  with  the  appellant's
    claim to have attended an  anger  management  course.   He  raised  his
    concern as to the lack of evidence  on  this  matter  with  Mr  Adebayo
    during the course of his submissions but records that Mr  Adebayo  "did
    not apply to recall the appellant to address my  concerns."  The  judge
    observes that the usual meaning of "attended" is  to  be  present  at".
    The judge took "judicial note" of the fact that the courses attended by
    the appellant were online courses  which  concluded  with  a  multiple-
    choice test before a diploma was printed at  home  for  the  successful
    applicant.  The judge was concerned that the appellant  was  presenting
    his diploma as one that  had  been  secured  upon  attending  a  course
    relating to anger management  and  he  had  sought  "manipulatively  to
    project that he has attended upon a detailed and rigorous  professional
    course..."  The judge found it  was  not  a  suitable  course  for  the
    appellant in seeking to address the concerns that had been raised  over
    time as to  his  emotional  state  and  his  management  of  anger  and
    aggression.  The judge took into account the fact  that  the  appellant
    had  commenced  counselling  after  having  received  the  respondent's
    decision letter.  While he accepted the counsellor's qualifications she
    was reliant upon the appellant providing frank and truthful details  as
    to his history.  He noted that the appellant maintained  his  innocence
    as to the allegations of violence and abuse and that  he  continued  to
    minimise his behaviour.  In paragraph 70  of  his  decision  the  judge
    refers to the appellant's  filing  one  page  of  his  bank  statements
    concerning payments of �50 to his former wife for maintenance.  He  was
    not satisfied for the reasons given in paragraph  70  of  his  decision
    that full disclosure had been made.  For reasons given in paragraph  71
    the judge found that he  could  place  only  limited  weight  upon  the
    evidence given by the appellant's sister.

11.  The judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  been  "relentless  in
    pursuing direct contact" with his children but had solely  done  so  to
    aid his focussed efforts to remain in the UK. The decision continues as
    follows:

         "72. On the evidence presented, I do not accept that the  appellant
             has been relentless in pursuing direct  contact.   Rather,  he
             has sought such contact in recent  times  solely  to  aid  his
             focussed efforts to remain in this country.  I find  that  the
             late filing of the recent  Family  Court  application,  itself
             reliant upon an online anger  management  course  and  therapy
             sessions that the appellant did not undertake in  good  faith,
             is simply a means of seeking to delay or prevent his  removal.
             I find, to the required standard, that the application has not
             been made to promote his children's welfare.  He has expressly
             stated that he maintains his innocence as  to  allegations  of
             violence and physical abuse towards his former wife and child,
             he exhibits no insight as to the  effect  such  behaviour  has
             upon his former wife and children  and  both  his  grounds  of
             appeal and his statement are consistent in the appellant being
             self-absorbed as to what is said about him rather than how his
             actions impact adversely upon others.  On its face, the recent
             Family Court application possesses very little, if any, merit,
             as I find to the  requisite  standard  that  the  concerns  of
             District Judge Fox as to the appellant posing a  risk  to  his
             former wife and children remain the same early  in  2019.   In
             such circumstances, I find that there  are  compelling  public
             interest reasons to  remove  the  appellant  from  the  United
             Kingdom irrespective of the outcome of the family  proceedings
             because the evidence provided does not arguably establish that
             it is in the best interests of his children to resume  contact
             with him.  He is a manipulative, self-absorbed man who poses a
             physical risk to his children, whom he primarily identifies as
             the most effective means of his being able to remain  in  this
             country.


         73.  As for private life rights, the respondent notes by way of his
             decision letter that the appellant had  been  granted  limited
             entry to this country as a student and so was aware  upon  his
             entry into this country  that  he  only  enjoyed  entry  on  a
             temporary basis.  It is further observed:  'It  is  considered
             that any private life that you  have  established  in  the  UK
             following the expiry of leave has been done  so  in  the  full
             knowledge that your immigration status was precarious and that
             you had no permission to be in the UK.'  Further, it is  noted
             within the decision letter:  'You  have  been  resourceful  in
             obtaining  accommodation  and  financial  support  in  the  UK
             despite having no permission to be here and no  permission  to
             work following the expiry of your visa  on  31  October  2009.
             You have provided no compelling reasons as to why you would be
             unable to obtain accommodation and employment  in  Nigeria  or
             why any financial support you are receiving in  the  UK  could
             not continue from abroad.'

12.   Having  referred  to  sections  117A  and  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  relevant  authorities  the  judge
    concluded as follows:

         "79. Mr.  Adebayo  did  not  seek  to  rely  upon  the  appellant's
             relationship with his sister, N.A., or her  children,  in  his
             submissions.   No  evidence  has  been  presented  as  to  any
             dependency between the  siblings  and  the  present  financial
             reliance arises solely because the appellant resides with  his
             sister.  The level of dependency is not such as to establish a
             dependency over and  above  that  of  normal  emotional  ties:
             Kugathas.


         80.  The appellant enjoyed leave to remain between  2007  and  2009
             and since this time he has been an overstayer.  Little  weight
             is therefore to  be  given  to  such  private  life:  sections
             117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act.  The Supreme Court  confirmed
             in Rhuppiah v. Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2018] UKSC 58; [2018] 1WLR 5536, at [49] that a small  degree
             of flexibility is built into the concept  of  'little  weight'
             and so applicants who  rely  upon  their  private  life  under
             article 8 can occasionally succeed.   I  observe  as  positive
             factors that the appellant speaks English and resides with his
             sister.  However, I further observe that he received treatment
             for glaucoma from the NHS whilst he  was  an  overstayer,  has
             abused his wife and children, has provided no evidence  as  to
             integration within his community beyond his sister's  evidence
             and has sought to hide the true nature as to how he spends his
             days and weeks.


         81.  Whilst the appellant may desire to visit G.O.'s grave, and his
             evidence on this issue is  general  in  nature,  providing  no
             detail as to  the  regularity  of  his  attendance  whilst  he
             resides in London, this alone is not  a  determinative  factor
             when  assessing  article  8.   Mr  Adebayo  did  not  draw  my
             attention  to  any  authority  establishing  that  article   8
             establishes a right to visit a grave and I  am  not  persuaded
             that there is existing a general right to visit  a  grave  and
             mourn on one's own or with family members or  that  there  are
             any particular facts, such as  strong  personal  relationships
             and/or powerful cultural norms, that create the right in  this
             case.  The option remains for the appellant to seek  to  enter
             this country on occasion to visit the grave, but I do not find
             that it is a matter that reduces the public  interest  in  the
             appellant's removal.


         82.  Being mindful as  to  the  public  interest,  I  find  to  the
             required standard that in such  circumstances  the  respondent
             has established that his decision to remove the  appellant  is
             proportionate and lawful in the circumstances  and  would  not
             result in a disproportionate breach of the appellant's article
             8 rights."

13.  There was an application for permission  to  appeal.   The  application
    was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but permission  was  granted  by
    the Upper Tribunal on 9 May  2019  on  the  basis  that  it  was  "just
    arguable" that the judge had erred in referring to the  order  made  by
    the Family Court without first obtaining  the  consent  of  the  Family
    Court.

14.  It was also considered arguable that the judge had erred  in  referring
    to the internet for information about the anger management  course  the
    appellant had attended.

15.  Mr Adebayo relied on the grounds although some as he  acknowledged  had
    been identified by the Upper Tribunal as being  "weaker  than  others".
    The judge had indulged in post-hearing internet  research  contrary  to
    the authority of e.g. Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00015.  This was very unwise
    given there was no opportunity to respond to his  findings.   The  fact
    that the  appellant  had  completed  an  anger  management  course  was
    crucial.

16.  He acknowledged that the point which  had  been  made  in  paragraph  7
    about the disclosure of documents to third parties without an order  of
    the Family Court judge was a weaker point since the parties had  agreed
    the procedure.  The appellant had lodged the appeal in person  and  had
    not realised that disclosure of documents was not allowed.

17.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the evidence considered  by  the  First-tier
    Judge had been agreed between the parties and there had been  no  error
    in the judge's approach.  The judge had directed himself  appropriately
    in paragraphs 24 to 26 of the decision.  The judge had only referred to
    the order made.

18.  In relation  to  the  recent  lodging  of  proceedings  the  judge  was
    entitled to  take  into  account  the  prospects  of  success  and  the
    submission that the appellant had gained insight into his behaviour  by
    attending  an  anger  management  course  (see  paragraph  40  of   the
    decision).  It did  not  appear  from  paragraph  41  that  the  appeal
    proceedings were live.  Mr Whitwell referred to Mohan  v  Secretary  of
    State [2012] EWCA Civ 1363 at paragraph 18 in relation to the  guidance
    provided by the Tribunal in RS in particular paragraph 43(i):  "is  the
    outcome of the contemplated family proceedings likely to be material to
    the immigration decision?"

19.  Further in paragraph 43(ii) the guidance stated: are  there  compelling
    public interest reasons to exclude the claimant from the United Kingdom
    irrespective of the outcome of  the  family  proceedings  or  the  best
    interests of the child?"  There plainly were as the judge had found  in
    paragraph 65 of the decision.  The judge had found in paragraph 66 that
    the appellant possessed no interest in appealing the decision until  he
    became aware that his strongest chance of staying in  the  country  was
    through enjoying contact with his children.  The judge had  raised  his
    concerns about the anger management  course  with  Mr  Adebayo  at  the
    hearing as appeared from paragraph 68 of the decision  but  Mr  Adebayo
    did not apply to recall the appellant.

20.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me.  I can only  interfere
    with the decision of the First-tier Judge if it was  materially  flawed
    in law.

21.  The first of the arguments advanced was acknowledged to be  the  weaker
    of the two since the parties had consented to the proposal of the judge
    to consider just the court order.   The  judge  did  not  consider  the
    documentary evidence filed before  the  Family  Court  but  simply  the
    order.  As the parties were in agreement with that course I cannot  see
    that the judge materially erred in proceeding as agreed.  I  note  that
    there had been ample time prior to  the  hearing  for  the  appellant's
    representatives to get the case in order and the judge was not assisted
    by the way the case has been presented to him.

22.  The judge was confronted  with  a  large  amount  of  evidence  at  the
    hearing and it was reasonable for him to deal with  the  issue  of  the
    anger management course in the way  that  he  did.   He  had  expressly
    raised his concerns as Mr Whitwell points out at the  hearing  and  the
    appellant had been given the opportunity to address those concerns  but
    that opportunity had not been taken.  In the circumstances of this case
    I do not find that it was a  material  error  for  the  judge  to  seek
    further information.  I note that in paragraph 9  of  the  grounds  the
    assertion was made that the First-tier Judge "had a  clear  opportunity
    to ask the appellant the necessary questions on the  nature,  structure
    and the content of the said courses."   It  is  quite  clear  that  the
    argument is without merit for the  reasons  given  by  Mr  Whitwell  by
    reference to paragraph 68 of the judge's decision.  For the  reasons  I
    have given I am not satisfied that the grounds raise a  material  error
    of law in the judge's decision.

23.  This appeal is dismissed and the appeal  of  the  First-tier  Judge  is
    confirmed.  The First-tier Judge made an anonymity order in  this  case
    which it is appropriate to continue.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date: 10 June 2019

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

