
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/06793/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13th October 2017                     |  On 18th October 2017              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     SF
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Thornhill of Thornhills Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Ransley of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 12th January 2017.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born 26th November  1967.
    She applied for leave to remain in the UK based upon family and private
    life, and this application was refused on 24th February 2016.

 3. The appeal was heard by the FtT on 6th January 2017 and dismissed.  The
    FtT considered that the Appellant had three children, born 31st October
    1997, 23rd September 2000, and 4th April 2003, who had been in  the  UK
    since 9th July 2008.  The application for leave to remain was  made  on
    27th October 2015, and therefore  the  children  had  been  continually
    resident in the UK for  in  excess  of  seven  years  at  the  date  of
    application.

 4. The FtT considered paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  and  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.  The  FtT  concluded
    that it would be reasonable, and the  appeal  was  dismissed,  the  FtT
    finding that the removal of the Appellant and her children from the  UK
    would not breach Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    relying upon three grounds which are summarised below.

 6. Firstly, it was contended that the FtT had failed  to  properly  follow
    and apply the guidance in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.   The  FtT
    had not recognised that the best interests  of  the  children  had  the
    status of a primary consideration.

 7. Secondly, it was contended that the FtT had made a mistake of  fact  at
    paragraph 35 in stating that the eldest daughter had indicated  in  her
    witness statement that she came from a wealthy  family.  This  had  not
    been stated in the witness statement, and therefore it was argued  that
    the FtT had erred because there was no evidential basis for  concluding
    that if returned to Pakistan the  children  would  attend  the  English
    medium school that had been attended  prior  to  their  departure  from
    Pakistan.

 8. Thirdly, it was contended that the FtT had erred in finding that  there
    was no evidence to show that the oldest child (who will be 20 years  of
    age on 27th October 2017) would be forced  into  an  arranged  marriage
    against her wishes.  It was contended that the  FtT  had  not  provided
    adequate reasoning for this finding, save that  the  eldest  child  had
    indicated in her witness statement that she had  minimal  contact  with
    her family in Pakistan.  It was contended that in the witness statement
    it had been stated that she had no contact with her father's family  in
    Pakistan but intermittent contact with her maternal  grandparents,  and
    therefore it was contended that there was evidence which supported  her
    claim that she would be coerced into an unwanted arranged marriage upon
    return to Pakistan.

 9. In conclusion it was submitted that the FtT  had  erred  in  law,  when
    carrying out a fact-sensitive balancing exercise, and had  given  undue
    weight to the perceived countervailing factors which primarily  concern
    the Appellant's poor immigration history.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hodgkinson of the FtT in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  The grounds argue that the judge erred as follows:  Ground  1,
             in failing  to  recognise  that  the  best  interests  of  the
             Appellant's children are a primary consideration; Ground 2, at
             [35]  of  her  decision,  in  wrongly  concluding   that   the
             Appellant's family was wealthy,  which  then  resulted  in  an
             erroneous conclusion that  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to
             arrange for her children to  re-attend  a  private  school  in
             Pakistan, such error being material; Ground  3,  at  [49],  in
             concluding, contrary  to  the  evidence,  that  there  was  no
             evidence that the Appellant's daughter,  M,  might  be  forced
             into an arranged marriage against her wishes.

         3.   Ground  1  has  arguable  merit.   Although  at  [27]  of  her
             decision, the judge referred to the decision in MA  (Pakistan)
             [2016] EWCA Civ 705 as indicating that the best  interests  of
             children are a primary consideration, it is far from  evident,
             from  reading  the  judge's  subsequent  reasoning,  that  she
             actually treated those interests as such.  Ground 2  also  has
             arguable merit.  It is correct that  M's  statement  makes  no
             reference  to  the  family  being  wealthy,  contrary  to  the
             indication of the judge at [35] of her decision.  For  reasons
             stated in the ground, Ground 3 similarly has  arguable  merit.
             Permission is granted on all grounds".

11. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary  it  was  contended  that  the  FtT  directed  itself
    appropriately and acknowledged that the children had been in the UK for
    seven years.  The FtT had adequately addressed the reasonableness  test
    as set out at paragraph 38.  The  FtT  also  had  regard  to  the  best
    interests of the children and factors in support of them  remaining  in
    the UK.

12. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

Submissions

13. At the  hearing  Mr  Thornhill  relied  upon  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission had been granted.  It was submitted that  although  the  FtT
    had considered the best interests of the children,  between  paragraphs
    27 and 37, the FtT had erred by not reaching a conclusion  as  to  what
    was in the best interests of the children.   The  FtT  had  not  stated
    whether the best interests of the children would be to remain in the UK
    or return to Pakistan.  Mr Thornhill submitted that this amounted to  a
    material error of law.

14. In addition, it was submitted that the FtT had made mistakes of fact as
    outlined in the grounds, in the conclusions at paragraphs 35 and 49.

15. Mr McVeety relied upon the rule 24 response.  It was submitted that the
    FtT had properly considered the best interests  of  the  children,  and
    appreciated  that  the  issue   of   reasonableness   is   a   separate
    consideration.  It was contended that there was no error,  as  the  FtT
    had considered  the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
    consideration, and had then gone on to consider  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for them to leave the UK.

16. It was accepted that there was a mistake of fact at paragraph 35 by the
    FtT, as the witness had not stated in her statement that she came  from
    a wealthy family.  She had, however, attended an English medium school.

17. With reference to paragraph 49, Mr McVeety submitted that the  evidence
    gave no indication that if the witness had contact  with  her  maternal
    grandparents, that they would  try  and  force  her  into  an  arranged
    marriage.  Mr McVeety argued that there was no material  error  of  law
    and the decision of the FtT should stand.

18. By way of response, Mr Thornhill submitted that the eldest daughter had
    only attended an English medium school in Pakistan when she lived  with
    her father, and her mother was now estranged from her father and  would
    have to go to her own parents.  The FtT was therefore wrong  to  assume
    that she would go to an English medium school.

19. Mr Thornhill relied upon paragraph 57 of MA (Pakistan) which emphasised
    that there must be a full and careful assessment of the best  interests
    of a child.  Mr Thornhill's point was that when  considering  the  best
    interests of a child, a conclusion must be reached and a failure to  do
    so is a material error of law.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. It is common ground that the best interests of a child  are  a  primary
    consideration.  All three of the Appellant's children in  the  UK  were
    under 18 when the application  for leave to remain was  made,  although
    the eldest  daughter  reached  the  age  of  18  four  days  after  the
    application was made.

22. The FtT did consider the best interests of the children  as  a  primary
    consideration.  The FtT correctly  summarised  the  legal  position  at
    paragraph 28, appreciating that the  best  interests  consideration  is
    separate from consideration of the reasonableness test, and that it may
    be the case that it would be in the best interests of a child to remain
    in the UK, but it may still be reasonable for that child to  return  to
    their home country with their parent.

23. The  best  interests  consideration  commences  at  paragraph  29,  and
    concludes at paragraph 37.  In my  view  there  has  been  an  adequate
    consideration of the best interests of the children.  I do  not  accept
    that no conclusion was reached by the FtT and paragraph 37 is  set  out
    below;

         "37. I give due weight to the fact that the children meet the seven
             year  residence  rule,  they  have  been  living  in  the   UK
             continuously since entering on a six month visit visa  on  9th
             July 2008.  I accept that the children  have  integrated  into
             the education system in this country; they  wish  to  continue
             their education here.  I also accept that  the  children  have
             made friends in this country during their  stay.   All  things
             being equal it might be possible to argue that it  is  in  the
             best interests of the children to be allowed to continue their
             education and private life here.  However, it is material that
             the children  are  nationals  of  Pakistan  who  can  have  no
             entitlement to state funded education in the UK".

24. My view, although I accept that the FtT could have been more  specific,
    is that it is arguably in the best interests of the children to  remain
    in the UK.

25. My view is that this was the conclusion reached by the FtT, because  if
    the FtT considered that the best interests of the children would be  to
    return  to  Pakistan,  the  FtT   would   not   have   considered   the
    reasonableness issue at such length.   The  FtT  goes  on  to  consider
    reasonableness  commencing  at  paragraph  38  and   continuing   until
    paragraph 50.  If the FtT conclusion on best interests of the  children
    would be to return to Pakistan, the reasonableness test would have been
    very brief.

26. I therefore reject the contention that the best interests consideration
    discloses a material error of law.

27. I specifically considered paragraph 57 of MA (Pakistan) in which it  is
    stated inter alia,

         "In my judgment all Lord Hodge was saying is that it is  vital  for
         the court to have made a full and careful assessment  of  the  best
         interests of  the  child  before  any  balancing  exercise  can  be
         undertaken.  If that is not done  there  is  a  danger  that  those
         interests will be overridden simply because their full significance
         has not been appreciated".

28. My reading of the FtT decision, is  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children would be served by remaining in the UK, but the FtT  then  had
    to go on and consider reasonableness in line with the  guidance  in  MA
    (Pakistan).

29. The FtT appreciated (paragraph 27) "strong reasons need to be given  to
    refuse leave to remain for children who have lived in  the  UK  for  at
    least seven years due to the foreseeable disruption  to  their  private
    life formed in the UK".  The FtT appreciated  that  the  reasonableness
    test does not involve a narrow approach taking into  account  only  the
    interests of the child, but  involves  a  wider  approach  taking  into
    account the public interest in enforcing effective immigration control,
    and the immigration history of a parent if relevant.

30. My view is that there is no material error of law in the  treatment  of
    the FtT of the best interests of the children, and in  considering  the
    reasonableness of removal, in accordance  with  the  guidelines  in  MA
    (Pakistan).

31. Turning to the second ground of appeal, the FtT made a mistake of  fact
    at paragraph 35 in referring to  a  wealthy  family.   That  is  not  a
    material error.  The eldest daughter who  made  the  witness  statement
    confirmed that she had attended an English medium school for five years
    before leaving Pakistan.  It was open to the judge on the  evidence  to
    find the option of an English  medium  school  would  be  available  in
    Pakistan.

32. The third ground discloses no material error.   Having  considered  the
    evidence before the FtT, it is my view that it was open to the  FtT  to
    find no real risk of the eldest daughter being forced to enter into  an
    arranged marriage in Pakistan.

33. The grounds upon which permission to appeal were  granted,  disclose  a
    disagreement with the conclusions  reached  by  the  FtT,  but  do  not
    disclose a material error of law.   The  FtT  considered  all  material
    evidence, applied the correct legal principles, and reached conclusions
    that could not be said  to  be  irrational  or  perverse.   Sustainable
    reasons for findings were provided, and therefore as no material  error
    of law is disclosed, the decision of the FtT stands and the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose an error of law.  The decision  of
the FtT stands and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction.  I continue that direction pursuant  to
rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  because  the
appeal involves consideration of the best interests of minors.   Unless  and
until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify her or any member of her family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date         16th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date         16th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
