
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/06826/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th October 2018                          |On 16th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Joan Allet Burke Walker
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M West, Counsel instructed by Thomas Andrew &
                    Daodu Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Shore to allow the appeal of  Joan  Allet  Burke  Walker  against
    refusal of her private and family life claim with a view  to  obtaining
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. I shall refer to  the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal; that is to say, to the Secretary of State as  the  Respondent
    and to Joan Walker as the Appellant.

 3. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in  2002.   She  is  currently
    living with her daughter and her daughter's child.  Her claim was based
    on both private and family life.  Her private life claim was  based  on
    her assertion that she no longer had social, cultural or family ties to
    Jamaica due to the length of time that had elapsed since she last lived
    there.  Her family life claim was based very much on the fact that  her
    daughter relies upon her to take care  of  her  granddaughter.  At  the
    relevant time, the Appellant's granddaughter was a baby. The  financial
    position of the Appellant's daughter was that she had an army  pension,
    together with state benefits  that  were  intended  to  assist  her  in
    financially supporting her baby daughter.

 4. The judge found that  neither  the  Appellant  nor  her  daughter  were
    credible witnesses, each of them having given evidence at the  hearing.
    That is stated in unqualified terms in the first sentence of  paragraph
    51 of the decision, to which I shall return.

 5. At paragraph 56 the judge made the following findings of fact:

         1.   The Appellant has established a family life with her  daughter
             and granddaughter;

         2.   she assists with the care of her daughter and granddaughter;

         3.   she has not met the standard of proof required  to  show  that
             she has no family or friends in Jamaica as she and the Sponsor
             were not credible witnesses;

         4.   she has not met the required standard of proof  to  show  that
             she has no property or assets in Jamaica;

         5.   she has not shown the required standard of proof that she  has
             lost ties with Jamaican culture;

         6.   she has exaggerated the effect of her medical conditions; and

         7.   she has a close and loving relationship with her daughter  and
             her granddaughter.

 6. Based on those findings, the judge went on to conduct an assessment  of
    the Appellant's position under Article 8.  Having repeated his findings
    of fact at paragraph 65 (as set  out  above)  the  judge  continued  as
    follows at paragraph 67 -

         66.  I find that to refuse the  Appellant  leave  to  remain  would
             amount to an interference by the Respondent with the  exercise
             of her right to respect for her private  and  family  life  of
             such gravity to engage  the  operation  of  Article  8.   Such
             interference may have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as  to
             potentially engage the operation of Article 8 because  of  the
             effect on her, her daughter and  her  granddaughter.   I  find
             that such interference is in accordance with  the  law.   Such
             interference is not necessary in a democratic society  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom,  as
             I have made a finding the Appellant would not be a  burden  on
             taxpayers.

         67.  Such interference in this case is  not  proportionate  to  the
             legitimate public end  that  the  Respondent  was  seeking  to
             achieve.  The balance that I undertook was the public interest
             in denial of leave to remain to which I have given substantial
             weight; the overstaying of the Appellant; and  the  fact  that
             her  private  life  has  mostly  been  established  when   her
             immigration status  was  precarious.   Against  this,  I  have
             considered the extent of the private life established  by  the
             Appellant  and  the  effect  on  her  and  her  daughter   and
             granddaughter of the decision to refuse leave  to  remain.   I
             find the balance tilts in favour of  the  Claimant  in  making
             this  decision.   I  considered  the  best  interests  of  the
             Appellant's granddaughter under Section 55 and  consider  that
             her best interests are served by her grandmother remaining  in
             the United Kingdom to contribute to her care.  I find that the
             decision appealed against would cause the United Kingdom to be
             in breach of its obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
             because the Appellant has shown exceptional  circumstances  as
             set out in my findings  above  and  refusal  would  result  in
             unjustifiably harsh consequences for the Appellant  such  that
             refusal of her application would not be proportionate.

 7. The Grounds of Appeal by the Secretary of State can  be  summarised  as
    follows:

      1. The judge failed to explain why he found that there was family life
         between the Appellant and her adult  daughter  given  the  findings
         concerning their complete lack of credibility.




      2. Having acknowledged that the Appellant could not meet  the  private
         life requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE,  the  judge  nevertheless
         proceeded to carry out a proportionality assessment on the basis of
         his finding (as  criticised  in  ground  1,  above)  that  she  had
         established  family  life.   The  judge  moreover  refers  to   the
         Appellant having shown "exceptional circumstances", but it  is  not
         at all clear from the decision what those circumstances are said to
         be.

 8. The difficulty I have with the judge's decision  stems  from  the  fact
    that it is based upon mixed credibility findings  that  are  not  fully
    explained.  It is of course possible for a judge to accept parts  of  a
    witness' evidence whilst rejecting  others.   But  it  is  a  difficult
    exercise, and one that needs to be carefully reasoned. At paragraph 51,
    the judge unequivocally stated that the Appellant and Sponsor were  not
    credible witnesses -

         I found the Appellant and  Sponsor  were  not  credible  witnesses.
         Their evidence was very self-serving and varied  depending  on  the
         point they wished to make.  For  example,  the  Appellant  stressed
         that she had multiple health issues when it suited her to emphasise
         the difficulty she would have with her health if removed, but  then
         said that she was the sole carer of an 18-month-old baby.   I  find
         that both cannot have been accurate.  Indeed, they weren't, as  the
         evidence then emerged that the Appellant and Sponsor shared care of
         the child and the household chores in direct contradiction  of  the
         written evidence. [Emphasis added]

    It would thus seem to follow from  these  findings  that  nothing  that
    either the Appellant or her daughter had told the judge about the level
    of care that the Appellant provided  for  her  granddaughter  could  be
    relied upon as a basis for making positive  findings  in  that  regard.
    Certainly, this is the logic that appears to lie  behind  the  negative
    credibility findings at sub-paragraphs 3 to 6 of paragraph  56  of  the
    decision (see paragraph 5, above).  What  the  judge  did  not  explain
    however  was  why,  given  the  contradictory  and  mutually  exclusive
    accounts the appellant had given as to  her  role  in  caring  for  her
    granddaughter, he nevertheless  accepted  that  she  provided  valuable
    assistance in that regard.

 9. Given the adverse credibility findings  that  the  judge  had  made  in
    respect of the Appellant and her daughter,  the  basis  upon  which  he
    found 'family life' to have been established is also  far  from  clear.
    As between the Appellant and her  adult  daughter,  it  was  of  course
    necessary for the Appellant to adduce credible evidence  of  dependency
    that was over and above the normal emotional ties that typically  exist
    between adult family members.  One possibility was that  the  appellant
    could establish financial dependency upon her daughter. However, at  no
    point (other than  possibly  by  way  of  implication  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 66) does the judge make a specific finding that the Appellant
    is financially dependent on her daughter.  The  other  possibility  was
    that the Appellant's daughter was dependent upon her to  care  for  her
    infant child.  However, as explained in  the  previous  paragraph,  the
    judge's reasoning in this regard is  highly  unsatisfactory.  Moreover,
    the judge appeared to acknowledge the difficulty faced by the Appellant
    in establishing the existence of family life, based as it was upon  her
    own discredited evidence: "I  find  that  the  Appellant,  despite  the
    unreliability of her evidence, has established family  life"  [Emphasis
    added]. Unfortunately, the judge did not explain the basis  upon  which
    he  was  able  to  find  that  family   life   had   been   established
    notwithstanding the  unreliability  of  the  evidence  relied  upon  to
    support this  claim.  Furthermore,  the  judge  did  not  identify  the
    "exceptional circumstances" to which he referred at  paragraph  67  and
    upon which he relied for consideration of the Appellant's claim outside
    the Immigration Rules.  I have thus  concluded  that  the  two  grounds
    raised by the Secretary of State are made out and that the  judge  made
    an error of law on both counts.

10. With great skill and tenacity, Mr West sought to persuade me that these
    errors of law were not material to the outcome of the appeal, which  he
    argued was in any event inevitable. I  disagree.  The  outcome  of  the
    appeal plainly turned upon particular findings  of  fact  that  I  have
    found wanting from the judge's decision.

11. Mr Lindsay, on the other hand,  invited  me  to  preserve  the  judge's
    adverse credibility  findings  and  to  set  aside  only  the  positive
    findings that the judge had made in  relation  to  family  life.   That
    seems to me to be inconsistent with the very reasons that I have  given
    for finding that the judge has made a material error if kaw.  It  would
    have the effect of forcing any future decisionmaker  to  either  reject
    the claim in its entirety or  to  undertake  the  complicated  task  of
    making mixed credibility findings.  It therefore seems to me  that  the
    only sensible course would be to start again, thus allowing a judge (a)
    to accept or reject the appellant's evidence in its  entirety,  or  (b)
    (subject to giving good and sufficient reasons for doing so) to  accept
    parts of her  evidence  whilst  rejecting  others.   I  have  therefore
    decided to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  reheard
    afresh at Taylor House by any judge other than Judge Shore.



Notice of Decision

 1. The appeal is allowed.
 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.
 3. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  afresh
    (no findings of fact preserved) by any judge at Taylor House other than
    Judge Shore.

Signed                              Date: 29th October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly





