
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU066502015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2017                           |On 17 August 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                 DR H H STOREY, JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    Mr AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E McKenzie, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, has permission  to  challenge  the
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge  O'Brien  sent  on  15
    September 2016 dismissing his appeal against a  decision  made  by  the
    respondent  communicated  on  22  September  2015  refusing  to   grant
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residence.

2.   The appellant arrived in the UK on 1 June 2004 on a  student  visa.  He
    was granted extensions in this capacity.  On 2  October  2006,  he  was
    granted leave to remain until 31 October 2009.  On 29 October 2009,  he
    applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student. In response,
    the respondent sent a letter dated 19 November informing him  that  his
    "attempted application" had been rejected as invalid as he had used the
    wrong form. This letter contained what it said was the correct form.

3.   On 4 December 2009, the appellant applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student.  On 5  February  2010,  his  application  was
    rejected with no right of appeal.  On 19 February 2010, he applied  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student.   On  1  February  2011
    leave to remain was granted until 3 October 2011.  On 26  August  2010,
    he applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  This was
    rejected on 9  September  2010  whereupon  on  22  September  2011  the
    appellant applied for Tier 1 post-study leave to remain.  This  he  was
    granted until 25 October 2013.  On 11  October  2013,  he  applied  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  When this  was  refused
    on 6 November 2013 he lodged an appeal on 15 November 2013.   This  led
    to the respondent reconsidering his application on  9  April  2014  and
    then refusing it on 27 June 2014.  The appellant appealed  on  15  July
    2014.  On 27 October 2014, his appeal was dismissed  and  on  15  April
    2015 he was appeal rights exhausted.

4.   On 12 May 2015, the appellant applied  for  ILR.   When  refusing  this
    application  in  September  2015  the  respondent   stated   that   his
    immigration history confirmed that he had been in the  UK  without  any
    valid leave from 19 November 2009 until 31 January 2011 and that he had
    been without valid leave since 16 April 2015.  On  this  basis  he  was
    refused under paragraph  276B(i)(a)  and  276B(v)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Paragraph 276B provides:


         "Requirements for indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long
         residence in the United Kingdom


         276B.    The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite
                leave to remain on the  ground  of  long  residence  in  the
                United Kingdom are that:


                (i)(a) he has had  at  least  10  years'  continuous  lawful
                    residence in the United Kingdom.


                (ii)   having regard to the public  interest  there  are  no
                    reasons why it would be undesirable for him to be  given
                    indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of  long
                    residence, taking into account his:


                    (a)    age; and


                    (b)    strength of connections in  the  United  Kingdom;
                        and


                    (c)    personal history, including  character,  conduct,
                        associations and employment record; and


                    (d)    domestic circumstances; and


                    (e)    compassionate circumstances; and


                    (f)    any  representations  received  on  the  person's
                        behalf; and


                (iii)  the applicant does not fall  for  refusal  under  the
                    general grounds for refusal.


                (iv)   the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge
                    of the English language and sufficient  knowledge  about
                    life in the United Kingdom, in accordance with  Appendix
                    KoLL.


                (v)    the applicant must not be in  the  UK  in  breach  of
                    immigration laws except that any period  of  overstaying
                    for a period of 28 days or less will be disregarded,  as
                    will any period of overstaying between periods of  entry
                    clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain of up to 28
                    days  and  any  period  of   overstaying   pending   the
                    determination of an application made within that 28  day
                    period."


5.   The respondent also refused the appellant under the private and  family
    life provisions of the Rules  and  found  that  he  had  not  submitted
    details of any exceptional circumstances warranting a  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules.

6.   At the hearing before the FtT Judge the appellant submitted  that  when
    he applied for leave to remain on 29 October 2009 he still had leave to
    remain (valid until 31 October 2009).  When applying he  had  used  the
    form he downloaded from the Home Office website.   Not  long  after  he
    received a notification from the Home Office that he had completed  the
    wrong form.  The notification form enclosed what the Home  Office  said
    was the correct form and stated that they would use his application fee
    towards the resubmitted application.  He returned this form promptly on
    4  December  2009.   The  appellant  said  he  should  therefore   have
    benefitted from the provisions of paragraph 34C(b), 34I and 34Y of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 34I, we note, has been in force since  29
    February 2008 and remained in force at the relevant date. It provides:


         "34I.    Where an application or claim is made no more than 21 days
                after the date on  which  a  form  is  specified  under  the
                immigration rules and on a form that was permitted for  such
                application or claim immediately prior to the date  of  such
                specification, the application or claim shall be  deemed  to
                have been made on the specified form."


7.   In relation to his Article 8 circumstances, the appellant  stated  that
    his family comprised an 8 year old daughter and a 4 year old son,  both
    of whom had been born in the UK.  Although he and the children's mother
    were  no  longer  in  a  relationship,  they  shared   the   children's
    upbringing.  He was of no fixed abode but stayed with his wife  two  or
    three times a week and helped with the children.  He took the  children
    to school and brought them home when necessary.  He did  not  wish  his
    children to be removed to Nigeria.  He was  particularly  concerned  he
    would not be able to protect his daughter from FGM.

8.   As regards paragraph 276B, at paragraphs 45 - 49 the judge held:

         "45. The form sent to the Respondent by the Appellant states on the
             front page that it is specified for applications  made  on  or
             after 5 October 2009.  Therefore, had the Appellant  sent  his
             application on the day he downloaded the form in question from
             the Home Office  website,  his  application  would  have  been
             deemed to have been made on the  specified  form  pursuant  to
             paragraph 34I.   As  it  is,  the  application  was  correctly
             assessed to be invalid.


         46.  Had the Appellant made a renewed  application  immediately  on
             receipt of the Respondent's rejection dated 19 November  2009,
             it might well have been submitted  within  the  28-day  window
             provided by paragraph 276B(v).   Instead,  when  he  made  his
             application on the specified form  on  4  December  2009,  his
             continuous lawful residence was interrupted.   In  any  event,
             the application was refused because he only had �211 in  funds
             on the date of the application, and had not provided  evidence
             of sponsorship from a prescribed source.


         47.  The Appellant suggests today that  the  Respondent  eventually
             reviewed this decision under 'Pankina' and  granted  leave  to
             remain from until 3 October  2011;  however,  his  grounds  of
             appeal  assert  that  it  was  in  fact  the   February   2010
             application was  eventually  reconsidered.   The  GCID  record
             dated 3 September 2010, shows that the Appellant qualified for
             a 'Pankina' remedy because his bank statement showed a balance
             of �1,962.82 on 26 February 2010.  Thus, it  is  clear  to  me
             that the reconsideration must have  been  of  his  application
             made in February 2010, which was refused on 11 May 2010.


         48.  Therefore, even if I  were  to  accept  that  the  Appellant's
             presence in the United Kingdom  should  be  considered  lawful
             from the date on which leave ought to have been granted (which
             I take to be the date on which the application  was  refused),
             it remains the case that the Appellant was unlawfully  present
             in the United Kingdom from 1 November 2009 until 10 May 2010.


         49.   It  follows  that  the  Appellant  does   not   satisfy   the
             requirements of paragraph 276B."


9.   As regards the appellant's Article  8  circumstances,  the  judge  held
    that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  based  on  private
    life as set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) as "I heard no  evidence  of
    any significant obstacles to the appellant's integration  to  Nigeria".
    He noted that it was not argued that the appellant  could  qualify  for
    leave to remain under any of the categories prescribed in  Appendix  FM
    as "[h]is entire family is Nigerian with presently no lawful  basis  to
    remain in the UK".  He then turned to consider Article  8  outside  the
    Rules concluding at [52] - [55] as follows:

         "52. I am not persuaded that the  Appellant's  case  discloses  any
             compelling reasons to consider his Article  8  rights  outside
             the Rules.  None of his family have leave  to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom.  Although the Appellant's daughter  has  lived
             for 9 years since birth in the United Kingdom, she is Nigerian
             and could reasonably return with her  mother  and  brother  to
             Nigeria.  Certainly, I am unpersuaded that  she  would  be  at
             risk of female genital mutilation from persons unknown;  I  am
             not told of any extended family who would take any interest in
             the  family,  let  alone  seek  to  mutilate  the  Appellant's
             daughter.  I have heard no evidence  that  moving  with  their
             mother to Nigeria would be contrary  to  either  child's  best
             interests.


         53.  Even if  it  were  appropriate  to  consider  the  Appellant's
             Article 8 rights outside the Rules, I remind myself  that  the
             maintenance of immigration controls is in the public interest.
              It is relevant that, contrary to his submissions  on  appeal,
             the Appellant has never  qualified  for  indefinite  leave  to
             remain in the United Kingdom.


         54.  Therefore, the Appellant's removal would be in accordance with
             the law and in furtherance of a  legitimate  aim.   I  further
             remind  myself  that  I  must  place  little  weight  on   the
             Appellant's private life in the United Kingdom, given that his
             presence here has been precarious for much  of  the  time  and
             unlawful for other shorter periods.  Similarly, I place little
             weight on the Appellant's  family's  private  lives  and  also
             their combined family life.


         55.  Ultimately, the Appellant's and his family's right to  respect
             of private and life is significantly outweighed by the  public
             interest.  Accordingly, this  appeal  is  dismissed  on  human
             rights grounds."

10.  The appellant's grounds of appeal were lengthy but in essence  asserted
    that (1) the respondent was wrong to say he did not  have  valid  leave
    between the periods 19 November 2009 -31 January 2011 as he was covered
    by Section 3C leave from 31 October 2009 when his leave  expired  until
    leave was granted to him on 2 February 2011; (2) the FtT Judge  wrongly
    declined to hear oral evidence from his wife, who attended the hearing;
    (3) the judge erred in failing to assess  the  best  interests  of  his
    children or to address his concern that his daughter would be subjected
    to FGM.

Submissions

11.  At the hearing before us Ms  McKenzie  requested  that  we  admit  into
    evidence a further witness statement from the appellant.  We agreed  to
    do so.  This stated, inter alia, that he had requested at the outset of
    the hearing that his wife be allowed to give oral evidence.

12.  Ms McKenzie said that her primary submission was that the  judge  erred
    in considering the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B as the application he made in  29  October  2009  should
    have been treated as a valid application instead of being responded  to
    by a notification stating that the appellant had used  the  wrong  form
    and needed to submit a different  one.   If  it  was  unlawful  of  the
    respondent to reject the application  as  invalid,  it  must  still  be
    outstanding.  There was no evidence to show that there was another form
    available on  the  Home  Office  website  at  the  time  the  appellant
    submitted his application.  The only form available bears  the  date  5
    October 2009.  Given that paragraph 34I was in force at  the  time  the
    respondent should have treated the form the  appellant  applied  on  as
    valid because he had submitted it within the 21 day period permitted by
    this Rule.

13.   As  regards  Article  8,  the  judge   failed   to   carry   out   any
    proportionality assessment, failed to carry out a best interests of the
    child  assessment  and  failed  to  consider  relevant  oral   evidence
    available at the hearing, failed to address the  risk  of  FGM  to  the
    daughter.

14.  Ms McKenzie urged us to find  that  the  judge  had  been  procedurally
    unfair in rejecting the appellant's request that his wife be allowed to
    give oral evidence.

15.  Mr Kotas submitted that the GCID record showed that the appellant's  T4
    application had been rejected as invalid because he had applied  on  an
    old form.  He accepted, however,  that  the  form  the  appellant  used
    appeared to be one stated as being a new version dated 5 October  2009.
    In any event, by resubmitting his application on the new form  sent  to
    him the  appellant  must  be  taken  to  have  abandoned  his  original
    application and when he made this further application he no longer  had
    leave.

16.  In relation to Article 8, Mr Kotas submitted that  there  had  been  no
    procedural unfairness as both the judge's record of proceedings and his
    decision showed that the appellant's application to call his  wife  had
    only been made in his closing submissions.  It was entirely  proper  of
    the judge to reject his application at that  stage  when  evidence  had
    closed.  The appellant was an intelligent man who had made a number  of
    applications for leave to remain and must have been aware  that  if  he
    wanted his wife to give evidence he should have requested this  at  the
    outset.

17.  Mr Kotas accepted that the judge only gave brief findings  in  relation
    to Article 8 but he had no assistance from the appellant so  there  was
    no error of law.

18.  After hearing  submissions  from  the  parties  on  the  issue  of  the
    validity or otherwise of the appellant's application sent on 29 October
    2009, we stated that we required further evidence from  the  respondent
    on two matters:

    1)   when in the October-4 December 2009 did the TW  application  forms
         change


    2)   whether paragraph 34I or an equivalent was in force at the time.


19.  Ms McKenzie objected that the respondent had had ample  opportunity  to
    submit further evidence and should not be given a  further  opportunity
    to defend the appeal.  Deciding against Ms McKenzie, we stated that our
    oral directions concerned two discrete matters only,  both  capable  of
    objective verification in a straightforward fashion.  We needed to have
    this evidence in order to decide whether the appellant had  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence as a matter of law.

20.  On 23 June 2017 Mr Kotas sent written submissions together with a  Rule
    15(2A) application.

21.  In these  submissions  Mr  Kotas  produced  an  archived  copy  of  the
    Immigration Rules in force from 1 October -  31  December  2009.   This
    showed, he submitted, that there was no Rule 34Y in force then and that
    the provisions  of  34C  were  markedly  different  to  the  Rules  the
    appellant had sought to rely on in his grounds.

22.  As regards  the  issue  of  the  T4  application  form,  enquiries  had
    revealed that records of the various versions of  this  form  were  not
    kept that far back:

         "The SSHD for present purposes accepts that in the  interim  period
         between the 5 October 2009 when the T4(G) version 10/09  came  into
         effect and the 19 November 2009 which was the date  of  the  letter
         rejecting the application sent on  29  October,  it  was  extremely
         unlikely that a new T4 application form came into effect."


23.  In subsequent paragraphs Mr Kotas submitted that  even  the  assumption
    that the 29 October 2009 application was valid, it still did not follow
    that the appellant  had  Section  3C  leave.   That  was  because  this
    application was 'decided' with reference to Section  3C(2)(a)  when  it
    was rejected on 19 November 2019.  In the  alternative,  if  it  was  a
    valid in time application not decided on that date, it was quite  clear
    from Section 3C(4) that the appellant was precluded  from  applying  to
    vary his leave to remain whilst this application was outstanding:

         "His resubmitted application of 4 December 2009 must therefore have
         been  a  variation  of  that  original   29   October   application
         subsequently 'decided' on 5 February 2010 when it was refused."


24.  In respect  of  his  concomitant  Rule  15(2A)  application,  Mr  Kotas
    submitted that the validity of the application must be  construed  with
    reference to the Rules in force at the relevant date in 2009.

25.  The respondent  still  maintained  that  the  application  was  invalid
    because the appellant used the wrong form in October 2009 - namely  the
    old 06/09 form.  Mr Kotas also averred that the appellant's grounds  of
    appeal as advanced in the reformulated skeleton argument were  at  odds
    with the appellant's own grounds which had argued that the  application
    was valid by reference to newer Rules, namely paragraph  34Y.   It  had
    never been his position that he submitted the  right  form  all  along.
    The respondent objected to the appellant pursuing this allegation of  a
    mistake of fact.

26.  In the alternative the respondent sought leave under Rule  15(2)(a)  to
    adduce further evidence supporting her contention  that  the  appellant
    did indeed  submit  the  old  wrong  form  on  29  October  2009.   The
    respondent then  identified  four  sets  of  materials  which  included
    admissions by the appellant that he had used the wrong form.   The  two
    GCID  notes,  this  application  outlined,  clearly  demonstrated   the
    appellant used the old form since the  words  used  on  the  GCID  only
    created on 19 November were clear: "Tier 4  (G)  version  06/09  posted
    29/10/2009".  Consequently, Mr Kotas stated, the  appellant's  reliance
    on Rule 34I as in force in 2009 did not rescue  the  appellant,  as  he
    submitted the old application form more than 21 days after the new  one
    came into force and so he was three days out of time.

27.  Mr Kotas submitted that although the FtT Judge dismissed the appeal  on
    long residency grounds albeit on a slightly erroneous basis, any  error
    of law was immaterial.

          Ms  McKenzie's  written  response  to  the  respondent's   further
    submissions was to maintain (1) that Mr Kotas' response confirmed  that
    paragraph 34I was in force on 29 October 2017; and  confirmed  that  it
    was "extremely unlikely"  that  another  form  was  introduced  in  the
    critical period; and (2) that Mr Kotas had gone beyond the confines  of
    the UT directions and that in any event his further submissions did not
    succeed  in  disproving  the  appellant's   case.    As   regards   the
    respondent's request to submit 120 pages of evidence pursuant  to  Rule
    15(2A), to accede to that request would defeat the UT reassurance given
    at the hearing that the scope of the further  directions  was  strictly
    limited.  It would also represent an improper use of  this  Rule  whose
    purpose was to ensure evidence was submitted or identified prior  to  a
    UT hearing.  Even if the UT did not agree about that, the new  evidence
    breached Rule 15(2A)(b) as the delay in adducing it  was  unreasonable.
    Even if the respondent was correct that it  was  not  clear  until  the
    appellant's skeleton argument for the UT served  six  days  before  the
    hearing what the revised challenge comprised, that meant he  respondent
    had had ample time to produce the evidence now relied on.

28.  Ms McKenzie's written response also averred that it  was  incorrect  of
    the respondent to allege that the appellant had changed his position as
    regards the application form from what it was in his grounds of  appeal
    as the appellant's grounds clearly stated that the  appellant  believed
    that the form he had downloaded from the  Home  Office  website  on  19
    October 2009 was "the same form ... still in use at the time I sent off
    my application on 29th October ..."

29.  Without  prejudice  to  the  above  responses,  Ms  McKenzie's  written
    response went on to dispute Mr  Kotas'  contention  that  returning  an
    invalid form was tantamount to  "deciding"  it.   Further  and  in  any
    event,  Section  3C(5)  would  still  apply  as  the  4  December  2009
    application was in effect a variation of the 29 October application.

30.  Ms McKenzie submitted it would be wrong to use previous  statements  by
    the appellant that he had used the wrong form as probative that he had,
    since it simply showed he believed the Home Office when it told him  it
    was the wrong form.  Further, there was no way of telling if  the  form
    submitted on 4  December  is  in  fact  the  same  form  the  appellant
    submitted on 29 October: the cover page  of  the  4  December  form  is
    missing and it contains the unexplained handwritten  annotation  "Valid
    26/11/10" on the first page.

31.  Finally, in her written response Ms McKenzie submitted  that  the  GCID
    notes took  the  case  no  further:  it  was  common  ground  that  the
    respondent asserted at the time it  was  the  wrong  form.   There  was
    therefore no direct evidence as to what form  the  appellant  submitted
    other than the evidence he gave at the UT hearing which was that it was
    the form with the cover page that appeared at 8/92 of the bundle.

Our analysis

The respondent's further submissions and Rule 15(2) application

32.  We concur with Ms McKenzie that the  respondent's  further  submissions
    go well beyond the very confined scope of the direction we gave at  the
    hearing which was limited to the respondent producing an archived  copy
    of the Immigration Rules in force in October - December  2009  and  any
    existing information about when  during  the  October-4  December  2009
    period the application form had changed (if at  all).   We  also  agree
    with her that the respondent's Rule 15(2) application comes  too  late.
    Even if the respondent is taken to have no notice of the  challenge  to
    the invalidity of the form  issue  until  receipt  of  the  appellant's
    skeleton argument, the respondent received that  six  days  before  the
    hearing, which was sufficient time to at least alert the UT to her wish
    to adduce further  evidence.   In  any  event,  one  of  the  main  new
    materials the  respondent  sought  to  submit,  the  GCID  record,  was
    referred to - and its relevant text read out to us - by Mr Kotas at the
    hearing with our permission.

33.  Nevertheless, we shall reach  our  decision  on  the  entirety  of  the
    evidence now before us,  including  the  appellant's  response  to  the
    respondent's further submissions, as nothing submitted or  produced  by
    Mr Kotas alters the essential facts so far as they can be established.

The invalidity issue

34.  Before going further, we set out the relevant provisions of s3C at  the
    material time:

      "3C Continuation of leave pending variation decision


      (1) This section applies if-
      a person who has limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom applies to the Secretary of State for variation of the leave,
      the application for variation is made before the leave expires, and
      the leave expires without the application for  variation  having  been
      decided.


      (2) The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any  period
      when-
      the application for variation is neither decided nor withdrawn, ...


      (3) Leave extended by virtue  of  this  section  shall  lapse  if  the
      applicant leaves the United Kingdom.


      (4) A person may not make an application for variation of his leave to
      enter or remain in the United Kingdom while that leave is extended  by
      virtue of this section.


      (5)  But  subsection  (4)  does  not  prevent  the  variation  of  the
      application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).


      (6) The Secretary of State may make regulations  determining  when  an
      application is decided for the purposes of this section;...."

35.  We are in no doubt that if we can be satisfied that the form  submitted
    by the appellant on 29 October 2009 was still the correct form to  use,
    then his application was wrongly rejected as invalid: s3C((1)  and  (2)
    would then apply so as to extend his leave.  If it was wrongly rejected
    as invalid, then the legal consequence is that  he  had  made  a  valid
    application.  If he made  a  valid  application  then  either:  (i)  it
    remains outstanding; or (ii) the resubmitted application he made  on  4
    December was a variation of the 29 October  application;  as  such  the
    appellant had continuing leave under Section 3C(5).   Either  way,  his
    residence during the disputed period would thereby be unbroken.

36.  Mr Kotas has sought to submit that the above analysis cannot  be  right
    because when the respondent wrote back to the appellant on 16  November
    2009 saying that he had made an invalid application, that amounted to a
    'decision' for the purposes of s3C. That argument,  however,  has  been
    roundly rejected by the Court of Appeal in  Iqbal  &  Ors,  R  (on  the
    application of) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
    EWCA Civ 838 (per Elias  LJ)  at  [31]-[22]  and  nothing  subsequently
    decided by the Supreme Court in Mirza and Others [2016] UKSC  63  calls
    into question anything said by the Court of Appeal on this  matter.  Mr
    Kotas also submitted that the making by the appellant of an application
    on 4 December on the form he was told was the one he should  have  used
    amounted to an implied abandonment by him of his original  application.
    We cannot accept this submission either. It was  only  because  he  was
    told that he used the wrong form that the appellant submitted  another.
    If the respondent was wrong about his original form being the incorrect
    form, then the application is one that  should  have  been  treated  as
    valid; the appellant did not  abandon  it  because  it  was  valid  but
    because he had been told it was invalid.

The correctness or otherwise of the form used originally

37.  So far as concerns whether the form submitted by the  appellant  on  29
    October 2009 was still the correct form, we consider  that  this  is  a
    simple  question  of  fact.   We  concur  with  Ms  McKenzie  that  the
    appellant's own and his solicitor's acceptance in  correspondence  that
    they used the wrong form was simply a reaction to what the Home  Office
    had told him about this.  It cannot be taken as an acknowledgement that
    he in fact used the wrong form.

38.  As regards whether the appellant used the correct form when  submitting
    his application on 29 October, we find the state of the evidence  quite
    unsatisfactory.  On the one hand,  the  case  owner  who  received  his
    application clearly thought he had used the wrong form: the GCID record
    refers to the form as a "6/09 version" (June 2009); and the letter then
    sent to the appellant states that he used the wrong form.  On the other
    hand,(i) Mr Kotas said at the hearing before us that  he  accepted  the
    appellant appeared to have used the  form  10/09  when  he  applied  in
    October: see above at paragraph 16; this demonstrates in our  view  how
    uncertain the  state  of  the  evidence  is  (and  remains);  (ii)  the
    respondent has been unable to produce  the  form  the  appellant  first
    submitted; (iii) the respondent  accepts (in Mr Kotas' response to  the
    UT directions) that in the period between  5  October  when  the  T4(G)
    version 10/09 came into effect and the 16 November (which was the  date
    of the letter rejecting the application sent on 29  October  2009),  it
    was "extremely unlikely that  a  new  T4  application  form  came  into
    effect".   The  respondent's  reference  to  the  5  October  2009   is
    significant because it has been  the  appellant's  consistent  evidence
    that he had downloaded the form from the  Home  Office  website  on  19
    October 2009.  Mr Kotas has not sought to challenge that  evidence  and
    in our view it would be surprising if someone were to download  such  a
    form over three weeks before submitting it.

39.  We accept that the  matter  is  not  free  of  doubt.  The  appellant's
    evidence has consistently  been  that  the  document  at  8/92  of  the
    appellant's bundle is a copy of the front page of the form he submitted
    on 29 October.  This clearly refers to TG(4) version 10/09. However, he
    has not been able to produce a full copy of his original application or
    any other electronic evidence  as  to  when  he  downloaded  the  form.
    Equally (as already noted), Mr Kotas was prepared to say in submissions
    before us that this appeared to be the form the appellant used  and  Mr
    Kotas's further submissions do not state in terms that he  now  rejects
    this.

40.  The respondent has been afforded every opportunity to demonstrate  that
    the appellant sent the wrong form, but has not been able to do so.   In
    our view, the appellant's account regarding the form is a credible  one
    and from the surrounding circumstances we think it right to infer  that
    he downloaded  the  form  after  5  October  2009.   Since  it  is  the
    respondent's evidence that as from 5 October 2009 there was a new  form
    and it was most unlikely yet another new form came into use  between  5
    October - 29 October, we conclude that the  appellant  applied  on  the
    correct form and that, accordingly, his period of lawful residence  was
    not broken by his making this application.

41.  Thus, in our view the judge materially erred in law in concluding  that
    the appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276B(1)(i)  of
    the Immigration Rules.  We set aside the decision of FtT Judge  O'Brien
    for this reason.

42.  In light of our conclusion on the invalidity issue, it is not  strictly
    necessary for us to address the appellant's other  grounds,  but  given
    the lengthy submissions we received regarding them,  we  shall  outline
    our conclusions.

Whether the appellant received a fair hearing

43.  We turn first to the issue of whether the judge conducted  the  hearing
    fairly in refusing the appellant's application to call his wife to give
    evidence.  In his witness statement the appellant has claimed  that  he
    made known to the judge and the Presenting Officer at the outset of the
    hearing that he wished to call his wife to give evidence.  We find this
    claim impossible to square with both the judge's Record of  Proceedings
    and the judge's written decision.  In neither is there any  mention  of
    the appellant making  any  such  submission.   The  first  time  he  is
    recorded as making any such application is at the commencement  of  his
    own closing submissions: that is what is shown both by  the  record  of
    proceedings and paragraph 22 of the judge's decision. Mr Kotas  submits
    that this late timing is fatal to  the  appellant's  challenge  and  in
    support he makes the valid  point  that  closing  submissions  are  not
    formally supposed to start until all the evidence in the case has  been
    heard.  However, in this case there  are  a  number  of  factors  which
    outweigh the formal position.  First, the appellant was  unrepresented.
    Second, during oral evidence he was specifically cross-examined by  the
    Presenting  Officer  about  his  relationship  with  his   wife.    The
    Presenting Officer specifically put to him that he was lying about  his
    relationship with her having broken down.  Given this direct  challenge
    it would have been of great relevance to  have  heard  from  the  wife.
    Even if the Presenting Officer did not realise his wife was actually in
    attendance at the outset of the hearing, he clearly became aware of  it
    shortly before he put to the appellant that his  relationship  had  not
    broken down.  This is clear from the judge's ROP which  at  this  point
    reads:


         "Why no letter from [the wife] to explain the relationship


         I didn't realise that she needed to produce one.  She is here


         Why no evidence from [the wife] or friend


         I provided sol with all info to handle case
         They did not represent me properly


         Trying to persuade the Tribunal you are not together  with  partner
         so could not be relocated as a family unit."


44.  Once the Presenting Officer was made aware of  the  appellant's  wife's
    presence, he should in our view have addressed  the  judge  as  to  the
    feasibility of the wife being asked to give oral evidence.   He  should
    have done so immediately or at least straight  after  the  end  of  the
    appellant's oral evidence. If perhaps he doubted that was  efficacious,
    given that she had been present in the hearing  room  up  to  then,  he
    should have raised this doubt with the judge straightaway.  Instead his
    very next question after he learnt she was present was  to  suggest  to
    the appellant he was lying about the relationship.

45.   Thirdly,  the  judge's  own  reason  for  refusing   the   appellant's
    application did not take sufficient account of the Presenting Officer's
    decision  to  challenge  the   appellant's   evidence   regarding   his
    relationship with his wife even after he too learnt  of  her  presence.
    At paragraph 22 the judge read out:

         "22. After Mrs Williams concluded her submissions on behalf of  the
             Respondent,  the  Appellant  applied  for  his  wife  to  give
             evidence as to the state of their relationship.  The Appellant
             claimed  that  he  was  unfamiliar  with  the   process,   was
             representing himself and it was only fair that he be given  an
             opportunity  to  lead  evidence  to  rebut  the   Respondent's
             suggestion that he  and  his  wife  were  still  together  and
             seeking to mislead the tribunal.  The Respondent objected.   I
             concluded that it would be materially  unfair  to  permit  the
             Appellant to call his wife, given that she  had  been  present
             whilst the Appellant had given evidence and had even heard the
             Respondent's closing submissions.   In  the  circumstances,  I
             refused the application and proceeded to hear the  Appellant's
             submissions."


46.  The effect of this decision  was  that  the  appellant  was  denied  an
    opportunity to rebut the Presenting Officer's allegation  of  falsehood
    by calling evidence.

47.  Fourth, in addition to challenging the respondent's  decision  refusing
    ILR under the long residence Rules, the appellant's grounds  of  appeal
    had raised Article 8 and  submissions  at  the  hearing  addressed  his
    family life circumstances.  Yet, despite concluding  at  paragraphs  54
    and 55 that he could attach little weight to the  appellant's  and  his
    family's "combined family life" and finding  it  outweighed  by  public
    interest considerations, the judge's decision  refusing  the  appellant
    permission to call his wife as a witness (when he  knew  there  was  no
    witness  statement  from  her)  meant  the  appellant  was  denied  any
    opportunity to identify the factual content to that family life.

48.  As well as being the appellant's wife, his wife was also the mother  of
    the two children  whose  best  interests  the  judge  said  he  had  to
    evaluate.  At paragraph 52 the judge said "I  have  heard  no  evidence
    that moving with their mother to Nigeria would be  contrary  to  either
    child's best interests".  The judge's decision refusing permission  for
    the mother to give evidence  made  this  conclusion  a  self-fulfilling
    prophesy.

49.  Finally, we would add that although to  allow  evidence  to  be  called
    even at the stage of closing submissions  is  in  general  contrary  to
    proper procedure, the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 do not prohibit  it
    and the judge should have recognised that he  had  an  overriding  duty
    under the Procedure Rules to deal with cases fairly and  justly,  which
    includes  (r2(2)(b)  "avoiding  unnecessary   formality   and   seeking
    flexibility in the proceedings..."

50.  Mr Kotas submitted that even if we found that the  judge's  refusal  to
    allow the wife to give evidence was unfair, it did not give rise to any
    material error because the appellant's Article 8 case clearly stood  to
    be  rejected.   We  cannot  agree.   The  judge's  treatment   of   the
    appellant's Article 8 circumstances outside  the  Rules  and  the  best
    interests of the children is markedly lacking in any clear reasoning  -
    e.g. it is  simply  asserted  at  paragraph  52  that  the  appellant's
    daughter (who had been in the UK  for  nine  years)  "could  reasonably
    return with her mother and brother to Nigeria".  The only  reason  then
    given for this assertion is that she would  not  be  at  risk  of  FGM.
    These shortcomings were in themselves errors of law and given the  fact
    that one of the children had been in the UK for nine years,  they  were
    errors capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

51.  For the above reasons  the  FtT  Judge's  decision  is  set  aside  for
    material error of law.

Re-making of the decision

52.  We consider we are in a position to  re-make  the  decision  without  a
    further hearing.  We have already explained why  we  have  declined  to
    admit the further evidence produced by Mr Kotas in the form of  a  Rule
    15(2)(a)  application.   Even  taking  that  new  evidence  fully  into
    account, however, we remain of the same view as regards the core  issue
    of whether or not the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276B(1)(a) by virtue of having accrued  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence from 1 June 2004 to 1 June 2014.  The only alleged  break  in
    this period according to the  respondent  arose  as  a  result  of  the
    appellant submitting an application for ILR on 29 October 2009 on  what
    she alleged was the wrong form.  We have found it more likely than  not
    that the appellant used a form that was still in use. By virtue of  our
    findings as  regards  the  lawfulness  of  the  appellant's  period  of
    residence during the period 29 October 2009-31 January 2011,  paragraph
    276B(v) has no application to him.

53.  Accordingly, it is not necessary for us to consider whether or not  the
    appellant could alternatively rely on paragraph 34I  (although  if  the
    appellant used the incorrect form then it seems to  us  that  we  would
    have had to conclude that the First-tier judge was correct  to  say  he
    was three days outside the 21-day time limit set out in this rule). For
    completeness, we should also note that we have  not  engaged  with  the
    appellant's attempted reliance on paragraph 34Y, as this only came into
    force  from  20  October  2014  and  is  concerned   with   forms   for
    "administrative review" (see crossheading before paragraph 34L). It  is
    therefore  irrelevant  to  the  case,  which  is  concerned  with   the
    application form on which the appellant sought further leave.

54.  In order to meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B  in  full,  an
    appellant must also show, pursuant to paragraph  276B(ii),  that  there
    are no reasons, having regard to the public interest, why it  would  be
    undesirable for him to be given ILR to remain on the  grounds  of  long
    residence. That was not addressed by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal
    letter. At the hearing before us Mr Kotas did not seek  to  argue  that
    the appellant would fall foul of 276B(ii). We note that even after  the
    respondent took the view (mistakenly we have found) that he had  become
    an overstayer by virtue of applying in October 2009  on  the  incorrect
    form and applying afresh too late, she later (in October 2013)  granted
    him leave as a Tier  1  post-study  work  applicant  and  there  is  no
    indication in the file that the appellant has a criminal record  or  is
    otherwise to be considered of bad character. However, we are not  in  a
    position to decide whether he has fully meets the remaining requirement
    of paragraph 276B(iv) regarding whether he has demonstrated  sufficient
    knowledge of the English language and sufficient knowledge  about  life
    in the United Kingdom in accordance with Appendix KoLL.

55.  We have given  consideration  to  whether  the  uncertain  position  as
    regards paragraph 276B((iv) affects our decision, given  that  we  only
    have jurisdiction to consider whether  the  appellant  is  entitled  to
    succeed in his appeal on human rights grounds. In light of our findings
    on his immigration  history,  we  cannot  see  that  there  remain  any
    significant public interest considerations to be weighed against him in
    relation to the application that he made for ILR on the basis  of  long
    residence. In our view he is entitled to succeed on the basis that  the
    decision appealed against constituted a  disproportionate  interference
    in his private life. We do not need, therefore, to address whether  his
    family life provides a separate factual content  to  his  Article  8(1)
    right or affords a  further  basis  for  considering  the  respondent's
    decision disproportionate.

56.  For the  above  reasons  the  decision  we  re-make  is  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The appellant has made an application for anonymity  and  in  light  of  the
history of the case and the  children's  circumstances  we  accede  to  that
request. Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This


direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date: 16 August 2017

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
