
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/06324/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 October 2018                            |On 21 November 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                             MRS JENNIFER WEXLER
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Sharkey of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the United  States  of  America  born  in
    1979.  She appealed against a decision of the respondent made on 4  May
    2017 to refuse her application, which was made on 22 October 2016,  for
    indefinite leave to remain based on  ten  years  long  residence.   The
    application  was  refused  under  paragraph  276D  with  reference   to
    paragraph 276B(i)(a) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The basis of the refusal was that the appellant during  the  period  in
    question had been absent from the UK for a  total  of  752  days  which
    exceeded the permitted period of 18 months (540 days).  Her explanation
    was that the  absences  were  for  family  visits,  holidays,  academic
    research and field work.  She is an archaeologist who was  involved  in
    research for her PhD.  The respondent did not consider the reason to be
    exceptional such that discretion should be exercised in her case.

 3. She appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 4. Her case was dealt with at her request "on  papers"  (without  an  oral
    hearing).  In a decision promulgated on 12 September 2017 Judge of  the
    First-tier McGavin dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and
    on human rights grounds.

 5. In summary,  the  judge  found  that  the  excess  of  the  appellant's
    absences, over 18 months had not occurred in circumstances  which  were
    exceptional,  unavoidable  or   of   a   compassionate   nature.    The
    respondent's decision to decline to exercise  her  discretion  was  one
    that was reasonably arrived at.   Nor  were  there  circumstances  that
    produced unjustifiably harsh results for a grant of leave  outside  the
    Rules.

 6. She sought permission to appeal which was refused but was granted on 15
    May 2018 on reapplication to the Upper Tribunal.

 7. At the error of law hearing on 25 July 2018 before me,  Mr  Kotas,  who
    appeared for the respondent, agreed that the First-tier decision showed
    material error of law.  It was noted that on 7 July 2017 a  bundle  was
    received from the appellant which was not sent to the  judge  prior  to
    her decision being promulgated.  Such  material  was  relevant  to  the
    judge's consideration of paragraph 276B of  the  Rules  and  Article  8
    ECHR.  The failure, albeit through no fault of the judge,  to  consider
    the material lodged on 7 July 2017 was a procedural  irregularity  such
    as to amount to an error of law.

 8. By consent the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside to  be
    remade.

 9. Following discussion as to the appropriate way to  proceed  I  set  the
    matter down for a resumed hearing on a later date.   Thus,  the  matter
    came before me again on 24 October 2018.

10. Mr Clarke and Miss Sharkey noted that  as  of  early  August  2018  the
    appellant had shown 10 years continuous lawful residence and was within
    the permitted period for time spent abroad.   By  joint  motion  I  was
    asked to allow the appeal.  I did so.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal showed material error  of  law.   It
is set aside and remade as follows:

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity order made.






Signed                                             Date: 16 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

