







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06328/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 9th August 2018               |On: 26th September 2018                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between


                                   kah [N]

                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Ephraim-Adejumo, counsel, instructed by L & L
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Malaysia born on 18 April 1978. She  is
      the mother of two children. [N], born in the UK on 7 October 2009, who
      has remained here since his birth. At the date of hearing he had lived
      in the UK for over eight years. He is at school. Her second  child  is
      [L], born in Malaysia on 13 January 2012, who was six years old at the
      date of hearing [1].

   2. In a decision promulgated on 16 May 2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Pears dismissed the appellant's application for leave to remain.

   3. He found that the appellant came to live in the UK in about  2003  and
      has not lived here continuously since then. She was absent from  about
      2009 until 2013. When she returned to the UK she came  pursuant  to  a
      visit visa. She was arrested in October 2016 and  was  served  with  a
      notice as an  overstayer.  Her  immigration  status  has  always  been
      precarious and for periods unlawful [39].

   4. He accepted that she is in a relationship with Mr [LC] and  cares  for
      him. He has a serious illness but even on  her  case  they  have  been
      cohabiting for less than two years He is not a British citizen and  is
      not settled here and  has  neither  refugee  status  nor  humanitarian
      protection. The cohabitation commenced whilst neither  had  status  in
      the UK. The appellant was here unlawfully.  It  would  not  be  unduly
      harsh for her to leave  the  UK.  The  decision  was  accordingly  not
      disproportionate. Nor were there any  exceptional  circumstances  [40-
      43].

   5. The respondent accepted that [N] had been in the UK for  a  continuous
      period of seven years or more. The appellant provided evidence however
      that her children are in the care of [SU], who is her cousin. There is
      a private fostering arrangement in place. Accordingly the appellant is
      not the sole carer of her children.

   6. At the hearing before the first-tier Tribunal the  appellant  asserted
      that whatever the position was with her children at the  date  of  her
      application, she is now their sole carer and has been since July 2017.



   7. Judge Pears referred  to  the  appellant's  immigration  history.  She
      appeared to have been in the  UK  since  before  September  2004.  Her
      husband was a work permit holder. She had leave to remain until  March
      2010 and [N] was born in the UK on 7 October 2009.

   8.  Judge  Pears  referred  to  a  social  circumstances  report  by   an
      independent social worker (ISW).  That was produced at the  time  when
      both children were cared for by [SU]. The ISW concluded that she would
      be "very concerned" about the appellant's  ability  to  care  for  the
      children and that there  would  need  to  be  a  further  social  care
      assessment in order to assess whether the children's  needs  could  be
      met by their mother either in Malaysia or in the UK. The  Judge  noted
      at [13] that the report was in the context of  the  breakdown  of  the
      mother's marriage.

   9. The ISW stated that  the  mother  retains  regular  contact  with  the
      children and her view is that the children should  remain  with  [SU].
      She saw 'the mother' and the children. When the mother became pregnant
      with her second child she returned to Malaysia. She returned to the UK
      to give her second husband "one last chance." The children  were  then
      placed with [SU] and she seemed to suggest that was in 2012  or  2013.
      However, [SU] said in evidence that they had lived together  with  her
      since 2009 [13].

  10. The appellant's second marriage broke down in August 2015. Her husband
      told the ISW that he had  had  no  involvement  or  contact  with  the
      children. She started her relationship with [LC] who is from China and
      has been in the UK for more than 16 years.  She  then  said  that  the
      children have been in [SU]'s care for over two years which  the  Judge
      stated seems neither consistent with the earlier account or what  [SU]
      told him. She sees the children either at [SU]'s home or  at  her  own
      [13].

  11. The ISW  stated  that  the  private  fostering  arrangement  has  been
      assessed by a social worker. The social worker stated that the private
      fostering arrangement started in August 2014 as there had been threats
      by the appellant's husband to kill the appellant and the  children  if
      the appellant separated from him. Even in October  2015  there  was  a
      continuing relationship between the appellant and her husband [14].

  12. The ISW found that the appellant had acted responsibly  in  protecting
      the children by making a private fostering  arrangement  and  she  had
      been cooperative with the social work department. The Judge noted that
      the ISW directed questions to the social worker  from  Medway  Council
      but were not answered for reasons of confidentiality. She  also  seeks
      to contact [SU] without success [14].

  13. The Judge noted that the ISW stated that she would be  very  concerned
      if contact between the appellant and the  children  were  broken,  for
      example if she were forced to relocate to Malaysia. [L] has spent  the
      majority of his life in the care  of  others  rather  than  his  birth
      parents. [N] has stability and security with his  care  and  residence
      arrangements and has  commenced  primary  education  and  is  able  to
      identify school friends with whom he has positive relationships and he
      is happy with friends and his life. The social worker  concluded  that
      she would be concerned that any change  to  [N]'s  arrangements  would
      have a negative impact on his emotional well  being,  his  development
      and his current educational achievements - [15].

  14. Judge  Pears  considered  documents  produced  which  related  to  the
      children who now attend [~] School, Mill Hill.  There  is  a  football
      club and a dance club at the school and other  documents  relating  to
      attendance  at  the  school  and  the  monitoring  of  the  children's
      progress. He noted that [N]'s Term  18  assessment  was  positive  and
      various awards and certificates were produced.  There were also school
      and other documents produced that related to [L] - [18].

  15. He noted that in her statement, the appellant asserted that  she  came
      to the UK in 2003 and her first  marriage  broke  down  in  2006.  She
      married her second husband in 2009 and [N] was born in  October  2009,
      but then she and her husband were forced to leave the UK and return to
      Malaysia leaving her son behind with her cousin, [SU] [19].

  16. When she returned to Malaysia, she had a second child.  The  breakdown
      of her second marriage occurred when her husband became involved  with
      loan sharks. She returned to the UK in 2013. She took the children and
      went to live with her cousin [19].

  17. She stated that she is living with [LC] and  given  his  diagnosis  he
      could not be expected to relocate when he is facing "death  or  life."
      She is caring for him and he would be  going  to  a  country  that  is
      strange to him. He would face persecution from loan  sharks  like  she
      would, as her husband owed money to them and was declared bankrupt  in
      Malaysia.  She is depressed, fears for her life and is  on  medication
      [19].

  18. Judge Pears also had regard to the evidence of [SU] who  claimed  that
      she was appointed guardian for the two children and took care  of  [N]
      in the UK between 2009 and 2013.

  19. Then Judge at the outset of  the  hearing  asked  whether,  given  the
      comments in the social circumstances report and that the children were
      now living with their mother,  there  was  any  evidence  from  social
      services indicating that they were aware of the change and  that  they
      approved it. He was told there was no such report [23].

  20. In his findings, Judge Pears noted that even on her case the appellant
      had only been sole carer from July 2017. That occurred  shortly  after
      the refusal of her claim when one of the grounds for that refusal  was
      that she was not their sole carer [33]. [SU] has been the  sole  carer
      of [N] from 2009 and he was left in her care when the appellant was in
      Malaysia for some four years [33]. He noted that the ISW  stated  that
      there needed to  be  a  social  care  assessment  in  order  that  the
      children's needs could be met by their mother. Nevertheless,  after  a
      number of years the children went to live with their mother and  there
      is no social service report.

  21. Accordingly, whatever the current position is, Judge Pears  could  not
      conclude that she has always had sole care of the children as she  has
      lodged the children for substantial periods of time with  her  cousin.
      The children's father is not involved with them and he concluded  that
      the appellant now has sole parental responsibility for them  and  they
      now live with her, and even though they did not live with her  in  the
      past she exercised access rights to them [34].

  22. He had regard to the children and considered whether it  would  be  in
      their interests to expect them to leave the UK. Their  best  interests
      are a primary consideration [35]. [N] has been in the UK for more than
      seven years. He found that he appears to  be  interested  in  football
      with  some  friends.  The  respondent   produced   evidence   of   the
      availability of education in English in Malaysia. [N] has no infirmity
      or medical condition. He would be moving to Malaysia with  his  mother
      and brother. His mother had lived there as recently as 2013 [35].

  23. He noted at [36] that the appellant relied on the social circumstances
      report in relation to the children. It appears that she  has  not  had
      access to any records and was not able to get any information from the
      social worker. She did not see [SU]. In consequence 'her views must be
      viewed with circumspection'. She concluded that she would be concerned
      that any change to [N]'s arrangements would have a negative impact  on
      his emotional well being, his development and his current  educational
      achievements. The Judge went on to state that in fact the mother chose
      to move his care from [SU] to her, as well as move his school and care
      for him with her new partner, with whom neither child had  ever  lived
      [36]. It would appear that the appellant is saying that he  has  coped
      well with these changes. He stated that the issue is whether there any
      evidence of a serious negative impact: He concluded that there is  not
      [36].

  24. He found that there would be no sufficient evidence to  show  that  it
      would not be reasonable for the children  to  move  to  Malaysia.  The
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) are not met [36].

  25.  He  considered  Article  8  outside  the  rules  and  the  issue   of
      proportionality. He accepted that the appellant is in  a  relationship
      with [LC] and cares for him. However, they  have  cohabited  for  less
      than two years. He is not British and nor has  he  settled  here.  The
      relationship commenced when his status was at the least precarious and
      hers unlawful.

  26. He concluded that it would not be unduly harsh to refuse the appellant
      leave to remain. The decision was not disproportionate.

  27. Ms Ephraim Adejumo,  who  did  not  represent  the  appellant  at  the
      hearing, adopted the grounds for permission.

  28. The IWS has identified the  issues  of  concern  in  relation  to  the
      children, namely [N]'s  wellbeing,  which  constituted  a  substantial
      issue, namely, whether his mother would be able to look after him  and
      provide for him and whether he would be safe in Malaysia.

  29. The Judge however did  not  properly  consider  the  mother's  current
      conditions.  This  included  her  medical  condition,  her   financial
      condition and her ability to provide for the children.

  30. She referred to the decision of the court of Appeal in  MA  (Pakistan)
      [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [49]. This child has remained  in  the  UK  for
      more than eight years. Having  found  that  his  mother  had  parental
      responsibility for the children, he  had  to  assess  where  his  best
      interests lie. He was born and has grown up in  this  country,  formed
      all his relationships and friendships here, which included  the  wider
      community in the UK.

  31. In Malaysia there would be no support network for him and no guarantee
      of even  completing  his  education  to  fulfil  his  aspirations  and
      potential.

  32. She referred to the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MT  and  ET
      (Child's Best Interest; ex tempore Pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88.  She
      referred to [28] where the Tribunal had regard to paragraph 46 of  the
      decision of Elias LJ in MA. The fact that the child has been in the UK
      for seven years has significant weight in the proportionality exercise
      for two related reasons: first because of its relevance to determining
      the nature and strength of the  child's  best  interests;  and  second
      because it establishes as  a  starting  point  that  leave  should  be
      granted unless  there  are  powerful  reasons  to  the  contrary.  The
      Tribunal had regard to whether or not there were "powerful reasons".

  33. The appellant in MT was described  as  a  somewhat  run  of  the  mill
      immigration  offender  who  came  to  the  UK  on  a  visit  visa  and
      overstayed, made a claim for asylum that was found to be false and who
      pursued various legal means of remaining in the UK. This is not  taken
      in any way as excusing or downplaying  MT's  unlawful  behaviour.  The
      point is that her immigration history is not so bad as  to  constitute
      the kind of "powerful" reason that would render reasonable the removal
      of ET, the child, to Nigeria. In re-making the  decision  the  appeals
      were allowed on human rights grounds.

  34. Ms Ephraim-Adejumo submitted that there was no proper assessment as to
      why the children had been left with the  foster  carer  in  the  first
      place. The mother had been out of the country for  four  years.  There
      was accordingly an insufficient inquiry made as to the best  interests
      of the children.

  35. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tufan referred to  the  varying  terms
      used in the  recent  decisions,  which  include:  "powerful  reasons",
      "significant", "cogent" and the like. He submitted that  on  a  proper
      assessment of the decisions of the Court of Appeal, there has not been
      a material error of law.

      Assessment

  36. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy
      noted that the Judge found  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship with  the  children  and  that  there
      needed to be a further  social  care  assessment  as  to  whether  the
      appellant could meet the child's needs. Further,  he  recognised  that
      the appellant has acted contrary  to  the  assessment  of  the  Medway
      Social Services and that her actions  may  have  undermined  the  well
      being of the children. He stated that it is difficult to see  how  the
      Judge could conclude at [36] in the light of such evidence that  there
      was insufficient evidence to show that it was unreasonable  to  expect
      the children to leave the UK.

  37. Judge Pears referred to the approach set out in MA (Pakistan)  and  in
      particular the judgement of Elias LJ, who held that there needed to be
      "strong reasons" for refusing the leave in such cases.

  38. He noted at [36] that the appellant relied on the social circumstances
      report in relation to the children. He noted the conclusion of the ISW
      that any change to [N]'s arrangements would have a negative impact  on
      his emotional well being, his development and his current  educational
      achievements.

  39. Judge Pears noted at [36] that his mother chose to move his care  from
      [SU] to herself, his accommodation from Chatham  to  Dollis  Hill,  to
      move his school and care for  him  with  her  new  partner  with  whom
      neither child had ever lived.

  40. He noted that the ISW was only saying that change would impact on  his
      emotional well being, his  development  and  his  current  educational
      achievement, but it would appear that the appellant is saying that [N]
      had coped well with those changes and the issue was whether  there  is
      any evidence of a serious negative impact. He found that there is  not
      - [36].

  41. Further, he did not find evidence to support  risks  to  the  children
      should they return to Malaysia. He found that there is  no  sufficient
      evidence to show that it would not be reasonable for the  children  to
      move to Malaysia. He has also had regard to the  fact  that  education
      was available in English in Malaysia. [N] had no medical condition  or
      any infirmity. He would be moving there with his mother  and  brother.
      His mother had lived there as recently as 2013. He also had regard  to
      the appellant's immigration status, which has always  been  precarious
      and for periods was unlawful.

  42. He  found  that  at  the  date  of  hearing  the  appellant  had  sole
      responsibility for the children and that they now live with her.  Even
      when they did not live with her  in  the  past  she  exercised  access
      rights to them. He found that she is taking and  intends  to  continue
      taking an active role in  their  upbringing.  He  concluded  that  the
      requirements of E-LTRPT.2.3 and 2.4 are met - [34].

  43. Even though it might have been in the child's best interests to remain
      in the UK, he concluded that notwithstanding  the  assessment  of  the
      Medway Social Services, the current position  was  that  it  would  be
      reasonable in the light of the evidence  to  expect  the  children  to
      leave the UK. He has given sustainable reasons for that conclusion.

      Notice of Decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.

      Anonymity direction not made.









      Signed  Date 16 September 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


