
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06908/2015
                                                               HU/06916/2015
                                                               HU/06922/2015
                                                               HU/06924/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Stoke                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 11 January 2017                  |On: 12 January 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     KS
                                     RK
                                     TK
                                     DSM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Pipe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Abone (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
first Appellant in this determination identified as KS.

      1. I have made an anonymity order because this decision refers to  the
         circumstances of a minor child, the fourth appellant. The first and
         second appellants are the mother and father of the third and fourth
         appellants.  The third appellant, T, was born in 1998  and  is  now
         18.  The fourth appellant, D, was born in 2003 and  is  nearly  14.
         They live together  as  a  family  unit  and  the  children  remain
         dependent upon their parents.

      2. The appellants have appealed against a decision of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal dated 12 August 2016  in  which  it  dismissed  an  appeal
         against the decision of the  respondent  dated  11  September  2015
         refusing leave on Article 8 grounds.

      3. The appellants have been granted permission to appeal against  that
         decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hodgkinson  on  15  November
         2016.

First-tier Tribunal decision

      4. The First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the  family  relationships  and
         immigration history of the appellants.  In summary  the  first  and
         second appellants came to the UK in 2003 as visitors, during  which
         time their children remained in India with relatives.   The  second
         appellant returned to India but arrived in the UK with the children
         in March 2008, and they have all remained since that time.  All the
         appellants are overstayers.

      5. The First-tier Tribunal considered what it described as  a  helpful
         report of an independent social worker  ('ISW'),  Ms  Diane  Harris
         dated 5 July 2016 and accepted it  was  in  the  interests  of  the
         children to remain in "their present settled life" [23].  The First-
         tier Tribunal accepted that the children were  qualifying  children
         as they had resided in the UK for over seven years.  The First-tier
         Tribunal also correctly identified the main  issue  to  resolve  as
         being whether or not it is reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
         leave the UK.  After conducting an  analysis  of  various  relevant
         factors  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  it  would   be
         reasonable and for this  reason  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
         Immigration Rules and Article 8.

Hearing

      6. Mrs Abone agreed with the preliminary  view  I  outlined  that  the
         First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  contains  errors  of  law.    She
         accepted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  direct  itself  in
         accordance with the relevant authorities  that  significant  weight
         must be attached to residence of over seven years by  children  and
         the respondent's policy to the effect that strong reasons  will  be
         required to refuse such a case.

      7. Mrs Abone also agreed that the First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  to
         the ISW report was unlawful for the reasons set out  in  Mr  Pipe's
         grounds of appeal.  In the premises,  both  representatives  agreed
         that the decision should be remade by me and that I should make  my
         own findings regarding the ISW report.

      8. Both representatives agreed that there was no need to hear  further
         evidence.  Ms Abode asked  me  to  find  that  the  children  could
         reasonably be expected to return to India.  No attempt was made  to
         outline any strong reasons why the children should be  expected  to
         return  and  no  attempt  was  made  to  resolve  this   with   the
         respondent's own policy.

      9. Mr Pipe relied  upon  his  skeleton  argument.   He  accepted  that
         although at the date of the application T  and  D  were  qualifying
         children, at the date of hearing and in remaking the decision I  am
         restricted to considering human  rights  and  not  the  immigration
         rules.  This is because of the changes in the appeal framework from
         4 April 2015.  Mrs Abode agreed with this approach.  Mr  Pipe  took
         me to the relevant evidence and asked me to find that removal of  D
         would not be reasonable.  It followed from this that  to  remove  T
         and her parents would be a disproportionate  breach  of  Article  8
         given D's close relationship with and dependence upon them.

Error of law discussion

Approach to length of residence

     10. The correct approach to  the  reasonableness  test  in  276ADE  and
         section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
         has been considered recently in MA (Pakistan) V  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 705 (7 July 2016).  The Court of Appeal  found  that  the  only
         significance of section 117B(6) is that where the child has been in
         the UK for seven years, this is a factor of some weight leaning  in
         favour of leave to remain being granted [45].  Elias LJ said this:

             "46.  Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact
             that a child has been here  for  seven  years  must  be  given
             significant  weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
             exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance in
             August  2015  in   the   form   of   Immigration   Directorate
             Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a  partner  or  parent)
             and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in  which  it  is  expressly
             stated that once the seven  years'  residence  requirement  is
             satisfied, there need to  be  "strong  reasons"  for  refusing
             leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions  were  not  in  force
             when the cases now subject to appeal were determined,  but  in
             my view they merely confirm what is  implicit  in  adopting  a
             policy of this nature. After such a period of time  the  child
             will have put down roots and developed  social,  cultural  and
             educational links in the UK such  that  it  is  likely  to  be
             highly disruptive if the child is required to  leave  the  UK.
             That may be less so when the children are very  young  because
             the focus of their lives will be on their  families,  but  the
             disruption becomes more serious as they get  older.  Moreover,
             in these cases there must be a very  strong  expectation  that
             the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
             his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as  a
             primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.

             ...

             49...However, the fact that the child has been in the  UK  for
             seven years would need to be given significant weight  in  the
             proportionality  exercise  for  two  related  reasons:  first,
             because  of  its  relevance  to  determining  the  nature  and
             strength of the child's best interests; and second, because it
             establishes as a starting point that leave should  be  granted
             unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary."

     11. When the First-tier Tribunal decision is read as a whole, there  is
         no clear indication that it  attached  significant  weight  to  the
         children's length of residence when considering the  reasonableness
         test or carrying out the proportionality exercise.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal was clearly mindful of their length of residence but  that
         is different to attaching significant weight to  it.   Indeed,  the
         First-tier Tribunal failed to take into account the full  ambit  of
         the relevant respondent's policy  in  the  Immigration  Directorate
         instructions ('IDI') and failed to acknowledge that once the  seven
         years' residence requirement is satisfied, there need to be "strong
         reasons" for refusing leave - see the limited reference to the  IDI
         at [37].  In adopting the approach it did the  First-tier  Tribunal
         erred in law and the decision needs to be remade.

ISW

     12. I accept that the First-tier Tribunal has irrationally described  a
         return trip to India in 2016 as a "mirror  image"  of  the  earlier
         trip to the UK in 2008.  As acknowledged by the First-tier Tribunal
         T was a little girl when she arrived and  is  now  a  young  woman.
         Nine years have elapsed and the children would be returning in very
         different circumstances and as very different personalities.

Remaking the decision

Approach to evidence

     13. Both representatives agreed that I should consider all the evidence
         for myself in making the relevant Article  8  assessment.   In  any
         event very little evidence was  disputed  by  the  respondent.   Ms
         Abone suggested that the ISW probably overstated the  impact  of  a
         return to India upon the children.

Best interests

     14. I begin the assessment by evaluating the primary  consideration  of
         D's best interests. I  appreciate  that  T  is  now  an  adult  and
         therefore focus my attention on D.  I  agree  with  the  First-tier
         Tribunal at [23] that at the time of its decision,  the  children's
         best interests lay in remaining in  the  UK.   To  summarise,  both
         children came to the UK at a young age (9 and 4) and have spent the
         most formative part of their lives in the UK. Throughout this nine-
         year period their lives have been shaped  by  UK  culture,  values,
         pastimes, living standards, language and the  prevailing  education
         system. Critical milestones in both their personal and  educational
         development have been passed and were looming at the time. They are
         both completely integrated into UK society and  culture.  This  has
         been cogently set out in the ISW report.  The ISW met with all four
         appellants and also spoke to the T's head of  A-Levels  at  college
         and D's head of year at  his  school.   This  evidence  provides  a
         detailed picture of two young  people  completely  immersed  in  UK
         society.

     15. I note that the First-tier Tribunal regarded the ISW report  to  be
         helpful (para 19).  I agree.  It helpfully sets out  a  summary  of
         the relevant  evidence  to  be  considered  as  part  of  the  best
         interests assessment and I accept it.  The First-tier Tribunal  was
         concerned that when setting out her opinion from page  18  the  ISW
         probably overstated the position.  I agree that there is some force
         in that concern.  There was no  medical  evidence  to  support  the
         conclusion that the children  would  suffer  significant  risks  to
         their mental health.  It is unlikely that the risk  to  D's  mental
         health will be significant but I accept his emotional well-being is
         likely to be adversely impacted for the reasons set out by the ISW.
          This includes his strong wishes and feelings.  It is important  to
         note that D's  head  of  year  considered  "it  would  be  a  great
         detriment to D's development both emotionally and educationally" to
         return to India and that he was thriving at school.

     16. I must assess D's best interests at the  date  of  hearing.   These
         remain the same as the position outlined in  the  ISW  report  save
         that the additional time spent in the UK at a formative  stage  has
         meant that it is now even clearer that his best  interests  lie  in
         remaining in the UK.  He is now in year 9 and is doing very well at
         school.

     17. I conclude that the best interests of D, viewed through the lens of
         Article 8 private life, would be overwhelmingly served by remaining
         in the UK. There are five dominant factors: (i) nine  years  length
         of residence in the UK (ii) full integration in UK  society,  (iii)
         age and formative years in the UK, (iv) D has minimum personal ties
         with India - whilst I accept  he  clearly  has  links  through  his
         parents and ethnicity, and has  a  clear  understanding  of  Indian
         culture, he was only four when he left and I accept he sees himself
         as thoroughly British with an  identity  based  on  British  multi-
         cultural society, (5) D will find it very difficult  to  return  to
         India at this particular stage of his education and childhood.   He
         is  a  quiet  child  with  a  small  but  close  and  long-standing
         friendship group, and is likely to find it  particularly  difficult
         to get accustomed to everything new, even with  the  assistance  of
         loving and supportive parents.

Proportionality

     18.  I  am  mindful  that  the  best  interests   assessment   is   not
         determinative of the question posed section  117B(6)  of  the  2002
         Act, namely whether it would be reasonable to expect D to leave the
         UK.  As Elias LJ noted in MA (Pakistan)  at  [47]  even  where  the
         child's  best  interests  are  to  stay,  it  may  still   be   not
         unreasonable to require the child to leave.  That will depend  upon
         a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the links in the  UK
         and India, as well as any other relevant wider considerations - see
         [45] of MA (Pakistan), EV (Philippines) v SSHD at  [34-37]  and  PD
         and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri  Lanka  [2016]
         UKUT 108 (IAC).

     19. This question cannot be answered without considering  the  parents'
         appeals, to which I  now  turn.   Their  Article  8  claims  cannot
         succeed under the Rules. They do not come remotely close  to  doing
         so. They can succeed only outwith the Rules.  The dismissal of  the
         parents' appeals would interfere with their rights to  respect  for
         their private lives. Since the impugned decisions are in accordance
         with the law and are in furtherance of a legitimate aim, namely the
         maintenance  of  immigration  control,  the  next  question  to  be
         addressed is whether they are proportionate.  It  is  important  to
         acknowledge  that  they  are  longstanding  unlawful   overstayers.
         Although they are law abiding, they have spent most of their  lives
         in their country of origin, India and significant  weight  must  be
         attached to their flagrant breach of immigration  controls  in  the
         UK.

     20. Proportionality  is  the  "public  interest  question"  within  the
         meaning of Part 5A of the 2002 Act. By section 117A(2) I am obliged
         to have regard to the considerations listed  in  section  117B.   I
         consider  that  section  117B  applies  to  these  appeals  in  the
         following way:

         (a)      The  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration controls is engaged.

         (b)      There is no infringement of the "English speaking"  public
         interest as all the appellants speak English.

         (c)      The economic interest must be engaged because T and P have
         been, and will continue to be, educated at public  expense  and  if
         all four appellants remain in the UK they will have the capacity to
         access other publicly funded services and benefits.   Although  the
         first appellant has worked repairing televisions  and  is  probably
         hard-working, such work in the UK has been illegal because  of  his
         immigration status.

         (d)      The private lives established by the  parents  during  the
         entirety of their time in the UK qualifies for the  attribution  of
         little weight only.

     21. This brings me back to section 117B(6), which provides:

             "In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child; and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom."

     22. It is not disputed that D is a "qualifying child" by virtue of  his
         length of residence in the UK and he has a genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationships with the first and second appellants, and is
         close to his sister.  In my consideration  of  D's  best  interests
         above I have already highlighted the salient facts and factors.   I
         must balance these with the outcome of  the  forecast,  which  must
         necessarily be undertaken, based  on  the  premise  of  the  entire
         family returning to India - see PD (supra). On the one  hand,  this
         would  be  hugely  disruptive  for  D  and   would   decimate   the
         friendships, relationships and activities that form the core of his
         private life. It would also obstruct his education, though I accept
         not irredeemably so. Importantly it would involve his transfer to a
         society whose culture, values, norms and language are unfamiliar to
         him. Emotionally, it would undoubtedly be  stressful  and  damaging
         given D's personality and outlook.  Furthermore,  this  fundamental
         transformation of his life and lifestyle would occur at an age  and
         stage of critical importance to his development.

     23. On the other hand, taking into account D's age and the support of a
         stable family unit, he would, foreseeably, adapt over  time.  There
         is no suggestion that his health would  be  detrimentally  affected
         other than the ISW's assessment that there will  be  a  significant
         risk to his mental health.  I do not accept that assessment because
         it is unsupported by cogent medical evidence.

     24. The test to be applied is that of reasonableness.  The  application
         of the reasonableness test involves a balance of all material facts
         and considerations - see MA (Pakistan) (supra). The application  of
         this test will invariably  be  intensely  fact  sensitive,  see  EB
         (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41, at [7] - [12], per Lord Bingham.  I
         attach significant weight to D's length  of  residence  in  the  UK
         (some 9 years).  Other factors of particular strength are: his time
         in the UK spanned three quarters of his life; his deep immersion in
         all aspects of life in this country;  the  critical  stage  of  his
         personal and educational development which has  been  reached;  his
         minimal personal connections with his country of  origin;  and  the
         likelihood that he will make a useful contribution to UK society.

     25. Furthermore, I must weigh D's best interests which have the  status
         of a primary consideration. The main countervailing factor is  that
         the first and second appellants have no legal right  to  remain  in
         the UK.  They have flagrantly  and  over  a  long  period  of  time
         flouted immigration control as unlawful  over-stayers.  This  is  a
         factor of undeniable weight. However, it has been frequently stated
         that a child's best interests should not be compromised on  account
         of the misdemeanours of its parents  -  see  Baroness  Hale  in  ZH
         (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, at  [20]-[21]  and  [35],  and  MA
         (Pakistan) at [52 and 53] and per Elias LJ at [102]:

             "In my judgment, the observation of the judge  to  the  effect
             that people who come on a temporary basis can be  expected  to
             leave cannot be true of the child. The purpose underlying  the
             seven year rule is that this kind of reasoning ought not to be
             adopted in their case. They are not to be blamed for the  fact
             that their parents  overstayed  illegally,  and  the  starting
             point is that their status should be legitimized unless  there
             is good reason not to do so. I accept that the position  might
             have been otherwise without the seven  years'  residence,  but
             that is a factor which must weigh heavily in  this  case.  The
             fact that the parents are overstayers and  have  no  right  to
             remain in their own right can thereafter  be  weighed  in  the
             proportionality balance against allowing the child to  remain,
             but that is after a recognition that the child's  seven  years
             of residence is a significant factor pointing the other way.

     26. I consider that there are strong factors supporting the  conclusion
         that it would not be reasonable to expect D to leave the UK.  There
         are no strong reasons that  bear  upon  D  pointing  in  the  other
         direction.  I have taken into account the fact that his parents are
         overstayers and have weighed that in  the  proportionality  balance
         but in my judgment this does  not  outweigh  the  preponderance  of
         factors in support of D remaining in the  UK,  as  outlined  above.
         Accordingly, his appeal succeeds under Article 8.

Parents

     27. Having thus concluded, the effect of section 117B(6)  of  the  2002
         Act is that the public interest does not  require  the  removal  of
         either parent.  The effect of dismissing the two  parents'  appeals
         would be to stultify the decision that T qualifies for leave -  see
         PD (supra).  In short it would be unreasonable and disproportionate
         (notwithstanding their immigration history) to remove  the  parents
         because this would inevitably mean that T would have to leave  with
         them.  The first and second appellants' appeals  therefore  succeed
         under Article 8.

  T

     28. I now turn to the remaining family member T.  She is  no  longer  a
         child as she is 18 but she is entirely dependent upon her  parents.
         She lives as part of a close  family  unit  with  her  brother  and
         parents.  She is  at  a  pivotal  stage  of  her  education  having
         completed the first year of A levels  and  is  in  the  process  of
         completing her final year.  This marks a critical milestone in  her
         educational and personal development.  She has ambitions to  become
         a lawyer.  Her head of year  has  been  very  supportive  of  these
         ambitions and she is doing well at college.  Like her brother,  she
         has completed immersed herself in UK society and considers  herself
         to be thoroughly British.  I accept the opinion of the ISW that she
         faces a significant risk of emotional damage  if  she  is  made  to
         leave the UK at this stage.  Although she is no longer a child  she
         has only recently become an adult  and  continues  to  be  entirely
         dependent upon her parents.  They continue to see her  as  a  child
         and her circumstances have changed very little from  last  year  at
         this time, when she was still to be treated as a child.

     29. A return to India would  rupture  T's  private  life  and  lead  to
         substantial emotional damage.  T and D have always  lived  together
         as siblings, even when  their  parents  were  in  the  UK.   In  my
         judgment it would be disproportionate to require  T  to  return  to
         India.   There  would  be  a  substantial  interference  with   her
         education, friends and relationship with her brother  and  parents.
         This interference is not outweighed by any countervailing  factors.
         Unlike her parents, her immigration history cannot be used  against
         her - she was nine when a decision was made by her parents to bring
         her to the UK.



Decision

     30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of  law
         and is set aside.

     31. I remake the decision by allowing the appeals of all the appellants
         on Article 8 of the ECHR grounds.


Signed:     Ms Melanie Plimmer    Dated: 12 January 2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
