
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06020/2018
     HU/06029/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10th May 2019                        |On 24 May 2019                      |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            asm (first Appellant)
                           gaam (second Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms E Lanlehin of Counsel (directly instructed)
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appealed against a  decision  of  Judge  Manyarara  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 29th October
    2018.

 2. The Appellants are Nigerian citizens  born  8th  March  1971  and  20th
    October 2011 respectively.  The first Appellant is the  mother  of  the
    second Appellant.

 3. The Appellants made a human rights claim on 20th February 2017  seeking
    leave to remain in the UK.  The first Appellant contended that she  had
    resided in the UK since 1995, and the second Appellant was born in  the
    UK.  The application was refused on 16th February 2018.

 4. The appeals were  heard  together  on  8th  October  2018.   The  judge
    produced  a  comprehensive  decision  dismissing  the  appeals  on  all
    grounds.  The judge rejected the first Appellant's claim to  have  been
    residing in the UK since 1995.  It was found that the  first  Appellant
    had resided in this country since 2003.  She had therefore not  resided
    in the UK for twenty years.

 5. The judge found the first Appellant could not satisfy the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  as  there  would  be  no  very  significant
    obstacles to her integration into Nigeria.  The judge did not find  any
    compelling or exceptional circumstances existing  in  relation  to  the
    first Appellant.

 6. With reference to the second Appellant, the judge found  that  she  was
    not a qualifying child at the date of hearing.  The best  interests  of
    the second Appellant would be to remain with her mother, and the  judge
    concluded that the removal of the  Appellants  from  the  UK  would  be
    proportionate and there would be no breach of Article  8  of  the  1950
    European Convention.

 7. The Appellants applied for permission to the Upper Tribunal in relation
    to the findings made by the judge in relation to the second  Appellant.
    It was submitted that the  judge  had  erred  by  providing  inadequate
    reasoning and had not reached a  firm  conclusion  as  to  whether  the
    second Appellant's best interests would be served by remaining  in  the
    UK.  It was submitted  the  judge  could  not  carry  out  an  adequate
    proportionality assessment, not having made a finding  in  relation  to
    the second Appellant's best interests.

 8. It was submitted that the judge had erred by finding  that  the  second
    Appellant was not a qualified child at the date  of  the  FtT  decision
    which was  24th  October  2018.   It  was  contended  that  the  second
    Appellant at that date  was  a  qualified  child  for  the  purpose  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

 9. It was further contended that  the  judge  had  fallen  into  error  by
    failing to treat the  second  Appellant  as  a  qualifying  child,  and
    failing to take into account case law such as MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA
    Civ 705, and MT and ET (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKUT  00088  (IAC).   It  was
    contended that the judge had erred by adopting  a  wrong  approach  and
    failing to recognise that the attainment of seven years'  residence  in
    the UK as a child should lead to a grant  of  leave  to  remain  unless
    there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grimmett of the FtT.

Error of Law

11. On 27th February 2019 I heard submissions from both parties in relation
    to error of law.  The Respondent contended that there was  no  material
    error.  On behalf of  the  Appellants  reliance  was  placed  upon  the
    grounds upon which permission to appeal had been granted.  Full details
    of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of  permission,
    the submissions made by both parties and my conclusions  are  contained
    in my decision dated 28th February 2019 promulgated on 11th March 2019.
     I found that the judge had erred in law in considering the position of
    the second Appellant, and set aside the FtT decision.  I set out  below
    paragraphs 13-23 of my  decision,  which  contain  my  conclusions  and
    reasons for setting aside the FtT decision;

         "13. I do not accept that it can fairly be said that the judge  did
             not consider the best interests of the second  Appellant.   At
             paragraph 94 the judge concludes;

                  "94. Next, I give primacy to the  best  interests  of  the
                      child.  I hold  that  the  best  interests  of  these
                      children will primarily be served by the  maintenance
                      of the family unit.  In the absence of any compelling
                      circumstances, I have  given  effect  to  the  public
                      interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration
                      controls."

         14.  The conclusion of the judge is that  as  the  first  Appellant
             would be returning to  Nigeria,  the  best  interests  of  the
             second Appellant would be served by  remaining  with  her  and
             travelling to Nigeria.

         15.  I do not accept the contention contained in the grounds, or in
             Counsel's speaking  note,  that  the  second  Appellant  is  a
             qualifying child with reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv).
             In order to be a qualified child under this provision, a child
             must have been living in the UK continuously for  seven  years
             at the date of application.  It is common ground that the date
             of application was 17th February 2017.  The second  Appellant,
             who was born  in  the  UK,  had  not  lived  in  this  country
             continuously for seven years at that date.

         16.   However  for  the  purposes  of  section   117B(6)   of   the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the  2002  Act)
             there is no requirement that a  child  must  live  in  the  UK
             continuously for seven years at the date of application.   The
             definition of a  qualifying  child  is  contained  in  section
             117D(1) and means a person under  the  age  of  18  who  is  a
             British citizen or who has lived in the UK  for  a  continuous
             period of seven years or more.

         17.  I am persuaded that the judge erred in not treating the second
             Appellant as a qualifying child.   The  second  Appellant  was
             born on 20th October 2011  and  therefore  had  accrued  seven
             years' continuous residence in this country  on  20th  October
             2018.   The  hearing  took  place  on  8th  October  2018  and
             therefore the judge was correct as at  that  date  the  second
             Appellant had not accrued seven years'  continuous  residence.
             However the judge did not make her  decision  at  the  hearing
             date.   The  decision  was  made  on  24th  October  2018  and
             promulgated on 29th October 2018.  Therefore at  the  date  of
             the FTT decision and date of promulgation the second Appellant
             was a qualifying child in accordance with  the  definition  in
             section 117D of the 2002 Act.

         18.  Therefore in my view the judge should have considered  section
             117B(6) which provides in the case of  a  person  who  is  not
             liable to deportation, the public interest  does  not  require
             the person's removal, where  the  person  has  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             UK.

         19.   The  judge  should  have  considered  whether  it  would   be
             reasonable for  the  second  Appellant  to  leave  the  UK  by
             reliance upon case law such as MA (Pakistan) in which  it  was
             held at paragraph 49 that the fact that a child  had  been  in
             the UK for seven years would  need  to  be  given  significant
             weight  in  the  proportionality  exercise  for  two   related
             reasons, first because  of  its  relevance  to  determine  the
             nature and strength of the child's best interests, and  second
             because it establishes as a starting point that  leave  should
             be granted unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

         20.  The Respondent's own guidance in force at the date of the  FTT
             decision, which was published on 22nd February  2018  contains
             at page 75 the guidance that "strong reasons will be  required
             in order to refuse a case where the outcome will be removal of
             a child with continuous UK residence of seven years or more."

         21.  Therefore, notwithstanding the  comprehensive  nature  of  the
             judge's decision, I am persuaded that she erred in law by  not
             treating the second Appellant as a qualifying child as at  the
             date of her  decision,  and  therefore  adopted  an  incorrect
             approach when assessing whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
             expect the second Appellant to leave the UK.  The decision  of
             the FTT is therefore unsafe on this point and the decision  is
             set aside.

         22.  There was no challenge to the findings made by  the  judge  in
             relation to the first  Appellant  and  those  findings  stand.
             This is not an appropriate case to  remit  to  the  FTT.   The
             decision does need to be remade but it  can  be  appropriately
             remade by the Upper Tribunal.

         23.  There will be a further hearing before the Upper Tribunal  the
             purpose of which is to consider  the  best  interests  of  the
             second Appellant and whether in the circumstances it would  be
             reasonable to expect her to leave the UK.   Findings  made  in
             relation to the first Appellant are preserved."

Remaking the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. The first Appellant attended the hearing but Ms Lanlehin indicated that
    no further oral evidence would be called.  I received from Ms  Lanlehin
    a skeleton argument.

13. I ascertained that I had all documentation to be  relied  upon  by  the
    parties.  This was the documentation that had been before the FtT which
    amounted to the Respondent's bundle with  Annexes  A-F,  and  a  bundle
    prepared on behalf of the Appellants with Annexes A-B.

14. The representatives made oral submissions.  On behalf of the Appellants
    reliance was placed upon the skeleton argument.  In  brief  summary  it
    was submitted that the best interests of the second Appellant would  be
    to remain with her mother and to remain in  the  UK.   Section  117B(6)
    must be considered and it was argued that it would  not  be  reasonable
    for the second Appellant to leave the UK.  It was  submitted  that  the
    Respondent had not demonstrated  that  there  were  any  compelling  or
    powerful reasons to indicate that it would be reasonable for the second
    Appellant to leave the UK.   Therefore  the  public  interest  did  not
    require either Appellant to leave the UK.

15. Miss Isherwood disagreed and submitted that the only evidence  produced
    on behalf of the second Appellant indicated that  she  attended  school
    and had more than seven years' continuous residence in the UK.  She  is
    only 8 years of age, and Miss Isherwood pointed out  that  Azimi-Moayed
    [2013] UKUT 197 confirmed that seven years' residence  from  age  4  is
    likely to be more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
    life.  The second Appellant had not accrued seven years' residence from
    age 4.  It was submitted that it would be  reasonable  for  the  second
    Appellant to leave the UK and return to Nigeria with her mother.

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. It is accepted on behalf of the Appellants that they cannot satisfy the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I am asked to consider  Article
    8 of the 1950 Convention outside the Rules.  I find that Article  8  is
    engaged.  The Appellants have established  family  life  together,  and
    private lives.  There would be no interference with their  family  life
    if they were removed to Nigeria together.  If the first  Appellant  did
    not have a child, her appeal would fail.

18. The burden of proof lies on the Appellants to establish their  personal
    circumstances in the UK, and to establish that family and private  life
    exists which engages Article 8, and why the decision  to  refuse  their
    human rights claim interferes disproportionately in  their  family  and
    private life rights in this country.   It  is  for  the  Respondent  to
    establish the public interest factors weighing against the  Appellants.
    The standard of proof is a balance  of  probabilities  throughout.   In
    deciding this appeal I take into account  the  balance  sheet  approach
    recommended at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60.

19. The factual matrix is that the Appellants live together in the UK.  The
    first Appellant has lived here since 2003.  The  second  Appellant  was
    born in the UK and has not visited Nigeria.  She is in the early stages
    of her education.

20. The best  interests  of  a  child  must  be  considered  as  a  primary
    consideration but not a  paramount  consideration,  and  not  the  only
    consideration.  Factors relevant to considering the best interests of a
    child are set out in paragraph 35 of EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874.  The factors involve considering the age of the child, the  length
    of time the child has been in the UK, how long the child  has  been  in
    education and what stage the education has reached.  There must also be
    consideration of the extent to which the child has been distanced  from
    the country where  it  is  proposed  they  return,  how  renewable  the
    connection with that country may be, and to what extent the child would
    have linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to  life  in
    that country, and  the  extent  to  which  the  course  proposed  would
    interfere with the private life of the child or the child's  rights  if
    there are any, as a British citizen.

21. Because of the age of the child it is clear  that  her  best  interests
    would be served by remaining with her mother.  She was born in  the  UK
    and therefore has now been living  continuously  in  this  country  for
    eight years and seven months.  She  is  in  the  early  stages  of  her
    education and not at a critical stage.  It is relevant that the  second
    Appellant has never visited Nigeria, but I do not find that there would
    be significant linguistic, medical or other significant difficulties in
    adapting to life in Nigeria.

22. If the second Appellant was removed to  Nigeria  this  would  interfere
    with the private life that she has established.  She is not  a  British
    citizen, but I am satisfied that she regards this country as her  home,
    as she has never known any other country, she speaks  English,  and  as
    one would expect, has made friends with other children, both inside and
    outside  school.   Taking  all  those  circumstances  into  account,  I
    conclude, on balance, that the best interests of the  second  Appellant
    would be to maintain the status quo and for her to remain  in  the  UK.
    This does not however mean that her appeal must  be  allowed.   I  must
    consider any other relevant considerations.

23. I must have regard to the considerations in section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act, which confirms  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest.

24. In particular I  must  consider  section  117B(6)  which  for  ease  of
    reference I set out below;

         '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.'

25. The first Appellant is not liable to deportation.  It is accepted  that
    she has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the  second
    Appellant.  The second Appellant is a qualifying child because she  has
    resided continuously in the UK for a period in excess of seven years.

26. I therefore must decide whether it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    the second Appellant to leave the UK.  I find it is relevant to  follow
    the guidance, on this point, contained in MA (Pakistan).  At  paragraph
    49 it is confirmed that seven years' continuous residence in  the  case
    of a child must be given significant weight, not only  in  relation  to
    the child's best interests, but because it establishes  as  a  starting
    point that leave should be granted unless there are powerful reasons to
    the contrary. The Respondent's own guidance makes a similar point. This
    is referred to at paragraph 20 of  my  error  of  law  decision,  which
    confirms that "strong reasons will be required in  order  to  refuse  a
    case where the outcome will be removal of a child  with  continuous  UK
    residence of seven years or more".







27. It has  now  been  established  that  when  considering  the  issue  of
    reasonableness, I must consider the  position  of  the  child,  without
    taking into account the immigration history of the parents.   This  was
    confirmed in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and I set out below paragraphs
    16 and 17 of that decision;

         "16. It is natural to  begin  with  the  first  in  time,  that  is
             paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  This paragraph is directed solely to
             the position of the child.  Unlike its predecessor  DP5/96  it
             contains  no  requirement  to  consider  the  criminality   or
             misconduct  of  a  parent  as  a  balancing  factor.   It   is
             impossible  in  my  view  to  read  it  as  importing  such  a
             requirement by implication.

         17.  As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated  the  substance
             of the rule without material change,  but  this  time  in  the
             context of the right of the parent to remain.  I  would  infer
             that it was intended to have the same  effect.   The  question
             again is what is 'reasonable' for the child.  As Elias LJ said
             in  MA  (Pakistan)  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
             Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016]  1  WLR  5093,  para  36,
             there is nothing in the subsection to import  a  reference  to
             the conduct of the parent.  Section 117B sets out a number  of
             factors relating to those seeking leave to  enter  or  remain,
             but criminality is not one of them.  Section 117B(6) is on its
             face freestanding,  the  only  qualification  being  that  the
             person relying on it is not liable to deportation.   The  list
             of relevant factors set out  in  the  IDI  guidance  (para  10
             above) seems to me wholly appropriate and sound in law, in the
             context of section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)."

28. I also follow the guidance in AB (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA
    Civ 661 and set out below paragraph 59 of that decision;

         "59. Accordingly, the position has now been reached in  which  this
             Court is not only free to depart from the  approach  taken  by
             Laws LJ in MM (Uganda) but indeed is  required  to  do  so  in
             order to follow the binding decision of the Supreme  Court  in
             KO (Nigeria).  That can be done  by  following  the  preferred
             approach of Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan), at para  36,  where  he
             said:

                  "Looking at section 117B(6) free from authority,  I  would
                  favour the argument  of  the  appellants.   The  focus  on
                  paragraph (b)  is  solely  on  the  child  and  I  see  no
                  justification for reading the concept of reasonableness so
                  as  to  include  a  consideration  of  the   conduct   and
                  immigration history of the parents as part of  an  overall
                  analysis of the public interest.  I do not deny that  this
                  may result in some cases in undeserving  applicants  being
                  allowed to remain, but that is not in my view a reason for
                  distorting the language of the section.  Moreover,  in  an
                  appropriate case  the  Secretary  of  State  could  render
                  someone liable to  deportation,  and  thereby  render  him
                  ineligible to rely on this provision, by  certifying  that
                  his or her presence would not be conducive to  the  public
                  good.""

29. Because of the second Appellant's length  of  continuous  residence,  I
    find I must follow the guidance in MA (Pakistan), that  as  a  starting
    point leave must be granted unless there are powerful  reasons  to  the
    contrary.  I do not find that the  immigration  history  of  the  first
    Appellant is relevant when considering reasonableness.  I do  not  find
    that the Respondent has pointed  to  any  powerful  reasons  why  leave
    should not be granted to the second Appellant.  In my view,  given  the
    length of residence, it will not be reasonable  to  expect  the  second
    Appellant to leave the UK where she has resided since birth.

30. Having made that decision, it follows that the public interest does not
    require the removal of the  first  Appellant  who  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with her daughter.

31.  As  section  117B(6)  is  satisfied,  I  find   that   it   would   be
    disproportionate to remove the Appellants given my conclusion  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the second Appellant to leave the UK,
    and the  public  interest   does  not  require  the  first  Appellant's
    removal, and therefore  the  appeals  are  allowed  with  reference  to
    section 117B(6) and Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds with reference to Article  8
of the 1950 Convention.

Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead
to contempt of court  proceedings.   This  direction  is  made  because  the
second Appellant is a minor,  and  is  made  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date 17th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The appeals  have  been  allowed  because  the  second
Appellant has resided in the UK for in excess of seven years.  That was  not
the case when the applications for leave to remain  were  initially  refused
by the Respondent.


Signed                              Date 17th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



















