
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06652/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th March 2018                             |On 5th April 2018             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                    MSUR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tauhid, Hubers Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  16th
    September 2015 to refuse his application for leave to remain in the  UK
    on the basis of his private and family life.  First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Robinson dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated  on
    21st June 2017.  The  Appellant  now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal  with
    permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne.  I  note  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osborne  originally  granted  permission  to
    appeal on 22nd December 2017 but the  permission  decision  erroneously
    noted that permission was refused.  That was amended  on  17th  January
    2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  on
    27th August 2011 with entry clearance as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    valid until 31st October 2013.   On  2nd  July  2013  he  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student and  that
    application was refused on 9th January 2014.  He  made  an  application
    for leave to remain on the basis of his private and family life on  8th
    July 2015 and the refusal of that application of 16th September 2015 is
    the subject of this  appeal.   At  the  time  of  the  application  the
    Appellant was in a relationship with his partner, Ms G, whom he met  on
    1st July 2013.  His partner is a part-time teacher and suffers  from  a
    number of disabilities.  She has two  children,  who  reside  part-time
    with her and part-time with their father.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the appeal at paragraphs 29 to
    41 of the decision.  The judge considered  the  provisions  of  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   The  judge
    noted the date of the application for leave to remain, which  was  made
    on 4th June 2015, and noted that it is apparent from the evidence  that
    the Appellant and his partner had not been living together as  partners
    for two years at the time the application was made.  The judge  made  a
    number of findings in relation to the Appellant and his partner and the
    children and considered the best interests of the children.  The  judge
    found at paragraph 40 that the Appellant  "is  a  step  parent  without
    parental responsibility" for the two  children,  whose  main  carer  is
    their father although the children's mother  shares  the  care  of  the
    children when they stay overnight at her home at least  twice  a  week.
    The judge noted  that  the  Appellant  takes  an  active  part  in  the
    children's care but he is not their main father figure and although  he
    plays an important role in the children's lives he  "does  not  have  a
    parental relationship with  a  "qualifying  child""  [41].   The  judge
    accepted that there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with Ms
    G continuing outside of the UK but considered that there is  no  reason
    that the Appellant could not apply to the British High  Commission  for
    entry clearance as a  partner  [43].   The  judge  considered  that  an
    application for entry clearance may involve a temporary absence between
    the Appellant and his partner but that this would not lead to permanent
    family upheaval [45].  The judge  took  into  account  the  Appellant's
    immigration history and concluded that this is not a case  where  there
    are  compelling  reasons  for  considering  the  Appellant's  situation
    outside the Rules [47].  The judge concluded that no  special  elements
    had been presented in support of an Article 8 claim outside  the  Rules
    which suggest that the decision is disproportionate [48].

    Error of Law

 4. Two Grounds of Appeal are put forward.  The first ground contends  that
    the judge failed to give adequate reasons for the variation of grounds.
     It is contended that under Section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as amended by the Immigration Act  2014  the  judge
    had jurisdiction to hear all issues of the appeal in one  hearing.   It
    is contended that the judge erred in disregarding the fact that, by the
    time of the hearing, the Appellant and the Sponsor had  lived  together
    for over two years.  It is contended that the judge erred under Section
    85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. At the hearing Mr Clarke submitted that at paragraph 30 the judge noted
    that it was apparent from the  evidence  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner had not been living together as partners for two years  at  the
    date of the application.  In his submission the  grounds  conflate  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8.  I  have  some  difficulty  with  this
    submission.   Mr  Tauhid  accepted  that  the  judge's  conclusion   at
    paragraph 30 was correct under the Rules  but  he  submitted  that  the
    judge should have considered new evidence in relation to the fact  that
    the relationship had been ongoing for a period of two years by the date
    of the hearing.  This was an appeal on the basis that the decision  was
    not in accordance with the Immigration Rules or in accordance with  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.   The  appeal  could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules because, as accepted by the  Appellant,  he
    had not demonstrated that his partner was a "partner" within GEN.1.2 of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, which states:

         "GEN.1.2. For the purposes of this Appendix "partner" means-


             (i)  the applicant's spouse;


             (ii) the applicant's civil partner;


             (iii)    the applicant's fianc�(e) or proposed civil partner;
             or


             (iv) a person who has been living together with the applicant
             in a relationship akin to a marriage or civil partnership for
             at least two years prior to the date of application, unless a
             different meaning of partner applies elsewhere in this
             Appendix."


 6. Accordingly this appeal could only succeed under Article  8.   To  this
    extent the Appellant has not established that there  is  any  error  at
    paragraph 30 where the judge noted that the Appellant and  his  partner
    had not been  living  together  for  two  years  at  the  date  of  the
    application. In any event it is clear from reading the  decision  as  a
    whole that the judge was aware of the length of the relationship at the
    date of the hearing but did not consider that this was a weighty factor
    in considering proportionality [46-47].

 7. In essence it is contended in  this  ground  that  the  judge  arguably
    failed to consider the appeal under Article 8 outside  the  Immigration
    Rules taking into account the current circumstances. Mr Clarke accepted
    for the purposes of Article 8 that the judge could  take  into  account
    the circumstances at the date of the hearing. On first reading  it  may
    appear that the judge failed to consider the current circumstances from
    paragraphs 47 and 48 where he considered that there were no  compelling
    reasons for considering the situation outside the  Rules  and  that  no
    special elements had been presented in support of an  Article  8  claim
    outside the Rules.

 8. However, it is my view that paragraphs 47 and 48 do  not  disclose  any
    material error.  This is because, although the judge said that  he  was
    not considering the appeal under  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, that is exactly what he did do at paragraphs 29 to 48.  As  this
    was an appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 (because it was
    lodged in September 2015), it would perhaps have been helpful  had  the
    judge considered the Immigration Rules and then Article 8 in  the  form
    of an assessment under R  v  SSHD  ex  parte  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.
    However, this is not a material error because the  judge  did  consider
    all relevant factors.

 9. The judge clearly accepted that  there  was  family  life  between  the
    Appellant  and  his  partner  and  his  partner's  children.   This  is
    apparent, for example, at paragraphs 40, 41 and  43.   The  judge  took
    into  account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  could  not   meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, which is apparent from paragraph
    30.  In considering  proportionality  the  factors  to  be  taken  into
    account  are  those  set  out  at  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which the judge rehearsed at paragraph
    29 and took into account at paragraphs 30 to 33.  The judge  considered
    that the Appellant speaks English and that he built up  a  private  and
    family life with his partner at a time when his immigration status  was
    precarious.  The judge took into account that  the  Appellant  was  not
    able to work lawfully in the  UK  and  that  he  is  dependent  on  his
    partner.  He took into account the fact that his partner is working and
    is in receipt of disability living allowance and that she receives care
    support from Social Services.   He  took  into  account  the  partner's
    medical  conditions  [32].   The  judge  took  into  account  that  the
    Appellant's partner is able to support herself financially.  The  judge
    also took into account  the  fact  that  the  partner  shares  parental
    responsibility for the two children with her former partner.  The judge
    went  on  to  identify  at  paragraph  38  that  he  had  to   consider
    proportionality.  In considering proportionality the  judge  looked  at
    the best interests of the children,  identifying  relevant  factors  at
    paragraph 39.  At paragraph 40 the judge  considered  the  issue  of  a
    parental responsibility and parental  relationship.   The  judge  found
    that the Appellant is a step parent without parental responsibility for
    the children and that the father is the main  carer  [40].   The  judge
    found that the Appellant plays an active part in  the  children's  care
    and he supports his partner and has an important part of  play  in  the
    children's lives.  However, the judge concluded that the Appellant does
    not have a parental relationship with a qualifying child [41].

10. Again, in considering proportionality,  the  judge  took  into  account
    factors put forward by the  Respondent  at  paragraph  42.   The  judge
    looked at paragraph 43 at the family life  claim  and  considered  that
    there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  the  Sponsor
    continuing outside the UK.  The judge went on at paragraphs 43, 44  and
    45 to consider the impact of a temporary absence on their  relationship
    and the judge found at paragraph 46 that the Appellant did not  provide
    evidence that he has any strong social or community  ties  outside  the
    family home. Further, at paragraph 47 the judge specifically took  into
    account that the Appellant and his partner were in a  relationship  for
    three years at the date of hearing.  So, whilst the judge indicated  at
    paragraphs 47 and 48 that he was not conducting a freestanding  Article
    8 assessment it is very clear that that is what he actually did.  There
    were all relevant factors in a proportionality assessment and all taken
    into account properly by the judge.

11. It is contended in the second ground that the judge erred in failing to
    apply the correct assessment of the material facts.  The judge accepted
    that the Appellant has a  parental  relationship  with  the  qualifying
    children at paragraph 40 but it is asserted that  the  judge  erred  in
    also seeking parental responsibility.  Reliance is placed on  the  case
    of R (on the application of RK) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (s.117B(6); "parental relationship" (IJR)  [2016]  UKUT  31.
    Reliance is placed on the head note where the Tribunal said that it  is
    not necessary for an individual to have parental responsibility in  law
    for there to exist a parental relationship.  It  is  further  contended
    that the judge accepted that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    continuing family life in the UK but reliance is placed on the decision
    of Agyarko and Another [2017] UKSC 11 where at paragraph 51 the Supreme
    Court stated:

         "51. Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is  entitled
         to remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance  of
         this consideration depends  on  what  the  outcome  of  immigration
         control might otherwise be. For  example,  if  an  applicant  would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal will  generally
         be very considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if
         residing in the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted
         leave to enter, at least if an application were made  from  outside
         the UK, then there might be  no  public  interest  in  his  or  her
         removal. The point is illustrated by the decision  in Chikwamba  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department."


12. The grounds of appeal contend that the judge erred in relation  to  the
    findings as to parental responsibility and parental  relationship.   In
    the case of R (on the application of RK) the  Tribunal  summarised  its
    conclusions in the head note as follows:

         "1.  It is not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  "parental
         responsibility" in law for there to exist a parental relationship.


         2.   Whether a person who is  not  a  biological  parent  is  in  a
         "parental relationship" with a child for the purposes of  s.117B(6)
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 depends on  the
         individual circumstances and whether the role that individual plays
         establishes he or she has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent.


         3.   Applying that approach, apart  from  the  situation  of  split
         families where relationships between parents have broken  down  and
         an actual or de facto step-parent exists, it will be  unusual,  but
         not impossible, for more than 2 individuals  to  have  a  "parental
         relationship" with a child. However, the  relationships  between  a
         child and professional or voluntary carers or  family  friends  are
         not "parental relationships"."


13. It is clear from this guidance that it is  important  to  consider  the
    particular facts of the case to establish whether  a  person  is  in  a
    parental relationship with a qualifying child.  The judge did  that  at
    paragraphs 40 and 41.  The judge concluded that the Appellant  did  not
    have a parental relationship with the children.  At the hearing  before
    me Mr Tauhid was unable to direct me to any evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal as to the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    children.  He pointed to evidence from the Appellant's bundle at  pages
    78 to 84.  However, this evidence from the school and a psychologist in
    relation to the children makes no reference to the Appellant.  There is
    also a  letter  from  the  Sponsor's  ex-husband,  who  refers  to  the
    Appellant having a role in relation to looking after the children.  The
    Appellant also dealt with this issue in his witness statement.

14. In my view, it was open to the judge on the basis of this  evidence  to
    conclude that the Appellant did not have a "parental relationship" with
    the children.  The judge did not require the Appellant  to  demonstrate
    parental responsibility  but  instead  he  assessed  the  evidence  and
    reached the conclusion that the evidence did not demonstrate a parental
    relationship.  This was open to the judge on the evidence.

15. It is further contended in the Grounds of Appeal that the  judge  erred
    in failing to consider the guidance from the Supreme Court  in  Agyarko
    at paragraph 51.  Mr Clarke referred to the  decisions  in  R  (on  the
    application of Chen) v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
    separation -  proportionality)  (IJR)  [2015]  UKUT  00189  (IAC).   He
    submitted that the correct approach is that set out at paragraph 39  of
    that decision where the Tribunal said:

         "In my judgment, if it is shown by an individual (the burden  being
         upon him or her) that  an  application  for  entry  clearance  from
         abroad would  be  granted  and  that  there  would  be  significant
         interference with family life by temporary removal, the  weight  to
         be accorded to the formal requirement of obtaining entry  clearance
         is reduced.  In  cases  involving  children,  where  removal  would
         interfere with the child's enjoyment of family  life  with  one  or
         other of his or her parents whilst entry clearance is obtained,  it
         will be easier to show that the balance on proportionality falls in
         favour of the claimant than in cases which do not involve  children
         but where removal interferes with family life between  parties  who
         knowingly entered into  the  relationship  in  the  knowledge  that
         family life was being established whilst the immigration status  of
         one party was 'precarious'.  In other words, in the former case, it
         would be easier to show that the  individual's  circumstances  fall
         within the minority envisaged by the House of Lords in Huang or the
         exceptions referred to in judgments of the ECtHR than in the latter
         case.  However, it all depends on the facts."


16. Mr Clarke also referred to the decision in Hayat (nature  of  Chikwamba
    principle) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00444 (IAC) and to paragraphs 23 and 24
    where the Tribunal emphasised that the decision in Chikwamba made plain
    that where the only matter weighing on the  Respondent's  side  of  the
    balance is the public policy of requiring a person to apply  under  the
    Rules from abroad that legitimate objective will usually be  outweighed
    by factors resting on the Appellant's side of the balance and that  the
    Chikwamba principle  does  not  automatically  trump  anything  on  the
    State's side, such as a poor immigration history.  I further note  that
    at paragraph 51 of  Agyarko  the  Supreme  Court  said  that  where  an
    applicant was "otherwise certain" to be granted leave to  enter  if  an
    application were made from outside the UK,  then  "there  might  be  no
    public interest in his or her removal".

17. What is clear from the guidance in all three of these cases is that the
    matter comes down to a proportionality assessment  considering  all  of
    the facts in the case.  This is exactly what the judge has done in this
    case. The judge took into account the Appellant's relationship with his
    partner and the relationship with the children.  It is clear  that  the
    judge attached particular weight to the fact that the children's  lives
    would not be disrupted by a temporary absence by the  Appellant.   This
    was a relevant  consideration  in  assessing  whether  there  would  be
    significant interference with family life by  temporary  removal.   The
    judge considered all relevant factors in making this assessment.

18. I note that the grounds do not assert that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was perverse.  There is no allegation  either  that
    the judge failed to take anything into account.   In  my  view,  it  is
    clear, looking at the decision as a whole, that  the  judge  considered
    all relevant factors.  The judge did conduct a proper assessment  under
    Article 8 accepting that there was family  life  between  the  parties,
    considering the best interests of the children, considering the factors
    in Section 117B of the 2002 Act and  considering  proportionality.   In
    these circumstances it is clear to me that the judge reached a decision
    open to him on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make any material error of law in  his
assessment of the appeal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 28th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 28th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
