
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/06521/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4th July 2017                           |On 13th July 2017                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                            miss gita sunam damai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      entry clearance officer new delhi

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of Nepal, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated  19th  August
    2015 to refuse her application for entry clearance  for  settlement  to
    join her father, a former Gurkha soldier who was granted settlement  in
    the UK in April 2010.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters determined the
    appeal on the papers and dismissed the appeal on human rights  grounds.
    The Appellant sought permission to appeal  which  was  refused  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  in  a  decision  dated  12th  April  2017.    The
    Appellant's renewed application for permission to appeal was granted by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 8th May 2017.  Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
    considered it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not fully
    apply the principles contained in  Ghising  (family  life  -  adults  -
    Gurkha policy) [2013] UKUT 00160 (IAC) and Gurung & Others  (R  on  the
    application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 8 when reaching his decision.

 2. In considering family life the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the
    Appellant was 31 years old at the date of decision.  He noted that  the
    Appellant had been living in Nepal without her parents for  about  five
    years and appeared to have been living independently as asserted by the
    ECO.  The judge noted at paragraph 9:

         "There  was  little  evidence  before  me  as  to  the  Appellant's
         circumstances in Nepal.  For example, there was no evidence  as  to
         where she lives or who pays for it.  Nor was there any evidence  as
         to her educational level which would influence her ability to  gain
         employment.  Nor was I given any evidence as to what  attempts  she
         has made to find employment."

 3. The judge noted at paragraph 10 that there was evidence of  remittances
    to the Appellant from her father and evidence of  visits  made  by  the
    Appellant's parents to Nepal since coming to the UK in 2010.  He  noted
    that the main argument put forward by the Appellant in  her  Notice  of
    Appeal was that her parents need her to care for  them  but  the  judge
    noted that the Entry Clearance Officer pointed out that there would  be
    nothing to prevent the Appellant's parents returning to  Nepal  and  to
    the Appellant  caring  for  them  there.   The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant had not proved that she has  family  life  with  her  parents
    noting that she is an adult child and  must  prove  more  than  "normal
    emotional dependence".  The judge concluded that because of the lack of
    evidence as to her circumstances in  Nepal  and  any  reasons  why  she
    cannot get employment there he did not find that she had  produced  the
    necessary evidence that she is dependent on her parents  [12].   Whilst
    he accepted that the Appellant's parents send remittances to her, as no
    budget was produced he could  not  ascertain  whether  these  were  for
    necessities or luxuries.

Submissions

 4. The Appellant contends that there are  two  errors  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision.  It is  firstly  contended  that  the  judge
    erred in concluding that the Appellant has not established that she has
    a family life with her parents in  the  UK.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge went on to consider proportionality in  the  event  that  he  was
    wrong in relation to his assessment of family life and it is  contended
    that the judge erred in relation to his assessment  of  proportionality
    as well.

 5. Mr Lee relied on the recent decision by the Court of Appeal in the case
    of Jitendra Rai v ECO New Delhi [2017] EWCA  Civ  320.   In  that  case
    Lindblom LJ gave guidance on determining whether Article 8 was engaged.
     The Court set out the legal principles relevant to determining whether
    there is family life in a case such as this from paragraphs 17 onwards.
     The Court noted that in the case of Kugathas v Secretary of State  for
    the  Home  Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31,  Sedley  LJ  referred  to
    dependency as meaning "real" "committed" or "effective" "support".  The
    Court of Appeal noted that the Upper Tribunal accepted in the  case  of
    Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy)  that  the  judgment  in
    Kugathas had been "interpreted too restrictively  in  the  past".   The
    Upper Tribunal went on to say a significant factor in assessing whether
    or not there is family life is whether  or  not  the  adult  child  has
    founded a family of his own,  "if he is still single  and  living  with
    his parents, he is  likely  to  enjoy  family  life  with  them"  [61].
    Lindblom LJ made reference to the case of Gurung where  it  was  stated
    that in some instances an adult child, particularly if he does not have
    a partner or children of his own, may establish that he  has  a  family
    life with his parents and that it all depends on the facts.

 6. Lord Justice Lindblom discussed the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    the case of Rai and noted that the single factor which seemed  to  have
    weighed most heavily in the conclusion of the Upper Tribunal  Judge  in
    that case was the Appellant's parents' willingness to  leave  Nepal  to
    settle in the UK when they did.  The court accepted that it was open to
    the Upper Tribunal Judge to have regard to the Appellant's  dependence,
    both financial and emotional, on his parents which was a  relevant  and
    necessary consideration in his assessment but the  judge  also  had  to
    have regard to whether there was real, committed or  effective  support
    in the Appellant's case [36].  The Court accepted the  submission  made
    on behalf of the Appellant that the judge  should  not  look  for  some
    extraordinary or exceptional feature in the Appellant's  dependence  on
    his parents as a necessary determinant of the existence of  his  family
    life with them.  The Court of Appeal found  that  the  judge  erred  in
    concentrating on the Appellant's parents' decision to leave  Nepal  and
    settle in the UK without  "focusing  on  the  practical  and  financial
    realities entailed in that decision" [38].  Lindblom LJ said  that  the
    critical question under Article  8(1)  was  whether,  even  though  the
    Appellant's parents had chosen to leave Nepal to settle in the UK  when
    they did, the Appellant's family life with them subsisted then and  was
    still subsisting at the time  of  the  decision  [42].  The  issue  was
    identified as being whether the judge gives  careful  consideration  of
    all of the relevant facts on which the answer to this question depends.



 7. Mr Lee highlighted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  this  case
    accepted that there was evidence  of  remittances  by  the  Appellant's
    father and visits to Nepal since 2010 and he submitted that this was on
    its  face  evidence  of  real,  committed  or  effective  support.   He
    submitted that at paragraphs 12 and 13 the judge  fell  into  the  same
    errors identified by the Court of Appeal in Rai in that  he  seemed  to
    look for something more.  He submitted that  the  judge  in  this  case
    applied too high of a threshold.  He submitted that the judge was wrong
    to highlight the fact that  no  budget  had  been  produced,  doing  so
    demonstrated that the judge was looking  for  a  subsistent  dependence
    which was different from the test put forward by the Court of Appeal in
    the case of Rai.

 8. Mr Tufan accepted that this appeal  turns  on  whether  the  judge  was
    correct to find that there  was  no  family  life  in  this  case.   He
    accepted that the judge had failed to consider the  historic  injustice
    in sufficient detail in his assessment of proportionality. In terms  of
    family life Mr Tufan submitted that Judge  Walters  did  determine  the
    issue of family life as a question of fact.  He took into  account  the
    fact that there had been a voluntary separation for six years and  that
    the evidence was  sparse  in  relation  to  financial  remittances  and
    visits.  He submitted that there was nothing in this case to show  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had elevated  the  threshold.   Mr  Tufan
    referred to the case of AAO v Entry Clearance Officer [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    840 where at paragraph 35 the court said that:

         "Family life will not normally  exist  between  parents  and  adult
         children in the absence of further elements of dependency which  go
         beyond the normal emotional ties and that reliance on  the  further
         element of financial dependency will not  normally  breach  Article
         8."

    He submitted that it was open to the judge to attach little  weight  to
    the evidence in relation to visits by the parents  because  they  would
    not have only been visiting this Appellant.

 9. Mr Lee submitted that this appeal mirrors that in the case  of  Rai  as
    there the Tribunal was wrestling with the  assessment  of  evidence  of
    continuing financial dependence.  He submitted  that  the  judge  asked
    himself the wrong question here.  He should have asked whether there is
    real, effective and committed support in the context of  this  type  of
    case.

Discussion

10. A difficulty in this appeal is that the  case  was  determined  on  the
    papers and there was limited direct evidence from the Appellant and the
    Sponsor.  The Grounds of Appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  raised  a
    number of issues including the assertion that the Appellant is the only
    child not married yet, that the parents only moved to the UK when  they
    were permitted to do so, that she is  their  sole  dependent  daughter,
    that the parents are depressed in the absence of their  family  members
    and require her support, that  the  parents  keep  in  touch  with  the
    Appellant by telephone, that they have visited her, and that they  send
    money to her and provide regular financial support.  There was apparent
    evidence of financial remittances.  There  was  a  statement  from  the
    Sponsor indicating that the Appellant is dependent on her  parents  but
    is compelled to  live  in  Nepal  and  that  is  supported  by  regular
    remittances.  The letter refers to  emotional  and  financial  support.
    There was evidence of visits in the form  of  passport  stamps  on  the
    parents' passports.

11. However the First-tier Tribunal Judge found at paragraph 9  that  there
    was little evidence before him as to the Appellant's  circumstances  in
    Nepal, for example in relation to where she lives or who  pays  for  it
    nor in relation to her ability to gain employment.  The judge  accepted
    that there were remittances to the Appellant and visits by the  parents
    to Nepal the judge. However, despite referring to more  than  a  normal
    emotional dependence, the judge again referred to the lack of  evidence
    as to the Appellant's circumstances in Nepal  and  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant  had  failed  to  produce  necessary  evidence  that  she  is
    dependent on her parents [12].

12. The Court of Appeal in Rai summarised the current guidance in  relation
    to whether there is family life between  adult  relatives.  Looking  at
    paragraphs 7 to 13, I am satisfied  that  the  judge  properly  applied
    these principles to the evidence before him. He considered the evidence
    and concluded that there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate  that
    there is a family life between the Appellant  and  her  parents  within
    Article 8.

13. Although there was some evidence before the judge,  as  highlighted  at
    paragraph 10 above, there was a lack of any direct evidence as  to  the
    Appellant's circumstances in Nepal. Evidence of remittances and  visits
    to Nepal are not necessarily in themselves evidence of  real  committed
    or effective support between the parents and their adult daughter.  The
    judge had no evidence as to what accommodation the Appellant  lived  in
    or who paid for that accommodation.  There was no evidence  as  to  who
    the Appellant lived with before  the  parents  left  Nepal.  The  judge
    referred to the lack of evidence on several occasions in his  findings.
    In my view the issue in  this  appeal  was  not,  as  asserted  by  the
    Appellant, the judge's application of the wrong test,  but  rather  the
    lack of evidence before the judge as to the nature and extent of family
    life between the parties. This led to the judge's  conclusion  that  he
    could not be satisfied on the basis of the evidence before him that  in
    this case there was sufficient evidence of family life  within  Article
    8(1) between  this  Appellant  and  her  parents.   I  find  that  this
    conclusion was open to the judge on the basis of  the  evidence  before
    him. It may well be that the Appellant can make a  further  application
    with further evidence to demonstrate family  life.  However  the  judge
    could decide the appeal only on the evidence before him. In so doing he
    did not fall into error.

14. It was conceded by Mr Tufan that the judge failed to  adequately  apply
    the case law to his assessment of proportionality at paragraphs  19  to
    24.  However this is not a material error in light  of  the  fact  that
    there is no material error in  the  judge's  decision  in  relation  to
    family life.

15. In these circumstances I consider that there is no  material  error  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

17. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 7 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 7 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
