
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06794/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2017                   |On 8 February 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Farrukh asim
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Peterson of Counsel instructed by M & K
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S
    D Lloyd promulgated on 15 September  2016  in  which  she  allowed  the
    appeal of Mr Farrukh Asim, a citizen of Pakistan, born on  12  November
    1982.

2.   Although before me the Entry Clearance Officer is the appellant and  Mr
    Asim  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with   the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    the Entry Clearance Officer as  the  Respondent  and  Mr  Asim  as  the
    Appellant.

3.   The Appellant made an application for entry clearance as  a  spouse  in
    or around June 2015.  The application was refused for reasons  set  out
    in a Notice of Immigration Decision dated 18 August  2015.   In  short,
    the Respondent was not satisfied  that  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant  and  his  British  citizen  spouse,  Ms  Jaasia  Khan  ('the
    sponsor'), was a genuine and subsisting relationship.  Furthermore, the
    Respondent was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  satisfied  the
    eligibility requirements of the Rules  in  respect  of  finances,  with
    particular reference to the provisions of Appendix FM-SE which  specify
    the evidence  that  is  required  to  be  produced  in  support  of  an
    application such as that made by the Appellant.

4.   In this latter regard it is  appropriate  at  this  stage  to  note  in
    slightly  more  detail  the  consideration  given  in  the  Notice   of
    Immigration Decision in respect of Appendix FM-SE.  It  was  said  that
    the sponsor was employed by an organisation called MOT Centre  Ltd  and
    in support of this it was  identified  that  the  Rules  required  that
    certain materials be submitted - summarised by citation from the  Rules
    in the Notice.  In particular, reference is  made  to  wage  slips,  an
    employer's letter, and bank  statements.   The  Notice  of  Immigration
    Decision  then  goes  on  to  consider  the  particular  facts  of  the
    application and identifies an issue with the bank  statements  and  the
    payslips.  Nothing is said at this stage in respect of  the  employer's
    letter.  The deficiencies identified in respect of the bank  statements
    and the payslips were such that it was  considered  by  the  Respondent
    that it was not appropriate to exercise the  'evidential  flexibility'.
    (It is reasonable to infer the conclusion reached that this was  not  a
    genuine relationship was  also  relevant  when  considering  evidential
    flexibility.)

5.   The Appellant lodged a Notice of Appeal and  it  is  apparent  that  an
    employer's letter was submitted, along with other  documents,  attached
    to the Notice of Appeal.  The  employer's  letter  submitted  with  the
    Notice of Appeal is dated 3 September 2015 and is  therefore  a  letter
    that post-dates the Entry Clearance Officer's decision.  I am told, and
    have no reason to doubt, that it was the case that an employer's letter
    was also submitted with the original application.  Indeed, as observed,
    no issue was taken with regard to the absence of an employer's  letter,
    or indeed the substance and form  of  any  employer's  letter,  in  the
    Notice of Immigration Decision.

6.   The appeal in due course was listed before the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    Birmingham  on  2  September  2016.   The  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    identified the issues in the appeal and in particular at,  paragraph  5
    of her Decision, identified the concerns in respect of Appendix  FM-SE.
    Again, it is to be noted, consistent with the contents of the Notice of
    Immigration Decision, that no reference is made in the Judge's  summary
    of the Respondent's decision to any issue or difficulty in  respect  of
    an employer's letter.

7.   The Judge considered the evidence before her, and over paragraphs  6-10
    sets out her considerations with regard to the question of  the  nature
    of the relationship between the Appellant and  his  sponsoring  British
    citizen wife.  At  paragraph  10  the  Judge  concludes  that  she  was
    satisfied that theirs was a genuine and subsisting relationship.

8.   Thereafter, the Judge went on to consider  the  financial  requirements
    and the concerns raised in respect of Appendix FM-SE.  At paragraph  11
    the Judge says this in part:-

         "Having made my findings above, I find that  any  deficiency  could
         have  been  corrected  by  the  reasonable  application   of   that
         discretion and the missing documents could have been provided."

    The 'discretion' is a reference to  the  evidential  flexibility  built
    into Appendix FM-SE in respect of circumstances in  which  a  decision-
    maker may ask for further documentation or clarification  if  documents
    are deficient in some way.

9.   The particular issue that has become pertinent for the purposes of  the
    appeal before me relates specifically to the employer's letter.  It may
    be seen at paragraph 13 of the Judge's decision that  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer raised issues in respect of  the  employer's  letter
    and argued that it did not meet the requirements at  paragraph  12A  of
    Appendix FM-SE.  The Judge sets out those requirements, then goes on to
    consider them over  the  following  paragraphs.   It  is  perhaps  most
    convenient for me to simply recite what is said in those paragraphs:-

         "13. Mr Hogg [for the Respondent] avers that the employer's  letter
             does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  appendix  FM-SE.   The
             requirement in question, at paragraph  12A,  states  that  the
             letter should confirm


                  13.1.   The employment,
                  13.2.   gross annual salary,
                  13.3.   annual salary after tax and national insurance,
                  13.4.   how long the employment has been held, and
                  13.5   the  type  of  employment  (permanent,  fixed  term
                  contract or agency)


         14.  The letter provided confirms the employment  and  states  that
             she is a full time employee.  It gives the start date  as  1st
             November 2014 and gives the salary as 'approximately  �1430.77
             gross per four weekly period'.  I find that  the  requirements
             that I have numbered above as 13.1 and 13.4 are met  and  that
             no further comment is required on those.


         15.  Appendix  FM-SE  also  allows  for  some  discretion  where  a
             document does not contain all the specified  information,  but
             that the information is verifiable from  other  documents.   I
             find that the information given with regard to earnings was in
             line in the payslips provided.  I also  find  that  the  gross
             annual and net salary was verifiable from the payslips.


         16.  It is therefore only the final requirement that needs  further
             comment. The letter does  not  explicitly  state  whether  the
             employment is permanent, fixed term or agency.   I  find  that
             agency work could  have  been  reasonably  ruled  out  by  the
             evidence showing that the Appellant was being paid directly by
             the employer and was on the payroll scheme,  as  confirmed  by
             the accountants.  I also  find  that  it  would  have  been  a
             reasonable exercise of discretion to request clarification  of
             whether the employment was permanent or fixed term.


         17.  This appeal falls under the  appeal  regime  set  out  in  the
             Immigration Act 2014 and can only be brought on the basis that
             the decision interferes with  private  or  family  life  under
             Article 8 ECHR.  However, Appendix FM is the  UK  Government's
             interpretation of Article 8 rights and accordingly, Article  8
             in the first instance should be viewed through the lens of the
             Immigration Rules.  Having found that the Appellant meets  the
             Rules, I allow the appeal."

10.  The Respondent has  challenged  the  Decision  in  grounds  upon  which
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft  granted  permission  to
    appeal on 8 December 2016.  In short, the  Secretary  of  State  argues
    that the reality of the situation was that even  by  the  date  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  there  was  not  an  employer's
    letter  that  met  the  requirements  of  the  Rules,  and   in   those
    circumstances it was wrong for the Judge to conclude that the Rules had
    been met.  In turn it is suggested, with particular reference to the so-
    called 'near miss' principle, that the Judge's consideration of Article
    8 was on an unsound foundation.  Before me today Mr  Singh  essentially
    reiterates and emphasises  the  substance  of  those  grounds  and  the
    matters that were identified by Judge Woodcraft as  finding  favour  in
    this regard - specifically, to quote from the grant of permission, that
    it was arguable that:

         "the  Judge  wrongly  relied  upon  the  de  minimis  principle  in
         overlooking  the  defect  and  arguably  erred  in  requiring   the
         Respondent to exercise discretion to make further enquiries of  the
         employer when this was not a document missing from a sequence.   If
         the Judge was wrong to find... that the  Appellant  met  the  Rules
         that  finding  arguably  distorted  the  Judge's  assessment  under
         Article 8".

11.  Before me Ms Peterson as a preliminary matter brings  to  my  attention
    the fact that  there  was  an  absence  of  issue  in  respect  of  the
    employer's letter in the  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision.   In  this
    regard, with reference to the submission recorded at  paragraph  13  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision,  Ms  Peterson  in  effect
    suggests that the raising of an issue  in  respect  of  the  employer's
    letter by the Presenting Officer at the hearing  could  have  been  met
    with an argument that no such issue had  been  raised  previously,  and
    moreover there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  to  show
    that the employer's letter that was submitted with the application - as
    distinct from the employer's letter that was attached to the Notice  of
    Appeal - was deficient in any way;  indeed it is  said  that  it  would
    have been open to the Appellant to argue  that  it  was  reasonable  to
    assume that the letter submitted  with  the  application  was  entirely
    valid for the very reason that no issue had been taken with it  by  the
    Respondent in the refusal.

12.  Such a line of argument may well have  some  merit.  However,  no  such
    submissions were advanced before the First-tier Tribunal,  and  in  the
    first instance it is for me to consider the approach taken by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to the issue before her, rather  than  to  essay  a
    consideration of what might have been  had  the  case  been  put  in  a
    different manner.

13.  For completeness, and very much parenthetically, I  interject  at  this
    point to observe that I have now been provided with a letter  from  the
    employer dated 11 January 2017  which  does  indeed  specify  that  the
    sponsor's employment is  permanent  employment.   This  is  also  be  a
    convenient point to observe that  when  invited  to  clarify  what  the
    importance of the distinction between the different types of employment
    identified in Appendix FM-SE might be, Mr Singh was unable  to  say  in
    terms why it was necessary that where employment brought in  sufficient
    income (demonstrable by  express  statement  in  an  employer's  letter
    supported by payslips and bank statements), it was  also  necessary  to
    identify whether that employment was permanent,  fixed  term  contract,
    agency or otherwise.

14.  Be that as it may, I must consider the substance  of  the  Respondent's
    challenge.  It seems abundantly clear to me that  what  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was saying,  in  effect,  was  that  evidence  had  been
    produced in support of the appeal that demonstrated  that  the  sponsor
    was in employment of a type  that  would,  subject  to  the  evidential
    requirements of the  Rules,  satisfy  the  substance  of  Appendix  FM.
    Moreover, much of the specific evidential  requirements  could  be  met
    with a careful, albeit generous eye on the  documents  that  have  been
    submitted with the application, and inasmuch as there was only one area
    of remaining potential dispute, the Judge was satisfied that  that  was
    not such a cause for concern that it could not be said that  the  Rules
    were in substance met.

15.  I acknowledge  the  weight  of  the  Respondent's  arguments  that  the
    reality was that the Appellant had not satisfied  the  requirements  of
    the  Rules  -  albeit  that  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  to  the
    satisfaction of the Judge that the requirements of the Rules  could  be
    met in substance, or indeed could have been met  at  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decision. (Indeed on Ms Peterson's 'new' submission, might
    well have actually been met at the date of the Respondent's  decision.)
    The question really then becomes whether  the  Judge's  error  in  this
    regard could have 'upset' or 'distorted' a consideration under  Article
    8.

16.  In this regard it is common ground before me that the  nature  of  this
    application, being an application to join a spouse, is  such  that  the
    first two Razgar questions  are  to  be  answered  in  the  Appellant's
    favour.

17.  Putting aside Ms Peterson's 'new' argument that was not  raised  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, in light of my observation that it does  seem,
    on the face of it, that the Rules were not met to the letter in respect
    of the evidential  requirements,  there  is  no  outstanding  issue  in
    respect of the third and fourth Razgar questions.

18.  Accordingly the issue under Article 8, as it frequently is in cases  of
    this kind, is really 'proportionality'. It is in this regard  that  the
    so-called 'near miss' principle requires  some  further  consideration.
    The Respondent cites two cases in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   Chau  Le
    (Immigration Rules - de minimis  principle)  [2016]  UKUT  00186  (IAC)
    deals specifically with the Immigration Rules and so is not  really  on
    point here where the appeal is brought under Article 8.  In respect  of
    Article 8 the Secretary of State brings to attention the case of  Patel
    [2013] UKSC 72 (albeit that it is the Court Court  of  Appeal  decision
    that is cited in the Grounds).

19.  In Patel Lord Carnwath gave consideration to  what  appeared  to  be  a
    tension between two lines of authority in respect of the relevance of a
    situation where an appellant failed in only a minimal  way  to  satisfy
    the requirements of the Rules, and the way in which that  should  sound
    in a consideration under Article 8.  I find it helpful to  revisit  the
    consideration of the authorities and the view then taken by the Supreme
    Court - set out in  Patel  at  paragraphs  45-57.   Lord  Carnwath  had
    particular regard to the approach taken by Lord Justice Stanley Burnton
    in the case of Miah v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
    QB 35, and at paragraph 53 of Patel said the following:

         "Faced with the  conflict  between  the  approach  taken  in  these
         authorities and that of Pankina Burnton LJ had 'no  difficulty'  in
         preferring the former, which he regarded as binding  on  the  court
         ... He could see no principled basis for distinguishing, as  Sedley
         LJ had proposed, between Rules to which the near-miss principle did
         and did not apply.  In particular he disagreed with Sedley LJ  that
         a financial  criterion  'has  in  itself  no  meaning',  and  could
         therefore be distinguished from other Rules, such as those relating
         to academic qualifications, in respect of which 'a miss is as  good
         as a mile'.  In conclusion he said at paragraphs 25 - 26:


             'Finally, quite apart from authority, I  prefer  the  approach
             stated in Mongoto's case ... and Rudi's case ... A rule  is  a
             rule. The considerations to which  Lord  Bingham  referred  in
             Huang's case  ...   require  rules  to  be  treated  as  such.
             Moreover, once an apparently bright-line rule is  regarded  as
             subject to a near-miss penumbra, and a  decision  is  made  in
             favour of  a  near  miss  applicant  on  that  basis,  another
             applicant will appear claiming to be a near miss to that  near
             miss. There would be  a  steep  slope  away  from  predictable
             Rules, the efficacy and utility of which would be undermined.'


         For these reasons, I would dismiss the appeal in  relation  to  the
         'near miss' argument. In my  judgment,  there  is  no  'near  miss'
         principle applicable to the Immigration  Rules.  The  Secretary  of
         State, and on appeal the Tribunal, must assess the strength  of  an
         Article 8 claim, but the requirements of  immigration  control  are
         not weakened by the degree of non-compliance with  the  Immigration
         Rules."

20.  Lord Carnwath continued at paragraph 54:

     "The difference between the two positions may not be as  stark  as  the
         submissions before  us  have  suggested.   The  most  authoritative
         guidance on the correct approach  of  the  Tribunal  to  Article  8
         remains that of Lord Bingham in Huang.  In  the  passage  cited  by
         Burnton LJ Lord Bingham observed that the  Rules  are  designed  to
         identify those to whom 'on  grounds  such  as  kinship  and  family
         relationship and dependence' leave to enter should be granted,  and
         that such Rules 'to be administratively workable,  require  that  a
         line be drawn somewhere'. But that was no more  than  the  starting
         point for the consideration of Article 8. Thus in Mrs  Huang's  own
         case, the most relevant rule (rule 317) was  not  satisfied,  since
         she was not, when the decision was made, aged 65 or  over  and  she
         was not a widow. He commented at para 6:

     'Such a rule, which does not lack  a  rational  basis,  is  not  to  be
             stigmatised as arbitrary or objectionable. But an  applicant's
             failure to qualify under the Rules is for present purposes the
             point at which to begin, not end, consideration of  the  claim
             under Article 8. The terms of the Rules are relevant  to  that
             consideration, but they are not determinative."

21.  Then, at paragraphs 55-56:

      "Thus  the  balance  drawn  by  the  Rules  may  be  relevant  to  the
         consideration of proportionality. I said much  the  same  in  Rudi.
         Although I rejected the concept of a 'near-miss principle',  I  did
         not see  this  as  inconsistent  with  the  Collins  J's  words  in
         Lekstaka:

      'Collins  J's  statement,  on  which  the  court  relied   ...   seems
             unexceptionable. It is saying no more, as I read it, than that
             the practical or compassionate considerations  which  underlie
             the policy are also likely to be  relevant  to  the  cases  of
             those who fall just outside it, and to  that  extent  may  add
             weight to their argument for exceptional treatment. He is  not
             saying that there arises any presumption or  expectation  that
             the policy will be extended to embrace them.'

         ...

         56.  Although the context of the  Rules  may  be  relevant  to  the
         consideration of proportionality, I agree with Burnton LJ that this
         cannot be equated with a formalised 'near miss' or 'sliding  scale'
         principle, as argued for by Mr Malik. That approach is  unsupported
         by Strasbourg authority, or by a proper reading of  Lord  Bingham's
         words. Mrs Huang's case for favourable treatment outside the  Rules
         did not turn on how close she had come to compliance with rule 317,
         but on the application of the family  values  which  underlie  that
         rule and are at the heart also of Article  8.  Conversely,  a  near
         miss under the Rules cannot provide substance  to  a  human  rights
         case which is otherwise lacking in merit."

22.  As an aside, it is to be noted that the evidential requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules are not the same  as  the  substantive  requirements,
    that is to say the substantive  requirements  of  having  a  particular
    level of income is a distinct matter from the way in which  that  level
    of income is to be proved.  Nonetheless, this does not get  around  the
    point  that  a  'rule  is  a  rule'  and  requires  to  be   considered
    accordingly.  Similarly, although  it  is  not  at  all  clear  why  an
    employer's letter should specify the  type  of  employment,  I  am  not
    prepared to say without an evidential basis one way or the  other  that
    it can be said to be  an  arbitrary  requirement  that  the  employer's
    letter identifies whether  the  employment  is  permanent,  fixed  term
    contract or agency.  Again, the rule is the rule.

23.  It seems to me that what is being said in Patel is  that  whilst  there
    is no 'near miss' principle as such and no sliding scale, the fact that
    somebody comes close to meeting the requirements of the  Rules  is  not
    inevitably an immaterial consideration when looking at the substance of
    their Article 8 claim: "the context of the Rules may be relevant to the
    consideration of proportionality, [although]  this  cannot  be  equated
    with a  formalised  'near  miss'  or  'sliding  scale'  principle"  (my
    emphasis).  It is not, of course, in itself sufficient to make good  an
    Article 8 claim  that  the  Rules  were  only  just  missed.   What  is
    required, as identified in Patel, is that there needs to  be  something
    of substance engaging Article 8 underlying  the  circumstances  of  the
    particular case.  Plainly there is here.  This is a  case  specifically
    in relation to a spouse application, and where  the  Immigration  Rules
    are specifically designed to allow a qualifying applicant  to  maintain
    and develop family life in the United Kingdom;  the  Rules  necessarily
    also facilitate protection and promotion of  the  family  life  of  the
    sponsoring partner (who in this case is a British citizen).   It  seems
    to me that in substance that is what the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    clearly in mind: that there was nothing in the facts of this case  that
    ran contrary to the public interest in terms of what is  identified  in
    the substance of the Rules as being the characteristics of  a  suitable
    spouse entrant to the UK.

24.  The question then really becomes whether the integrity  of  maintaining
    effective immigration control by adherence to a published known set  of
    Rules is such that in all of the circumstances  of  this  case,  it  is
    appropriate and proportionate that rather than allow  the  appeal,  the
    Appellant be expected to resubmit an  application  in  the  appropriate
    format supported by evidence that satisfies the evidential requirements
    of the Rules.

25.  In my judgement the integrity of the system of immigration control  and
    the  public  interest  in  so  maintaining  is  itself  maintained  and
    reinforced by there being a degree of  sensible  in-built  flexibility.
    The Rules themselves provide for such flexibility.  There was, however,
    with regard to the employment letter, no consideration or  exercise  of
    flexibility, assuming always that  there  was  any  deficiency  in  the
    employment letter in the first instance.  The Judge  found  that  there
    should have been an exercise of discretion and flexibility.  Had  there
    been, then these matters could have been resolved to  the  satisfaction
    of the Appellant and his wife, and without any detriment to the  system
    of immigration control or the public interest.  In  short,  a  flexible
    and sensible approach consistent with the Rules and the inherent powers
    of the Respondent  would  have  resulted  in  this  particular  British
    citizen sponsor having been permitted to be joined in  the  UK  by  her
    spouse shortly after the date of the Respondent's decision.  To  expect
    this couple now to submit to further delay and the expense of  mounting
    another  application  in  my  judgement  would  not  be  reasonable  or
    proportionate.

26.  In short, I consider that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  reached  the
    correct result in her decision, albeit slipped up with  regard  to  the
    observation in respect of the requirements of  the  Rules  having  been
    met.  In all such circumstances I acknowledge the error of law inherent
    in what is said at paragraph 17 of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision,
    but I decline to exercise my discretion pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of
    the Tribunal Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to set aside the  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

27.  In the circumstances the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will
    stand and the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

28.  Although the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  of
    law in all of the  circumstances  it  was  ultimately  immaterial.  The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

29.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

