
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/06419/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 February 2018                        | On 20 March 2018                |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CAMEROON
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         mr Emmanuel Nyugap Tamngwa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ell, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The  respondent  (hereafter  the  claimant),  a  citizen  of  Cameroon,
    applied for a visit entry clearance for approximately 23  days  to  see
    his wife and son.  He stated that he wished to care for his wife whilst
    she underwent treatment for cancer.  The appellant (hereafter the Entry
    Clearance Officer or ECO) decided on 15 May 2017 that the claimant  did
    not meet the requirements of paragraphs V4.2-V4.10 of  the  Immigration
    Rules because he was not satisfied he intended to leave  on  completion
    of his visit; and because he was not satisfied the claimant's financial
    circumstances were as set out by him.  The ECO also concluded that  the
    claimant's application did not constitute a human rights claim.

2.   On appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge (Judge Henderson)  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal.  Despite finding that the claimant's wife would have
    available treatment for her cancer in Cameroon (paragraph 21) and  that
    it was "unlikely that he [the claimant] would be able to  provide  very
    much real substantive support  to  the  sponsor  during  such  a  short
    period" (23 days) (paragraph 25), the judge said he accepted that given
    the sponsor's current medical condition and stage of her treatment  "it
    would be extremely difficult and possibly risky for her  to  travel  to
    Cameroon" (paragraph 26).  The judge then addressed the  ECO's  reasons
    for refusal and concluded:


    27.  The respondent had refused the appellant's visa on the basis  that
         his was not a genuine intention to visit and referred to paragraphs
         4.2-4.10 of Appendix V - these relate to eligibility and are not in
         relation to  any  lack  of  suitability  or  previous  breaches  of
         Immigration laws (which are contained in paragraphs 3.1-3.16).   On
         the basis of the evidence produced, I do  not  understand  why  the
         appellant did not meet the provisions of paragraphs 4.2-4.10. There
         was  some  reference  in  the  RFRL  to  insufficient   information
         regarding his financial position but no evidence was referred to.


    28.  The main issue seemed to be that the  respondent  did  not  accept
         that the appellant would leave the UK at the end of his  visit.  In
         NG (Iran) v SSHD 2008 EWCA Civ 312 and LU 15.5.08  the  IJ  thought
         that AA and Others (Sector Based Work) Bangladesh 2006 UKAIT  00026
         precluded him, on a visit visa appeal, from giving  weight  to  the
         fact that the Iranian applicant had  previously  sought  to  settle
         here.  The Court of  Appeal  said  the  IJ's  reliance  on  AA  was
         misconceived and the Tribunal on reconsideration  was  entitled  to
         weigh that previous application in the balance and find that,  when
         taken together with other evidence, there was a strong  possibility
         that the applicant still intended to settle. However,  I  have  not
         seen any evidence from the respondent as to  why  it  was  believed
         that this was the case. He had left  the  UK  voluntarily  and  the
         evidence about his job in Cameroon was not challenged.


    29.  I have considered carefully the evidence on both sides relating to
         the question of proportionality and I find that,  on  balance,  the
         respondent's  decision  is  not  a  proportionate  one.  Given  the
         sponsor's  poor  state  of  health,  even  though  it  may  not  be
         impossible for her to travel to Cameroon to visit her  husband,  it
         would be risky and difficult for her to do so,  especially  with  a
         young child. The appellant wishes to make a short visit so that  he
         can be with the sponsor and see his child for  the  first  time.  I
         accept that he is unlikely to provide  any  substantive  care  with
         regard to her medical treatment over this period, but I find  that
         refusing him  the  right  to  see  his  wife  and  child  in  these
         circumstances would be a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
         right to family life.




         Notice of Decision


         30.  the appeal is allowed: the respondent's decision is in  breach
             of section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

3.   The ECO's four  main  grounds  of  appeal  were  as  follows.   It  was
    contended that the judge had legally erred by:

    (i)  considering he had jurisdiction to deal with the appeal,  when  in
         fact the claimant had not made a human rights claim;


    (ii) in assuming, contrary to Mostafa [2015]  UKUT  00112  (IAC),  that
         Article 8 was engaged by a bare refusal to permit a short visit  to
         the UK;


    (iii)    in failing  to  take  into  account  the  claimant's  previous
         actions undermining immigration  control  which  should  have  been
         considered as part of the proportionality assessment; and


    (iv) in making contradictory findings  on  the  issue  of  whether  the
         sponsor could return to Cameroon and be treated  there,  especially
         given that the sponsor's visa was due to expire  in  December  2017
         and [she] so could be expected to return to Cameroon soon.

4.   The ECO's first ground is hopeless; wisely, Ms Isherwood did  not  seek
    to maintain it.  Manifestly the claimant made a human rights claim both
    in form and substance.  He identified the human  right  he  alleged  to
    have been breached as Article 8 and specified that  he  relied  on  his
    right to respect for his family life relationship  with  his  wife  and
    son.  It did not merely rely on a formulaic mention  of  human  rights.
    Ahsan [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 applied.

5.   As regards the ECO's second ground, whilst the fact that the visit  was
    short-term was a relevant point to  be  considered  in  the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment, it is hard to see that the judge overlooked
    this, since he did indeed comment on it at paragraph 25.  Mostafa  does
    not support this ground since the Upper Tribunal itself  in  this  case
    identified the relationship between a husband  and  wife  as  one  that
    falls within the scope of Article 8(1) in the entry clearance  context.



6.   Jumping to ground (iv), this too lacks force.  The judge's findings  on
    whether the sponsor could return there were not contradictory.   It  is
    clear from paragraph 26 that the  judge's  finding  was  that  for  the
    sponsor to return to Cameroon given her "current medical condition  and
    stage of her treatment"  would  be  extremely  difficult  and  possibly
    risky.  That did not gainsay the other fact found, namely that, if  she
    were back there, she would have available treatment.

7.   Nevertheless ground  (iii)  is  of  a  different  order.   It  properly
    identifies a serious flaw in the judge's approach to the assessment  of
    proportionality.  The crux  of  any  proportionality  assessment  is  a
    balancing  exercise,  including  weighing  the  appellant's   interests
    against the public or community interest in  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control and  economic  well-being.   In  this  context  one
    obvious factor requiring to be weighed on the public interest  side  of
    the scales was the fact that the claimant had breached immigration laws
    when he was in the UK.  He had worked in breach of his  conditions  and
    had become an overstayer.  Another factor is that he  had  married  his
    wife at a time (in 2014) when his immigration  status  was  precarious.
    Further, his wife did not hold settled status and her leave was due  to
    expire in December 2017.

8.   The nearest the judge comes to addressing such factors is in  paragraph
    27.  The judge's reasoning therein appears to be that  they  could  not
    have been relevant because the ECO  had  not  sought  to  refuse  entry
    clearance for lack of suitability or previous breaches  of  immigration
    laws (which  are  contained  within  paragraphs  3.1-3.16).   But  that
    reasoning at best establishes that the ECO was prepared  to  hinge  the
    claimant's ability to meet the Immigration Rules solely on intention to
    depart and maintenance.

9.   Given that the judge had rejected the ECO's view that the claimant  had
    not made a human rights claim, the judge was only entitled to allow the
    appeal under Article 8 if satisfied that the  decision  amounted  to  a
    disproportionate interference  with  (disrespect  for)  the  claimant's
    right to respect for family  life.   Not  weighing  in  the  Article  8
    balance the aforementioned public interest factors was a clear  failure
    to take into account relevant matters and a clearly material  error  of
    law.

10.  Compounding this error was the fact that on the  judge's  own  findings
    the right to family life involved in the  entry  clearance  application
    was clearly seen as extremely contingent, being for a  very  short-term
    visit (23 days) and not one during which the claimant would be able  to
    provide very much real substantive support (paragraph 25).

11.  I would also observe that in paragraph 27 the judge appears to  reverse
    the burden of proof in relation to the  maintenance  requirement.   The
    ECO had also refused the application on the grounds that  the  claimant
    had  not  satisfactorily  verified  his  financial  circumstances.   At
    paragraph 27 the judge brushed this aside on the footing that  "[t]here
    was some reference in the RFRL to  insufficient  information  regarding
    his financial information but no evidence was referred to".   First  of
    all, it was not incumbent on the ECO to refer to evidence,  since  what
    was relied on was lack  of  evidence  on  the  part  of  the  claimant.
    Second, in any event the ECO did refer to evidence, e.g. the claimant's
    copy of his UBA statement.

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge's decision must be  set
    aside for material error of law.

13.  I now turn to consider re-making the decision.

14.  I consider that I am in a position  to  re-make  the  decision  without
    further ado.  The  decision  under  challenge  is  an  entry  clearance
    decision made in May 2017 and both parties have had an  opportunity  to
    present further evidence, but  chose  to  rely  on  the  state  of  the
    evidence as it was before the judge.

15.  As already stated, it is clear that the claimant made  a  human  rights
    claim and that his appeal is a human rights appeal.

16.  I consider first whether the  claimant  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules at V4.2-4.10 of Appendix V.  He clearly did not.   If
    on no other ground he clearly failed to show (as required  by  V4.2(e))
    that he had sufficient funds to cover all reasonable costs in  relation
    to his visit without working or accessing  public  funds.   But  in  my
    judgment the claimant also  failed  to  show  that  he  had  a  genuine
    intention to visit as required by V.4.2.(a)(c).   There  are  two  main
    reasons leading me to this conclusion.  First, the  claimant  said  his
    purpose was to care for his wife whilst she  was  undergoing  treatment
    for cancer, but the letter from the doctor that he produced to  support
    this claim stated that his wife  needed  her  husband  as  a  full-time
    carer.  This medical opinion pointed to the wife needing a considerably
    longer visit than 23 days.

17.  Second, the claimant had previously failed to comply  with  immigration
    law, working in breach of conditions and overstaying.  It is true  that
    he had eventually left voluntarily, but it would have been  obvious  to
    him that if the immigration authorities had had to enforce his removal,
    he would very likely have face debarment from being able to  apply  for
    entry clearance again.  At best his voluntary departure  mitigated  the
    seriousness of  his  immigration  offending;  it  did  not  negate  it.



18.  Having concluded that the claimant did not  meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules, I turn to consider whether he  was  nevertheless
    entitled to succeed on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.

19.  I have no difficulty accepting that the  claimant  has  a  family  life
    relationship with his wife and son and so comes  within  the  scope  of
    Article 8(1).  I am also  prepared  to  accept  that  the  ECO  refusal
    amounted to an interference with his right to respect for family  life.
    However I do not consider such interference was  disproportionate.   It
    is true that, it was clearly a family visit  underpinned  by  genuinely
    compassionate circumstances comprised by the wife's  medical  condition
    and ongoing treatment for cancer.  However, what I  have  said  earlier
    when analysing the decision of the FtT remains relevant here: the right
    to family life at stake in the context of a visit claimed to be for  23
    days is one having a more contingent basis than a longer-term stay.  In
    Entry Clearance Officer, Sierra Leone v  Kopoi  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1511
    Sales LJ said at [30]:

         "In my view, the shortness of the proposed  visit  in  the  present
         case is a yet further indication that the refusal of leave to enter
         did not involve any want of respect for anyone's  family  life  for
         the purposes of Article 8. A three week visit would not  involve  a
         significant contribution to 'family life' in  the  sense  in  which
         that term is used in Article 8. Of course, it would often  be  nice
         for family members to meet up and visit in this way.  But  a  short
         visit of this kind will not establish a relationship between any of
         the individuals concerned of support going beyond normal  emotional
         ties, even if there were a  positive  obligation  under  Article  8
         (which there is not) to allow a person to enter the UK  to  try  to
         develop a 'family life' which does not currently exist."

    This passage was cited with approval by Singh, LJ  in  SSHD  v  Onuorah
    [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1757  at  [35].   Further,  also  relevant  was  the
    claimant's immigration history. The marriage with the claimant's spouse
    took place at a time when both parties must have known his  immigration
    status was precarious and that is a relevant factor in the  context  of
    family life  as  well  as  private  life:  see  Rajendran  UKUT  (IAC).
    Further, the claimant had breached immigration law on his last stay  in
    the UK and had become an overstayer.  In addition, his wife's own leave
    to remain was limited and due to expire in just over six  months'  time
    (in December 2017).  The lack of satisfactory evidence relating to  his
    financial circumstances meant that he could not be treated  as  someone
    able to maintain and accommodate himself in the UK without recourse  to
    public funds.

20.  In my judgement  the  public  interest  factors  weighing  against  the
    claimant far outweighed the strength of his  family  life  interest  in
    being  granted  entry  clearance.   Notwithstanding  the  compassionate
    purpose of his visit, it cannot be  said  that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances warranting a  grant  of  entry  clearance  on  Article  8
    grounds.

21.  For the above reasons:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal against  the
    decision refusing him entry clearance as  a  visitor.   His  Article  8
    claim fails.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed:                                 Date: 16 March 2018
[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




