

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/06322/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Determination Promulgated       |
|On 29th October 2018                      | On 1st November 2018            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     B W
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Jaquiss, of Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGill, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1953. She  arrived  in
       the UK in 2002 as a visitor. She applied  to  extend  her  leave  to
       remain as a student, which was granted  from  March  2003  to  March
       2005. She then overstayed and in February 2006 applied to extend her
       leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules.  This  application
       was refused, and she appealed. Her appeal was allowed in a  decision
       promulgated  in  June  2009.  She  was  then  granted  a  period  of
       discretionary leave to remain from February 2010 to  February  2013.
       In January 2013 the appellant applied to extend her leave to  remain
       outside of the Immigration Rules, this was refused in December 2013.
       She again appealed, and the appeal was allowed leading to her  being
       granted at further period of discretionary leave to remain from 16th
       September 2014 until 16th September 2017. On 12th September 2017 the
       appellant applied to extend her leave to remain based on her private
       life ties with the UK. This was  refused  on  5th  March  2018.  Her
       appeal against this decision was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge GC Solly in a determination promulgated on the 23rd July 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Swaney on 13th September 2018 on the basis that it was arguable that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law in  failing  to  consider  the
       impact of her mental health problems on her credibility and  on  her
       ability to access treatment and reintegrate herself if  returned  to
       Jamaica.  Judge  Swaney  also  extended  time   and   admitted   the
       application.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal contend that the First-tier Tribunal failed to
       weigh relevant matters in the appellant's favour including: that she
       was the full time carer for her father between 2005 and 2015 when he
       passed away, which had been seen  by  previous  First-tier  Tribunal
       judges as a factor which had saved public services a lot of time and
       money; her 16.5 year period of residence in the UK and the fact that
       it was acknowledged in the past by previous First-tier Tribunals  it
       would be a disproportionate interference with  her  Article  8  ECHR
       rights to remove her; her mental health -  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       accepted that the appellant had suffered a  psychotic  episode;  and
       the fact that she speaks English which should have been  seen  as  a
       positive factor not just a neutral one.

    5. Ms Jaquiss submitted that she relied upon the grounds but  that  the
       decision was also wrong in asserting at paragraph 48 that there  was
       only one factor in the appellant's favour  in  the  current  appeal,
       which was that remaining in the UK enabled her to visit her father's
       grave, and that all other factors were against her. Her private life
       ties and past contribution to her father's care and past family life
       ties ought equally to be in her favour. She accepted that there  was
       no evidence of lack of treatment  in  Jamaica  for  the  appellant's
       medical issues before the First-tier Tribunal.

    6. The Rule 24 notice of the respondent contends  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal considered the appellant's mental health problems but found
       that as she has children and other family in Jamaica she  would  not
       face very significant obstacles to integration  if  returned  there.
       There was no evidence or argument that she  would  not  be  able  to
       access adequate mental health treatment in Jamaica. The grounds  are
       said simply to be a disagreement with the outcome of the appeal.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. The First-tier Tribunal correctly starts the decision-making in this
       appeal with the two previous decisions relating to  this  appellant.
       It is noted that  both  previous  appeals  were  successful  as  the
       appellant was caring for her father who suffered from schizophrenia,
       and because of the family life relationship  between  the  appellant
       and her elderly British citizen father. It is then  noted  that  her
       father sadly passed away in March 2015.

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is based  on  the  following
       facts. The appellant has private life within the UK  which  includes
       two cousins and a particular friend; and the fact  that  she  has  a
       number of physical health conditions  and  had  some  mental  health
       issues from 2015 for which she is provided with  medical  treatment.
       It is noted however that no evidence was produced to show  that  she
       could not access appropriate health care in Jamaica;  and  that  she
       had family including children in Jamaica  with  whom  she  says  she
       currently has no contact. The First-tier  Tribunal  finds  that  the
       appellant could locate these family members in Jamaica  however  and
       seek their assistance  with  reintegrating.  Consideration  is  also
       given to the fact that the appellant visits her  father's  grave  in
       the UK and her church attendance. It is found that she  speaks  good
       English but is currently not working and therefore  not  financially
       independent. I find that all material matters were considered by the
       First-tier Tribunal, and there is no error in overlooking a material
       issue.  It was not an error  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  not  to
       balance the appellant's no longer existing family life  relationship
       with her deceased father or her past contribution to his care as the
       decision was to be made on the facts at the date of hearing.

    9. I find that it was rationally open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
       conclude  that  the  appellant  would  not  have  very   significant
       obstacles to integration, and thus that the appellant was  not  able
       to meet the requirements of the private life  Immigration  Rules  at
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). This is particularly  the  case  given  the
       findings that the appellant has a number  of  relatives  in  Jamaica
       including four children whom it is  found  that  she  could  locate;
       given that she has a number of managed health problems but there  is
       no evidence these could not be treated in Jamaica;  and  given  that
       she would be able to find a church to attend in Jamaica as she  does
       in the UK.

   10. It was also rationally open to the First-tier Tribunal to find  that
       the appellant's removal was not disproportionate to her private life
       ties to the UK in all of the circumstances. This is particularly the
       case as it was correctly noted that little weight could be given  to
       her private life ties with the UK  as  these  had  all  been  formed
       whilst she had been unlawfully and  precariously  present,  applying
       s.117B(4) and (5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
       2002; there was  no  evidence  she  could  not  receive  appropriate
       medical treatment in Jamaica; and as she is  not  financially  self-
       sufficient, which  is  a  factor  which  weighs  against  her  under
       s.117B(3) of the 2002 Act. It was not an error of law not  to  weigh
       in her favour her ability in English, rather than treat  this  as  a
       neutral factor, see AM (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260.

   11. Whilst it was an overstatement at paragraph 48  for  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to say that there was only one  factor  in  favour  of  her
       remaining in the UK I do not find this to be a material error as the
       little weight that could be given to the  appellant's  private  life
       ties formed over the 16.5 years of her residence in the UK  and  her
       ability to visit her father's grave were  rationally  found  not  to
       outweigh the fact that she did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       private life Immigration Rules and so her removal was in the  public
       interest of maintaining immigration control and the  fact  that  she
       was not financially independent.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing
      the appeal which is therefore upheld.


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I  make  this  order  in  light  of  the
    appellant's vulnerable mental health.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         29th October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



