
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06101/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2019                            |On 13 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                  amjad [h]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fisher, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He was born on  19  November
    1994.

 2. He appealed against the decision dated 25  April  2017  to  refuse  him
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. The appeal was dismissed by Judge A J Blake (the judge) in  a  decision
    promulgated on 16 October 2018.

 4. The grounds claim the judge erred in refusing an adjournment  in  order
    to get evidence and then making a finding that the appellant was not  a
    suicide risk on the limited evidence available so erring  in  terms  of
    the overriding principle contained in Rule  2  of  the  2008  Procedure
    Rules.

 5. Further, whilst the judge found the appellant to be a credible  witness
    and accepted his account that he had been  brought  here  aged  12,  no
    consideration was given to the length of  residence  here  as  a  minor
    albeit without status in the fact-finding exercise in terms of  whether
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was satisfied and the near miss in  respect  of
    (v) as the appellant was under 25  years of age and  had  spent  almost
    half his life here.  JO (Uganda) [2010] EWCA Civ 10 was  of  relevance.
    The  judge  was  obliged  to  conduct   a   free-standing   Article   8
    proportionality assessment and his failure to  do  so  was  a  material
    error of law.

 6. Judge Lambert granted permission on 13 November 2018.  She  said  inter
    alia as follows:

         "2.  The appellant was  found  not  to  meet  the  requirements  of
             Appendix  FM  or  paragraph  276ADE.   The  decision  displays
             adequately reasoned and evidence based findings  resulting  in
             the conclusion that there were no very  significant  obstacles
             to the appellant's integration to Bangladesh  and  the  taking
             into account his medical condition the decision to not  breach
             Articles 3 or 8.  Paragraph 3 ground 1 takes  issue  with  the
             judge's findings as to medical evidence and the  applicability
             of  Article  3,  but  in  effect  amounts  to  no  more   than
             disagreement with those findings and an  attempt  to  re-argue
             the appellant's case.

         4.   The second ground claims failure by the  judge,  having  found
             the appellant could not meet the private life requirements  of
             the Rules, to demonstrate engagement with the Razgar test  and
             to consider the appellant's "near miss" argument that  he  had
             spent almost half his life in the United Kingdom since aged 12
             years.  Those contentions are arguable  on  the  face  of  the
             decision at paragraphs 113-117.   Despite  the  judge's  other
             conclusions as to the appellant's remaining ties to Bangladesh
             they may on balance be material to the overall outcome."

 7. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Ms Fisher relied upon  the  grounds.   There  were  two  broad  grounds
    claimed to be errors, that the judge had failed to properly  deal  with
    the suicide risk and failed to  carry  out  a  freestanding  Article  8
    proportionality assessment.

 9. As regards the suicide risk, the judge relied upon the appellant's most
    recent discharge summary at page 158 of the bundle.  Ms Fisher accepted
    that there was limited evidence of the appellant's mental health before
    the judge, but nevertheless submitted that the judge erred  because  he
    failed to have regard to the fact that the appellant on return would be
    unwilling and unable to seek help and that  healthcare  is  limited  in
    Bangladesh.  Further, suicide attempts are illegal in Bangladesh.

10.  As  regards  Article  8,  Ms  Fisher  submitted  that  there  was   no
    consideration of the appellant's length of residence here as  a  minor,
    albeit without status in terms of the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.
     Further, that the judge gave insufficient weight  to  the  time  spent
    here by the appellant as a minor.  See JO (Uganda) [2010] EWCA Civ  10.
    The appellant had lived in British society for  almost  half  his  life
    such that it could not be said that he had failed to develop a  private
    life.  Further, the judge erred by failing to  conduct  a  freestanding
    Article 8 proportionality assessment applying Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

11. Mr Walker submitted that the judge properly took as his starting  point
    Devaseelan and the previous decision of Judge Nightingale.   The  judge
    was entitled to come to the conclusions he had  made  on  the  evidence
    before him and the grounds disclosed no arguable error of law.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12. I find that the claim that the judge erred with regard to his  approach
    to the medical evidence and the applicability of Article 3  amounts  to
    nothing more than a disagreement  with  the  judge's  findings  and  an
    attempt to reargue the case.  The most recent  information  before  the
    judge regarding the appellant's mental health was a  discharge  summary
    from Barts Health NHS Trust dated 23 May 2017.  It reads inter alia  as
    follows:

         "Has been reviewed by RAID team, with  a  view  for  discharge  and
         IAPTT follow up.  States that he is/has no  suicidal  intention  or
         ideation and regrets the incident.  Will be returning to  the  care
         of his sister."

13. The evidence before the judge was  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    making further attempts upon his life.  In such circumstances, I do not
    accept that he erred in the manner submitted by Ms Fisher which I  have
    set out above.  The judge did not err in  finding  at  [100]  that  the
    appellant was in "reasonably good health" at the time of  the  hearing.
    That was the evidence before the judge at the time.

14. As regards Article 8,  the  judge  considered  paragraph  276ADE.   See
    [102].  The judge properly took as his starting point the  decision  of
    Judge Nightingale promulgated in 2015.  Despite  the  appellant  having
    come to the United Kingdom at the age of 12,  Judge  Nightingale  found
    that the appellant had never entered the education  system  here.   The
    judge found that the appellant had largely lived within the family  and
    the Bangladeshi community.  I do accept that the judge did not in terms
    consider paragraph 276ADE but I do not accept that to be material.   It
    was not claimed that the appellant had spent at least half of his  life
    living here.  What the judge did was to consider whether there were any
    significant obstacles to the appellant's reintegration into  Bangladesh
    which was the appropriate question to consider.  The judge  found  that
    the appellant had close family in Bangladesh  and  that  if  he  needed
    medical attention there,  there  would  be  an  adequacy  of  help  and
    assistance both medically, socially and emotionally.

15. The judge did not err in his analysis.  He was clearly entitled to come
    to the decision he reached on the findings he made.

Notice of Decision

16. The judge's decision discloses no error of law and shall stand.


Signed                              Date 30 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



