
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06789 /2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons          |
|                                  |Promulgated                   |
|On 19 April 2018                  |On 02 May 2018                |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                              ERIC ADJEI YEBOAH
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                   For the ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr P Richardson, Counsel instructed by Carmelite
For the Respondent:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a Ghanaian national born on 26 May 1972 who seeks  to
join his British wife for settlement. The application  for  entry  clearance
was refused on 22 January 2016 under paragraph 320(11)  of  the  Immigration
Rules due to his previous  adverse  immigration  history.  There  were  also
doubts about whether the relationship was genuine and  subsisting  and  over
his identity. The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a  positive  finding  on  the
relationship but nevertheless dismissed the appeal. For the reasons set  out
in my decision of 13 February 2018, the determination of the judge  was  set
aside but his findings on the relationship, which  were  not  challenged  by
the respondent, were preserved.

The Hearing

2.    The sponsor attended the hearing but it was not  considered  necessary
to call oral evidence and the matter proceeded on the basis  of  submissions
only. Mr Wilding confirmed that he would have no questions for  the  sponsor
if she were called as a witness.

3.    Mr Richardson submitted that although  there  had  been  a  time  when
refusal under paragraph 320(11) would have been  justified,  that  time  had
now passed and weight should be  given  to  the  passage  of  time  and  the
discretion to permit rather than deny entry. The past  adverse  history  was
accepted but Mr Richardson submitted that when the appellant had been  faced
with removal, he did not attempt to frustrate the arrangements made  and  he
withdrew his  outstanding  bogus  EEA  application.  Seven  years  later  he
unsuccessfully applied to visit his wife but that his was his first  attempt
to re-enter.

4.    Mr Richardson pointed out that the appellant  had  known  the  sponsor
for many years  before  the  relationship  developed.  They  married  on  15
February 2014 and the  sponsor  has  made  four  visits  to  Ghana.  She  is
employed as a nurse and has the opportunity to earn more on top of her  base
salary. It would be difficult for her to relocate but this would not  be  an
insurmountable obstacle. The couple were trying to conceive  and  there  was
evidence of IVF treatment.

5.    Mr Richardson submitted that the sole barrier to entry  was  paragraph
320(11) and that was based on conduct prior to July 2007. Those events  took
place 11 years ago and it could not be right that the  appellant  should  be
banned for ever more. A comparison was made to the  ten-year  ban  for  non-
spouses under 320(7B). Mr Richardson submitted that it made no sense  for  a
spouse to be treated more harshly than a  non-spouse  particularly  as  they
were deliberately excluded from that rule.  Even  the  deportation  ban  for
criminals was for ten years; less than that applied to the appellant. I  was
urged to consider what the appellant had been doing in the  past  years.  He
had studied and obtained a qualification  as  a  pharmacist.  There  was  no
evidence  of   any   offending   behaviour.   He   showed   contrition   and
embarrassment. Given that more than ten  years  had  passed  since  his  bad
behaviour, his interests now outweighed that of the public.

6.    Mr Wilding  relied  on  the  refusal  letter.  He  submitted  that  no
findings of fact were required. There was  discretion  to  permit  entry  in
circumstances  such  as  the  appellant's  but  such   applications   should
"normally" be refused. He submitted that  of  the  four  components  listed,
only one need apply for a refusal but in the  appellant's  case  there  were
three that were applicable - overstaying, breaching  a  condition  of  leave
and using deception in an application. The aggravating factors were the  use
of a false identity and making a frivolous application. He  referred  me  to
the guidance on entry clearance applications (as set out  at  PS  (paragraph
320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440).  He submitted  that
the appellant's actions cut at the heart of immigration  control  and  there
was nothing in his favour except the passage of time.  Mr  Wilding  reminded
me that I was entitled to review the exercise of discretion  myself  but  to
find that it had been properly applied  by  the  ECO.  The  public  interest
outweighed the other matters put forward.

7.    In response, Mr Richardson submitted that the same  competing  factors
applied to the exercise of discretion and the article 8 balancing  exercise.
He submitted that there was more than just the passage of  time  to  warrant
the exercise of discretion. The appellant had obtained a  qualification  and
had a genuine relationship with a British sponsor.  Full  regard  should  be
had to those factors.

8.    That completed the submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing  I
reserved my determination which I now give.

Discussion and Findings

9.    In reaching my findings, I have  taken  a  careful  note  of  all  the
submissions and the evidence, whether or not it is specifically referred  to
in my determination. I bear in mind that it is for  the  appellant  to  make
out his case on the balance of probabilities.  The  issue,  essentially,  is
whether the refusal under paragraph 320(11) is  justified.  It  is  accepted
that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  have  a  genuine   and   subsisting
relationship. Although the ECO also raised the  issue  of  identity  in  the
refusal, that has not been pursued and Mr Wilding did not raise  any  issues
over the appellant's claim that his  current  application  is  in  his  true
name. I also note that the ECO did not rely on such an issue  in  2014  when
the appellant made an application for entry clearance in the  same  identity
as he  has  used  for  this  application,  for  his  marriage  and  for  his
educational and professional qualifications.

10.   Paragraph 320 (11) covers the situation:

    Where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant way to
    frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:


         (i)      overstaying; or


         (ii)     breaching a condition attached to his leave; or


         (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or


         (iv)     using deception in an application for entry clearance,
         leave to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents from the
         Secretary of State or a third party required in support of the
         application (whether successful or not);


    and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding,  not
    meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail  conditions,
    using  an  assumed   identity   or   multiple   identities,   switching
    nationality, making frivolous applications or not complying with the re-
    documentation process.

11.   In PS the Tribunal found: "In exercising  discretion  under  paragraph
320(11) of HC 395, as amended, to refuse an application for entry  clearance
in a case where the automatic prohibition on the grant  of  entry  clearance
in paragraph 320(7B) is disapplied by paragraph 320(7C), the decision  maker
must exercise great care in assessing the aggravating circumstances said  to
justify refusal and must have regard to the public interest in encouraging
those unlawfully in the United Kingdom  to  leave  and  seek  to  regularise
their status by an application for entry clearance".

12. The court also considered  the  guidance  to  Entry  Clearance  Officers
which, in relation to aggravating circumstances, provides as follows:

    "Please  note  that  the  list  below  is  not  an   exhaustive   list.
     Aggravating circumstances can include actions such as:


         absconding;


         not  complying  with  temporary  admission  /  temporary  reporting
         conditions / bail conditions;


         not complying with reporting restrictions;


         failing to comply with removal directions (RDs) after port  refusal
          of leave to enter (RLE);


         failing to comply with RDs after illegal entry;


         previous working in breach on visitor conditions within short  time
         of arrive in the UK (ie pre-meditated intention to work);


         previous recourse to NHS treatment when not entitled;


         previous receipt of benefits (income, housing, child, incapacity or
         otherwise) or NASS benefits when not  entitled;  using  an  assumed
         identity or multiple identities;


         previous use of a different identity  or  multiple  identities  for
         deceptive reasons; vexatious attempts to prevent removal  from  the
         UK, eg feigning illness; active  attempt  to  frustrate  arrest  or
         detention by UK Border Agency or police;


         a sham marriage / marriage of convenience / polygamous marriage  in
         the UK; harbouring an immigration offender; facilitation /  people
         smuggling; escaping from UK Border Agency detention;


         switching of nationality;


         vexatious or frivolous applications;


         not complying with re-documentation process."

13.   The guidance goes on to state:

    "All  cases  must  be  considered  on  their  merits,  the   activities
    considered in the round to see whether they meet  the  threshold  under
    paragraph 320 (11), taking into account family life in the UK  and,  in
    the case of children, the level of responsibility for the breach.


    Where an applicant falls to be refused under 320(7A)  or  320(7B),  the
    ECO must also consider whether it is also  appropriate  to  refuse  the
    applicant under paragraph 320(11).  Where 320(7C) applies  which  makes
    an applicant exempt from  320(7B),  an  ECO  must  consider  whether  a
    refusal under paragraph 320(11) is appropriate."

14.   The  automatic  prohibition  of  entry  clearance  under  320(7B)  was
disapplied to the appellant under 320(7C) but, as noted by the  Tribunal  in
PS (at 14), the present case does not contain any reference to the  guidance
or to the question whether the appellant's breaches of immigration law  were
sufficiently aggravating to justify the refusal under 320(11).  Nor  have  I
seen any evidence that the matter was referred to the ECM prior to  refusal.


15.   I have considered for myself whether  the  decision  not  to  exercise
discretion was appropriate and fair in all the circumstances. Mr  Richardson
is right to point out that the only remaining  barrier  to  removal  is  the
application of paragraph 320(11). It is also right to say that  the  conduct
for which the appellant was punished occurred in July 2007, almost 11  years
ago.  Furthermore,  it  is  not  the  case  that  the  only  factor  in  the
appellant's favour is the passage of time. I take note of the fact that  the
appellant has shown contrition and remorse for his  behaviour.  He  has  not
compounded his adverse immigration history by making attempts to  return  on
false documents nor did he seek to frustrate his removal  when  arrested  by
making further applications or commencing judicial review litigation  as  so
many do. It is to his credit that he acknowledged he had  been  caught  out,
that he withdrew his bogus EEA claim  and  allowed  himself  to  be  removed
without further ado. As I have stated, he did not then  seek  to  return  to
the UK until making an application to visit his wife in 2014. When that  was
refused, no further action appears to have  been  taken  until  the  present
application. The appellant has also furthered his career in the meantime  by
studying for and achieving  further  qualifications  as  a  pharmacist.  He,
therefore, has a skill that could be put to use in this country.  He  has  a
clean police record in Ghana. Another important factor  is  that  he  has  a
British wife. Given that no  questions  are  raised  over  the  genuine  and
subsisting nature of the relationship, it is a weighty matter.  The  sponsor
works for the NHS as an ophthalmic nurse. She contributes to the economy  of
this country. I also have  regard  to  Mr  Richardson's  submission  on  the
comparison between the ban for criminal deportees, non-spousal  applications
and the appellant's refusal.   I agree that it cannot be right that  someone
excluded from paragraph 320(7B) is then treated more  harshly  than  a  non-
spouse or deportee.

16.   I take account of all these factors cumulatively and find that  whilst
there were aggravating features in the appellant's case (as  highlighted  in
Mr Wilding's submissions but  not  in  the  ECO's  refusal),  they  are  now
insufficiently grave to justify a continued ban on entry. I  agree  with  Mr
Richardson that a 320(11) refusal would indeed have been appropriate in  the
past but after eleven  years,  the  development  of  a  relationship  and  a
genuine marriage to a British national and where  the  respondent  does  not
maintain that all other aspects of the rules have not been  met,  discretion
should have been exercised in the appellant's favour.

17.   Each case is fact sensitive and I accept that there may well be  cases
where a continued ban on entry  is  justified.  Having  considered  all  the
evidence and submissions for the appellant and  given  the  factors  I  have
highlighted above, I am satisfied that the public interest does not  require
the refusal of entry clearance and I conclude that  discretion  should  have
been exercised in the appellant's favour.

Decision

18.   The appeal is allowed.

Anonymity Order

19.   I make no order for anonymity.


Signed






Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

Date: 26 April 2018
