
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
HU/06973/2015

                                                    HU/06974/2015

                                                    HU/06975/2015

                                                     HU/06976/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 15 June 2017                       |         On 5 July 2017              |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                       RHEA LACHICA (first appellant)
                      ROMMEL LACHICA (Second appellant)
                   CHINO ANGELO LACHICA (third appellant)
                           C A (fourth appellant)
       (anonymity direction made IN RESPECT OF FOURTH APPELLANT ONLY)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M S Kamal, Legal Representative, Immigration
Solutions Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The first appellant is a citizen of the Philippines.  She had  appealed
    along with three other  members  of  her  family  including  the  third
    appellant against a decision made by the  respondent  on  14  September
    2015 refusing leave to remain on family and private life grounds.  In a
    decision sent on  30  November  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford
    allowed the appeals of the parents and the younger  child  (the  fourth
    appellant), but dismissed the appeal of the third appellant because  by
    the date of application he had turned 18  and  she  was  not  satisfied
    there would be very significant obstacles to his integration back  into
    Filipino society.  This  appeal  is  only  therefore  about  the  third
    appellant. In respect of his appeal, the judge said that:

         "[w]hilst it is understandable that he wishes to remain in  the  UK
         and complete his university studies here  (the  evidence  was  that
         having completed his secondary education, he had secured  an  offer
         of a place on a Creative Writing Degree course at the University of
         Bedfordshire but had been unable to  take  it  up  because  of  his
         immigration status).  I am not satisfied that he will be unable  to
         achieve his ambition in the Philippines or indeed by  returning  to
         the Philippines and applying for student only clearance  to  return
         to the UK as a student in the same way his mother did.   I  am  not
         satisfied that there would be very significant obstacles  to  [his]
         integration in the Philippines if required to leave the UK ..."

2.   The grounds of appeal contend that the judge's decision was unfair  and
    failed to consider his case as  a  whole  and  in  particular  had  not
    weighed  sufficiently  in  the  balance  that  he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his parents, had spent more than half  his
    life in the UK, had come to the UK when he was only 11  years  old,  he
    "does not know anyone anymore in the Philippines"; he  does  not  speak
    the Filipino language; all his family are in the UK; he is living  with
    his parents who are continuing to support him financially  and  in  all
    respects; he is a young adult and there was evidence that it  would  be
    "excruciatingly  difficult"  for  the  family  to   relocate   to   the
    Philippines to live with him there; now he is reaching the age where he
    has finished his education and is likely soon to be a productive member
    of society working and paying taxes back to the State that  has  hosted
    him; he cannot be blamed for his  presence  in  the  UK  and  would  be
    desperately affected by the expulsion.

3.   I heard submissions from both  representatives.   Mr  Kamal  sought  to
    rely, inter alia, on PD  and  Others  (Article  8  -  conjoined  family
    claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC).  He  also  made  reference  to
    Strasbourg jurisprudence which had accepted that young adults still  in
    education could still retain family life with their parents.

4.   I am not persuaded that the judge materially erred in law.  It  may  be
    that another FtT judge would have come to a different  decision  but  I
    cannot interfere  in  the  judge's  decision  unless  satisfied  it  is
    vitiated by legal error.

5.   I do not consider that the judge erred in  concluding  that  the  third
    appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Contrary to what is asserted more than once in the grounds,  the  third
    appellant had not spent more than half his life in the UK.   It  cannot
    be said that the judge failed to consider that  as  a  dependent  young
    adult the third appellant could still have a  "family  life"  with  his
    parents and sibling in the UK within the meaning of Article 8,  because
    at paragraph 43 the judge expressly  found  he  had  both  private  and
    family life ties in the UK.  The judge also  expressly  considered  his
    situation as "part of a family unit" (paragraph 45).   In  relation  to
    the appellant's age, it was entirely open to the judge to consider that
    he was at an age where the  impact  of  physical  separation  from  his
    parents was no longer  significant,  noting  that  he  was  planning  a
    university career.  It cannot be said that the judge treated as adverse
    to the third appellant  his  parents'  immigration  history,  since  at
    paragraph 28 he expressly found that  the  whole  family  had  'a  good
    immigration history'. The judge clearly gave full consideration to  the
    third appellant's family, social, cultural and educational ties to  the
    UK: see paragraph 39.  The judge also gave careful consideration to the
    third appellant's likely ties  back  in  the  Philippines.   The  judge
    considered the issue of his  ability  to  adapt  to  life  there.   The
    grounds are incorrect to assert that it was  accepted  that  the  third
    appellant had no knowledge of the Filipino language.  At  paragraph  33
    the  judge  found  that  the  third  appellant  had   some   level   of
    understanding of Tagalog and could acquire a much better  knowledge  of
    it on return as he had lived in the country for  eleven  years  of  his
    life and would still have linguistic, cultural  and  social  ties  with
    that country.  It was also  open  to  the  judge  on  the  evidence  to
    conclude that the third appellant had remaining ties there which on the
    family's own evidence included grandparents.

6.   Looking at the judge's decision as a whole, it is clear that the  third
    appellant's grounds amount to no more than a  series  of  disagreements
    with the judge's own assessment of the relative weight to  be  accorded
    to his family and private life ties in the UK and the  public  interest
    in removing persons without leave unless they meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules or can show compassionate  circumstances  outside
    the Rules.  On both counts the judge made very  clear  that  the  third
    appellant did not succeed.

7.   For the above reasons I conclude that:

     The FtT judge did not  materially  err  in  law  and  the  decision  to
    dismiss the third appellant's appeal must stand.

8.   I would only add the following observation.  It was clearly within  the
    contemplation of the FtT judge when assessing proportionality  that  if
    the third appellant could not pursue his wish to do university  studies
    in creative writing in the Philippines, it would  be  open  to  him  to
    apply to come to the UK as a  student  for  that  purpose.   Given  the
    judge's  finding  that  the  third  appellant's  family  has  a   "good
    immigration history", I would hope that in the context  of  any  future
    entry  clearance  application  the  third  appellant  might  make,  his
    previous history of entry into and stay in the UK and  his  involvement
    in litigation seeking to secure his stay, will not be held against him.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  fourth
appellant is granted anonymity.  This direction applies both to  the  fourth
appellant and to the respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 4 July 2017
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal








