
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06267/2017
                                                               HU/06268/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14th November 2018                |On 6th December 2018                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    [J M]
                                    [M M]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr C Holmes, Counsel, instructed by Bolton Citizens
Advice
For the respondent:    Mr. A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS







Introduction

      1. Permission has been granted to appeal the decision of First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Alis who, in a decision promulgated on 13 February
         2018, dismissed the appeals on human rights grounds.

      2. The appellants are brother and sister, and nationals of the
         Democratic Republic of Congo. The 1st appellant was born on 10
         December 2001; his sister was born on 2 March 2003.They applied for
         entry clearance for the purposes of settlement as the adopted
         children of their paternal uncle, Mr [JM] and his wife, [L].

      3. Mr [M] was granted refugee status in June 2009; his wife having
         been granted status in June 2007. The sponsors did not resume
         living together until 2011.

      4. The applications were refused because the adoption was not
         recognised by the United Kingdom. Consequently, the immigration
         rules could not be met. The respondent saw no basis outside the
         rules which would justify the grant of leave.

The First tier Tribunal

      5. The appellant's representative accepted the applications could not
         succeed under the rules. The appeal was on freestanding article 8
         grounds.

      6. The evidence was that the sponsors were given care of the two
         children in June 2003 by way of an adoption procedure in the DRC.
         This was because their parents were not looking after them
         properly. Mr [M] fled his home country in December 2003 and his
         wife continue to take care of the children. Then, in 2006 she also
         fled, having made arrangements with a Pastor to look after the
         children. Contact was then lost and it was not until December 2012
         they were located, living with a relative of the Pastor.

      7. The person who located them, Ms [OM], is described as a cousin. She
         agreed to look after them and received remittances from the
         sponsors. They moved with her to Bunia Town and in 2013 to Kinshasa
         where they have continued to live. It was then indicated that
         Odbul's marriage had ended and she was no longer in a position to
         care for them and would have to leave them on a certain date
         because she intended studying. Medical reports as to the children's
         mental states had been submitted.

      8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis accepted that family life existed
         between the appellants and their sponsors. The judge also accepted
         that when the sponsors took care of the appellants in the DRC their
         natural parents were unable to care for them properly. The judge
         saw some discrepancies in the evidence and did not accept that
         Odbul would cease caring for them on a certain date as was
         suggested. The judge found the medical evidence of limited help and
         pointed out the significant delay of 5 years before the
         applications were made.

      9. The judge referred to section 55 and pointed out the appellants had
         lived most of their lives apart from the sponsors. The judge did
         not find anything adverse against the appellants or sponsors but
         pointed out that no effort had been made to regularise their
         situation by way of an adoption which would be recognised in the
         United Kingdom. The judge concluded by finding the decision to be
         proportionate.

The Upper Tribunal

     10. Permission was granted on the basis it was arguable the judge had
         not identified the appellant's best interests. Also, at paragraph
         45 the judge had said that the best interests assessment in
         relation to them did not automatically resolve the reasonableness
         question. The grant of permission states that what this
         reasonableness question is, was unclear. It was arguable the judge
         thereby misdirected himself in the proportionality assessment.

     11. In the original hearing the presenting officer questioned whether
         family life existed between the appellants and their sponsors. The
         judge found at paragraph 33 that there was family life. Had the
         judge found to the contrary then this would effectively have been
         the end of the matter. However, the finding of the existence of
         family life has not been challenged by the respondent in the Upper
         Tribunal.

     12. Both representatives were in agreement that there were errors.
         Whilst the judge at paragraph 45 referred to the best interests of
         the appellant as being a primary consideration the judge made no
         clear finding on what that was. Furthermore, in the same paragraph
         the judge states that the best interests assessment does not
         automatically resolve the reasonableness question. In referring to
         a reasonableness issue (my emphasis) the judge is asking the wrong
         question. Applying the Razgar sequential approach the final
         question is the proportionality of the decision.

     13. I suggested that possibly this was a slip in terminology and that
         the judge meant to allude to proportionality. Mr McVeety suggested
         this seemed improbable and the Judge's reference to their best
         interests not resolving the reasonableness  question appears to be
         taken from MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the application of) v Upper
         Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ
         705.Reasonableness considerations apply to an in country appeal,
         for instance, in relation to a parent or child leaving in the
         context of paragraph 276 ADE(vi) or in consideration of section 117
         B (6). The use of the phrase to an entry clearance application
         suggested the judge had applied the wrong test and was considering
         factors more relevant to removal.

Conclusions

     14. The judge did set out all the facts clearly and made the
         significant finding that family life existed. However, the judge
         was required to demonstrate a fuller analysis of what was in the
         appellants best interests. The judge had indicated they were in
         their country of nationality and had lived most of their lives
         apart from the sponsors. However there was no evaluation of their
         lives in that country and their prospects in the United Kingdom and
         the judge's conclusion is unclear.

     15. It also is apparent that the proportionality test has not been set
         out and instead the notion of reasonableness imported. Mr McVeety
         acknowledge that it was not clear precisely what the judge was
         applying in reaching a decision on the appeal and did not oppose
         present application.

     16. Having regard to these factors is my conclusion that the decision,
         particularly the comments in paragraph 45, demonstrate a material
         error of law which means the decision cannot stand.

     17. I would set the decision aside and remit the matter to the First-
         tier Tribunal. The finding of the existence of family life is
         preserved, this not having been challenged by the respondent.

Decision

     18. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis is set aside and the
         matter remitted for the First-tier Tribunal to determine where the
         best interests of the appellant's lie and to determine the
         proportionality of the decision in all the circumstances.




    Francis J Farrelly
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


