






Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/06062/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |             Decision and Reasons        |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 4 March 2019                  |             On:12 April 2019            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                              Mr Amjad Mahmood
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, counsel (instructed by M R Solicitors
LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on  12  April  1971.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Siddall promulgated on 17 October 2018,  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the respondent's decision dated 22 February  2018,  to  refuse
      his application for further leave to remain.



      Background to the appeal




   2. The appellant entered the UK on 6 February 2011 as a student.  He  was
      granted an extension until 25 April 2014. Leave was  curtailed  on  10
      December 2013 as his college's sponsorship licence was revoked.

   3. He was granted further leave to remain as a student until  15  October
      2016, but in October 2014 the respondent asserted  that  he  had  used
      deception to fraudulently obtain an English language  certificate.  He
      was served with a notice  of  removal.  An  application  for  judicial
      review was unsuccessful.

   4. On 25 January 2016 he lodged a human rights  claim  on  the  basis  of
      private life in the UK which was  refused  and  certified  as  clearly
      unfounded on 13 April 2016[1].

   5. On 25 May 2016, he  made  an  asylum  claim  on  the  basis  that  his
      homosexuality would cause him to be persecuted in Pakistan.  That  was
      refused on 23 November 2016. He appealed that decision but  there  was
      no appearance by the appellant at his  appeal  hearing  on  5  January
      2017. On 13 January 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley  dismissed
      his appeal. He noted that the appellant's solicitors had withdrawn. He
      became appeal rights exhausted on 30 January 2017.

   6. In May 2017 he was served with removal directions. In November 2017 he
      lodged a human rights application which was  refused  on  22  February
      2018.




      The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Siddall




   7. He found on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  appellant  had
      discharged the evidential burden placed upon him and had  provided  an
      adequate explanation to counter the argument that he had  fraudulently
      obtained an English language certificate procured a false  TOEIC  test
      result. Accordingly, the respondent had not made out its assertion  on
      this ground - [39].

   8. Judge Siddall then considered at [41] the appellant's claim that he is
      gay. He took the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley  dated
      13 January 2017, as his starting  point  [40].  He  noted  that  Judge
      Greasley concluded, after considering the evidence before him  at  the
      time, that he could not be satisfied  that  the  appellant  is  a  gay
      person at risk  on  return.  Neither  he  or  any  other  third  party
      individual attended the hearing where their accounts could  have  been
      tested  and  subjected  to  proper  examination.  The  appellant  also
      admitted that he obtained a  number  of  entries  for  gay  clubs  and
      websites as he knew this would strengthen his claim to be  gay,  which
      Judge Greasley rejected.

   9. He stated that Judge Greasley had  regard  to  a  number  of  factors,
      including the fact that in his application  dated  January  2016,  the
      appellant made no mention of a fear of returning to  Pakistan  due  to
      his sexuality. He also noted that in  March  2016  the  appellant  had
      indicated that he wished to return to Pakistan  voluntarily,  although
      he later changed his mind [42]. Judge Greasley considered  the  record
      of the appellant's asylum interview and the matters relied on  in  the
      refusal letter.  He noted that the appellant stated at  his  interview
      that he joined gay and LGBT  groups  in  the  UK  to  'make  his  case
      stronger' [44]. The appellant had not set  out  who  Mr  Khan  and  Mr
      Arshad  were.  No  evidence  was  provided  of   any   activities   or
      relationships that pre-dated the asylum claim [45].

  10. Judge Siddall stated at [49] that he has had the  benefit  of  hearing
      the appellant. Apart from the photographs  of  the  appellant  at  Gay
      Pride events, the evidence produced by him did not differ greatly from
      the evidence presented to Judge Greasley [49].

  11. He noted that Mr Khan and Mr Arshad  provided  more  detailed  written
      statements and there is  some  significant  additional  material  from
      them. Mr Khan claimed that he was in a relationship with the appellant
      for around four years and Mr Arshad stated that he was aware that  the
      appellant had been disowned by his family  in  Pakistan  [50].   Judge
      Siddall stated at [51] that if Mr Arshad was  aware  of  this,  it  is
      surprising that he made no reference to it in the letter  provided  as
      part  of  the  asylum  application  which  would  have  supported  the
      appellant's case.

  12. Judge Siddall treated Mr Khan's statement with  "some  circumspection"
      as it was not signed and Mr Khan did not attend the hearing. He  found
      at [52]  that  there  were  issues  with  the  content  of  Mr  Khan's
      statement. If he had been in a sexual relationship with the  appellant
      for around four years, that relationship must  have  existed  when  he
      wrote his letter in 2016. Yet, in the letter he simply referred to  Mr
      Mahmood as a "friend."  In addition, his  statement  contradicted  the
      appellant's evidence that they have not been  in  a  relationship  for
      three or four years because of the appellant's health. He  accordingly
      discounted Mr Khan's evidence. He found that it is  more  likely  than
      not that he is just a friend of the appellant's  and  has  not  had  a
      relationship with him [52]. Even if the content  of  their  statements
      are true, there was no reason why their more detailed  evidence  could
      not have been presented to the Tribunal in 2017 [53].

  13. Nor were the photographs showing the appellant  at  Gay  Pride  events
      clear as to what year they were taken.

  14. In the circumstances he concluded that he was  bound  by  the  earlier
      decision that the appellant  had  not  demonstrated  to  the  required
      standard that he was at risk on return because of  his  sexuality.  He
      treated the later oral evidence of the appellant and Mr Arshad and the
      statement of Mr Khan with a strong degree of suspicion  in  accordance
      with paragraph 4 of the guidance in Deevaseelan. There was  no  reason
      why this evidence could  not  have  been  put  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. There were in any  event  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
      which support the finding of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  did  not
      provide a basis for him to reach  a  different  conclusion  [55].  The
      appellant  did  not  deal  with  the  inconsistencies  in  his  asylum
      interview record that were identified in the earlier  decision.  Judge
      Greasley noted that the account was inconsistent.

  15. Judge Siddall then reminded himself that the appeal before him  was  a
      human rights claim. He  considered  the  claim  under  Article  8.  He
      adopted the approach in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

  16. He found that the appellant would not face  significant  obstacles  to
      his integration back into Pakistan because of his  sexual  orientation
      [59-60].

  17. He accepted that the appellant is in poor health  [61].  However,  the
      respondent  noted  that  there  was  treatment  for  kidney   problems
      available in Pakistan albeit that he may have to pay for it  and  that
      it may not be available on a national basis. The fact  that  the  care
      available may not be as good or as available as  in  the  UK  did  not
      amount to a very significant reason why he could not return [61].

  18. He considered the public interest factors in s.117B of the  2002  Act.
      The appellant did not meet the Rules at the date  of  application.  He
      overstayed since his asylum was refused in January 2017. He only  made
      his latest application at the point at which he  was  threatened  with
      removal. He found that his removal would be consistent with the public
      interest in the exercise of effective immigration controls [63].

  19. The appellant is currently a significant burden on  public  funds.  He
      receives  the  benefit  of  extensive  treatment  funded  by  the  NHS
      including  dialysis.  There  is  also  the  possibility  of  a  kidney
      transplant if he is given leave to  remain.  He  considered  that  his
      private life was established at a time when his status was precarious.



  20. In carrying out the proportionality exercise, he accepted on  the  one
      hand that the appellant is in poor health. He will face  an  uncertain
      future if he returns and may find it difficult to  access  healthcare.
      However, he had not been able to demonstrate that there  would  be  no
      treatment available to him.

  21. He had regard at [69] to the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  GS
      (India) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 40 where it was held that Article 8
      is only engaged in such  cases  where  there  are  additional  factual
      grounds that bring the matter within the parameters of  that  article.
      He referred to the judgment  of  Underhill  LJ  who  stated  that  the
      absence or inadequacy  of  medical  treatment,  even  life  preserving
      treatment, in the country of return, cannot be relied on at all  as  a
      factor engaging Article 8: if that is all there  is,  the  claim  must
      fail. Secondly, where Article 8 is engaged by other factors, the  fact
      that the claimant is receiving medical treatment in this country which
      may not be available in the country of return may be a factor  in  the
      proportionality exercise; but that factor  cannot  be  treated  as  by
      itself giving rise to a breach since that  would  contravene  the  "no
      obligation to treat" principle.

  22. In the light of the above he stated that he did not take into  account
      the level of treatment available in Pakistan for a  kidney  condition.
      It was contended on  his  behalf  that  because  of  his  health,  the
      appellant would not be able to  work  and  will  be  destitute  if  he
      returns to Pakistan. Judge Siddall stated that  he  was  not  able  to
      accept that. The appellant has family in Pakistan. Even  if  estranged
      from his wife, he has children there, a parent and siblings.  Although
      life might be hard for him, he will  not  be  without  access  to  any
      support. [70].

  23. He accepted that the appellant has established a private life  in  the
      UK, having lived here for about seven  years.  On  his  own  evidence,
      however, he has no partner here  and  did  not  refer  to  any  family
      members in the UK. Having taken all these  factors  into  account,  he
      concluded that the decision  did  not  amount  to  a  disproportionate
      interference with his right to a private life in the UK.

  24. Similarly, with regard to Article 3, the appellant whilst in a serious
      condition had not produced any evidence to suggest that the  diagnosis
      is terminal and that he is facing death, nor  that  his  condition  is
      likely to worsen significantly if forced to return to Pakistan [73].



      The appeal before the Upper Tribunal




  25. On 23 January 2019, DUT Judge Chapman granted the appellant permission
      to appeal. She stated that whilst the grounds  of  appeal  are  poorly
      drafted:

        "it is just arguable that the Judge may have erred in rejecting the
        appellant's sexual orientation based on a previous decision of  the
        FTT when the appellant was not present at that  hearing  albeit  he
        gave adequate reasons at [55] this may be  infected  by  procedural
        unfairness and  that  he  arguably  erred  in  failing  to  provide
        adequate reasons for finding  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant
        suffers from ESKD does not constitute a very  significant  obstacle
        to his integration at [61]".

  26. Mr Aslam, who did not represent the appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal submitted  that  the  Judge  could  have  departed  from  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley because there  was  new
      evidence. He erred in failing to come to his  own  findings  regarding
      the appellant's sexual orientation. What was  different  before  Judge
      Siddall was the fact that the  evidence  of  the  appellant  could  be
      tested. Nor was there any  explanation  given  before  Judge  Greasley
      regarding the TOEIC deception. This is an important factor in  respect
      of credibility.

  27. Judge Siddall stated that in the light of  the  appellant's  assertion
      that he is gay, and which formed the crucial part of the appeal bundle
      he made against the refusal of his  asylum  application  in  2017,  he
      obtained a copy of the determination that had been referred  to  [29].
      Judge Siddall  went  into  detail  regarding  the  decision  of  Judge
      Greasley. He stated  at  [44]  that  Judge  Greasley  noted  what  the
      appellant stated at his interview, namely, that 'he had joined gay and
      LGBT groups in the UK to make his case stronger'.

  28. However, the appellant was given no opportunity to explain or  explore
      that evidence. This  should  have  been  put  to  the  appellant.  The
      appellant should have had an opportunity  to  deal  with  what  he  is
      alleged to have stated at the interview. Nor did counsel on behalf  of
      the appellant raise that issue at the time. All these documents should
      have  been  before  the  Tribunal  at  the  hearing,  especially  when
      consideration has been given to the Deevaseelan principles.

  29. With regard to whether there would be very significant obstacles under
      paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  there  was  medical  evidence  before   the
      Tribunal. There was a letter at page 25 from the CKD nurse  specialist
      dated 20 September 2017 where  the  diagnoses  are  set  out.  It  was
      discussed that he may need to start dialysis treatment.  At  page  14,
      there is a letter  from  the  Department  of  Renal  Medicine  at  the
      Northwick Park Hospital  noting  that  the  appellant  presented  with
      weight loss and  end  stage  renal  failure  in  March  2017.  He  was
      reviewed. He was a late presentation with Stage 5 CKD.

  30. Mr Aslam stated that Article 3 is not relied upon.

  31. He submitted that there was an insufficiency of reasoning at  [61]  of
      Judge Siddall's decision.  A deeper  analysis  was  required  for  the
      conclusion that his poor health does not amount to a very  significant
      reason why he should not return. There was no proper consideration  of
      what support he would have there.

  32. The Judge needed to "do more" with regard to the issues  raised  under
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). He failed to provide  adequate  reasons  with
      regard to the issues raised under that paragraph.

  33. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Cunha  submitted  that  Judge  Siddall
      dealt with paragraph 276ADE properly. He has considered  the  evidence
      "holistically". He has adopted a structured approach.

  34. He referred to the relevant case law at [69]. He applied  it  properly
      at [70]. He noted that that appellant was presenting  a  substantially
      similar case to that put before First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley. He
      accepted that  his  health  may  have  deteriorated  since  the  first
      decision and stated that he had noted the  reports  contained  in  the
      bundle from 2017, demonstrating that he has a serious  kidney  problem
      that requires dialysis. Any difficulty accessing treatment in Pakistan
      was not a reason to allow the appeal. He noted that the appellant  has
      lived for most of his life in Pakistan and has family there.

  35. She submitted that the Judge has considered the evidence carefully and
      adopted a structured approach. He took the  earlier  decision  as  his
      starting  point  [40].  He  followed  the  approach  set  out  in  the
      Deevaseelan principles.  Accordingly, she submitted that ground 2  has
      not been made out.

  36. Judge Siddall did  in  fact  depart  from  the  earlier  decision.  He
      considered the medical evidence that was now produced. He  had  regard
      to the claim that the  appellant  is  gay,  and  considered  the  LGBT
      evidence.  He made findings on the basis of the  new  evidence  before
      him. He also considered the evidence  relating  to  the  assertion  of
      deceit used by the appellant to obtain his TOEIC certificate.

  37. Ms Cunha submitted that in any event no evidence has been produced  by
      way of a record of proceedings from  the  solicitors  or  counsel  who
      represented the appellant at the hearing as  to  precisely  what  took
      place. The Judge found  that  there  had  been  no  challenge  to  the
      respondent's  evidence  in  the  asylum  appeal.  This  included   the
      interview record referred to in the respondent's asylum  decision.  He
      was accordingly entitled to refer to this. The  asylum  interview  had
      not been disputed by or on behalf of the appellant.

  38. In any event, she submitted that  the  Judge  made  "more  significant
      findings" from [49-52]. He took into account the evidence  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, noted  what  was  different  and  considered  the
      evidence since then.

  39. The appellant was aware that Mr Khan's evidence was  lacking.  In  his
      witness statement Mr Khan stated that they  were  in  a  relationship.
      That contradicted the appellant's statement that they had not been  in
      a relationship for 3-4 years because of his health.  Mr Khan  did  not
      attend the hearing to give evidence and be tested. Nor was  there  any
      reason why more detailed evidence could not have been given.

  40. She submitted that in the  circumstances,  he  was  entitled  to  give
      little weight to that evidence [52]

  41. She relied onm the decision of the Court of Appeal in TK  (Burundi)  v
      SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40 at [16]: Where evidence to support an  account
      given by a party is or should readily be available, a Judge is plainly
      entitled to take into account the failure to provide that evidence and
      any  explanations  for  that  failure.  This  may  be  a   factor   of
      considerable weight in relation to credibility where there are  doubts
      about the credibility of a party for other reasons. She also  referred
      to the decision in Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 at [25-27].

  42. At [55] he treated the later oral evidence of  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Arshad with a strong degree of suspicion. That is a key paragraph. The
      appellant knew that the respondent had refused his asylum  case  based
      on inconsistencies in the interview. He engaged solicitors to  appeal.
      The findings from Judge Greasley were not challenged.

  43. Accordingly she submitted that  the  Judge  has  not  been  unfair  as
      claimed. He has taken into account  the  live  evidence  produced  and
      concluded why there should be no departure.

  44. In reply, Mr Aslam again submitted that the Judge should have made his
      own findings as to whether or not the appellant is gay.



      Assessment




  45. I have set out the background to this appeal  in  some  detail.  Judge
      Siddal noted that the appellant claimed to be a  gay  person.  He  had
      regard to the appellant's application for asylum on 25 May 2016 on the
      basis that he is a gay man and would be persecuted as a  result  of  a
      return to Pakistan. That claim was refused on 23 November 2016 and the
      appeal against that decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Greasley on 23 November 2016. He became appeal rights  exhausted
      on 30 January 2017.

  46. These facts are all referred to and set out in the  skeleton  argument
      on behalf of the appellant produced by counsel who represented him  at
      the appeal hearing.  The written submissions were placed  produced  to
      the First-tier Tribunal at the time. The appellant contended  that  he
      would face insurmountable obstacles of re-integrating into Pakistan on
      account of his homosexuality. Further, he would  struggle  to  acquire
      treatment. Submissions were made under paragraph 276ADE(vi) as well as
      in the alternative under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. The
      relevant cases relating to his medical condition as  a  factor  to  be
      considered under Article 8 were referred to in the skeleton  and  were
      considered by the Judge as part of his decision.

  47. The grounds seeking permission to  appeal  simply  asserted  that  the
      Judge failed to appreciate "that the  lack  of  documentary  evidence"
      (sic).  Further he erred in  refusing  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of
      issues/matters that were not put to the appellant. He was not given  a
      fair chance to put his case. He had sent all the  supporting  evidence
      in support of the application which was not taken  into  account.  The
      Judge speculated on matters which he used to dismiss  the  appeal.  He
      was under an obligation to clarify matters which were  of  concern  to
      him.

  48. As noted, permission to appeal was granted on the limited basis as set
      out above.

  49. Mr Aslam submitted that  the  appellant  should  have  been  given  an
      opportunity to deal with what Judge Siddall's  reliance  on  what  the
      appellant stated at his interview, namely, that he had joined gay  and
      LGBT groups in the UK 'in order to make his case stronger'.

  50. That  assertion  was  not  made  explicitly  in  the  grounds  seeking
      permission to appeal. In any event, as noted  by  Judge  Siddall,  the
      appellant was aware  that  his  earlier  appeal  had  been  dismissed.
      Counsel who represented him before Judge Siddall pointed out that  the
      appellant had not attended his appeal hearing in January 2017. Counsel
      was aware that his asylum claim, made on 25 May 2016 on the basis that
      he was a gay man, had been refused and that his  appeal  against  that
      refusal was  dismissed.   These  background  facts  were  set  out  at
      paragraph 9 of counsel's skeleton argument  produced  at  the  hearing
      before Judge Siddall.

  51. There had never been any suggestion that the findings of fact made  by
      Judge Greasley regarding the appellant's interview  were  in  any  way
      incorrect. Nor was it contended before me that the appellant  did  not
      state at his interview what is recorded  at  [44]  of  Judge  Siddal's
      decision. As Ms Cunha submitted, the asylum interview has  never  been
      disputed by the appellant or his solicitors.

  52. I do not find that the decision of Judge Siddall has been 'infected by
      procedural unfairness.' Nor did Judge Siddall fail to provide adequate
      reasons in concluding that the fact that the  appellant  suffers  from
      ESKD do not constitute a very significant obstacle to his integration.
      [61].

  53. He has undertaken a  detailed  assessment  regarding  the  appellant's
      sexual orientation. He was aware that the appellant's  assertion  that
      he is gay formed the crucial  part  of  his  bundle.  He  referred  to
      Deevaseelan and  has  directed  himself  and  applied  the  principles
      correctly [31].

  54. He noted that the appellant claimed that his solicitors had  told  him
      that they were applying for an adjournment of his earlier  appeal  and
      that they took his money and did nothing, but confirmed  that  he  had
      received the adverse appeal decision  [32].  He  noted  however,  that
      contrary  to  these  assertions,  Judge  Greasley  recorded  that  the
      appellant had  failed  to  cooperate  with  his  solicitors  and  make
      contact. His legal representatives had in fact  written  the  Tribunal
      indicating that he had failed to co-operate with them and make contact
      and that they had taken themselves off the record [32].

  55. Judge Greasley was thus satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  adequate
      notice of the earlier hearing.  Despite  the  appellant's  failure  to
      appear,  Judge  Siddal  found  that  Judge  Greasley   had   carefully
      considered the grounds of appeal and all  the  evidence  available  to
      him, including the statements of Mr Khan and Mr Arshad [33].

  56. Judge Siddall heard evidence from both the appellant and Mr Arshad. Mr
      Khan's witness statement  was  not  signed.  Nor  did  he  attend  the
      hearing. The Judge treated his statement with some circumspection  and
      found that it was more likely than not that he is just a friend of the
      appellant and had not had a relationship with him [52].

  57. He also had regard to  the  photographs  in  the  bundle  showing  the
      appellant at Gay Pride events. It was not clear what year  these  were
      taken. He also noted Judge Greasley's finding that the  appellant  had
      signed up for gay groups in order to bolster his asylum claim [54]

  58. In the circumstances he was entitled to treat the witness statement of
      Mr Khan as well as the evidence of the appellant and Mr Arshad with  a
      strong  degree  of  suspicion  in  accordance  with  the  guidance  in
      Deevaseelan. He has given sustainable reasons for  his  conclusion  at
      [55].

  59. I consider whether Judge Siddall failed to  provide  adequate  reasons
      regarding the appellant's assertion that he may find it  difficult  to
      access healthcare and treatment for his kidney problems in Pakistan.

  60. In assessing the proportionality of  the  decision,  he  balanced  the
      competing interests. He accepted that the appellant is in poor  health
      and would face an uncertain future if returned  to  Pakistan.  He  may
      find it difficult to access healthcare. On the other hand, he had  not
      demonstrated that there would be no treatment available to him for the
      condition from which he suffers.  The  respondent  had  asserted  that
      treatment for kidney problems is available in  Pakistan,  albeit  that
      the appellant might have to pay for it.

  61. He concluded that the appellant was not able to demonstrate that there
      would be no treatment available for him for the condition  from  which
      he suffers [67]. He considered relevant Article 8 decisions, including
      the judgement of Underhill LJ in GS (India) and Others, supra. He  did
      not accept that the appellant would be unable  to  work  and  that  he
      would be destitute if he  returns  to  Pakistan.  He  noted  that  the
      appellant has family in Pakistan and would not be  without  access  to
      support. He concluded that refusal of leave to remain did  not  amount
      to a disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights in the UK
      [72].

  62. He has provided sustainable reasons for concluding that  the  decision
      to  remove  the  appellant  did  not  constitute  a   disproportionate
      interference with his Article 8 rights.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction made.






      Signed Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                        Dated 8 April 2019

-----------------------
[1]  Judge Siddal incorrectly stated at [5] that it was certified on 25
January 2016

