
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: hu/06463/2017
                                                               HU/06464/2017
                                                               HU/06467/2017
                                                               HU/06469/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 June 2019                      |On 02 July 2019                      |


                                   Before

                           LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  (sitting as Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D M W PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     GM
                                     AS
                                     KC
                                     GC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Thoree, solicitor Thoree & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by these four appellants against a decision of First-
    tier Judge Nicholls promulgated on 5 June 2018. That  decision  refused
    the appellants' appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse
    leave to remain on article 8 family grounds. Permission to  appeal  was
    refused by FTTJ Grimmett on 12 September 2018 and by UTJ  Eshun  on  11
    December 2018. Following an application for Judicial  Review  the  High
    Court, of consent, set aside that decision remitting  it  back  to  the
    Upper  Tribunal.  On  15  May  2019  Vice  President  Ockleton  granted
    permission in the light of the High Court  decision  reminding  parties
    that the UT's task is set out in s.12 of the 2007 Act.

 2. All of the appellants are nationals of Ecuador. The  first  and  second
    appellants are married. Both of them entered the  UK  illegally  -  the
    first appellant in about 2002  and  the  second  in  2000.  The  second
    appellant was removed in 2004 but re-entered the UK illegally  again  a
    few months later. They have been in the UK ever since.  The  third  and
    fourth appellants are their children both of whom were born in the  UK.
    There is now a third child of the marriage. At  the  time  of  the  FTT
    hearing the fourth appellant was a qualifying child for the purposes of
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The ground of appeal that was pursued before us by Mr Thoree  was  that
    FTTJ Nicholls had visited the sins of the parents on to  the  children.
    He had found that it was in  their  best  interests,  particularly  the
    fourth appellant, to remain in the UK with their  parents.  However  at
    paragraph 23 he had balanced that with public interest in  the  control
    of immigration and found that it would  be  reasonable  to  remove  the
    fourth appellant from the UK in the company of her parents and  sister.
    Had the First-tier Judge left the matter there then we would  not  have
    found an error of law. However he then proceeded to make the  following
    statement, "I find that the deliberate and aggravated breaches  of  the
    Immigration Rules by the first and second  appellants  create  powerful
    reasons why leave to remain for these four  appellants  should  not  be
    granted."

 4. Mr Tufan submitted that these remarks were similar to those  attributed
    to UTJ Perkins' findings in NS, reported in KO (Nigeria)  UKSC  53,  at
    paragraph 50. UTJ Perkins said that he would consider it outrageous for
    them (the adult appellants) to be permitted to remain  in  the  UK.  He
    said that they must  go  and  in  the  circumstances  the  others  (the
    children) must go with them. At paragraph 51 Lord Carnwath acknowledged
    that the final conclusion was arguably open to the interpretation  that
    the "outrageousness" of the parents' conduct was  somehow  relevant  to
    the conclusion under section 117B(6). In context  however  he  rejected
    that argument.

 5. The distinction between this case and that of NS is that  there  was  a
    clear distinction drawn between the adults  and  the  children  in  UTJ
    Perkin's  conclusions.  While  it  was  permissible  to  point  to  the
    deliberate and aggravated breaches of  the  immigration  rules  by  the
    first and second appellants the assessment under section 117B(6)  is  a
    discrete exercise. It is one which may be made in the context that  the
    parents have no right to remain in the UK; KO (Nigeria)  paragraphs  18
    and 19. However as the IDI guidance (reported at paragraph 11 of KO and
    approved at paragraph 17) makes clear the  assessment  of  the  child's
    best interests must not be affected by the conduct of the parent.

 6. It may be that the sentence quoted at paragraph 3 above was a  careless
    use of words. But applying anxious scrutiny to a case  which  turns  on
    the best interests of a child born in this country  who  faces  removal
    from the UK with her parents it appears to us that  the  assessment  of
    her interests under section 117B(6) has been infected by the view  that
    FTTJ Nicholls took of the conduct of the first and  second  appellants.
    Accordingly we find an error of law.

 7. Having canvassed options with the parties we  came  to  the  conclusion
    that this is a case which should be remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. It is over a year since the decision of  FTTJ  Nicholls.  The
    third appellant is now a qualifying child and we were informed that the
    fourth  appellant  was  about  to  become  a  UK  citizen.   In   these
    circumstances we consider that the fact finding exercise  is  one  best
    conducted in the FTT, consistent with 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The case is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
be remade.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                             Date 1 July 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup





