
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06093/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 July 2020                      |On 29 July 2020                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                Harpreet [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, further to directions issued  by  the
Upper Tribunal on 11 May 2020.

The appellant is a national of India born on 17 May  1985.  She  arrived  in
the United Kingdom on 26 January 2008 on  a  student  visa  valid  until  28
February 2008 and was granted subsequent extensions of leave  until  7  June
2014. She made an application for an EEA residence  card  on  6  June  2014,
which was refused on 7 November 2014. An appeal against  that  decision  was
dismissed on 26 June 2015.

On 26 January 2017 the appellant made an application  for  indefinite  leave
to remain on the grounds of long  residence,  relying  upon  her  length  of
residence in the UK as well as her Article 8 family  and  private  life,  in
particular her family life with her son [M] (born on 21  October  2015)  and
her brother upon whom she claimed to be  dependent.  She  claimed  that  she
could not return to India as a single mother who had  had  a  child  out  of
wedlock. She  was  no  longer  in  contact  with  the  child's  father.  The
appellant's application was refused on 20 February 2018.

The appellant appealed against that decision. Her  appeal  was  heard  on  4
October 2018 and was dismissed in the First-tier Tribunal by Judge  Hussain,
on 22 November 2018. Judge Hussein's decision was subsequently set aside  in
the Upper Tribunal in a decision  promulgated  on  18  March  2019  and  was
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.

The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer  on  4  October
2019. Judge Mailer noted that the relevant issue was whether there would  be
very significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration  in  India  as  a
single mother with a child born out of wedlock. Indeed the reasons  for  the
appeal being remitted was because the previous judge had not addressed  that
issue fully. Judge Mailer rejected the appellant's  claim  to  have  had  no
contact with her mother since telling her she was pregnant, as that was  not
the evidence she had given before Judge Hussein at her last  hearing.  Judge
Mailer found that the appellant was in regular contact with her  mother  and
did not accept her claim that she would suffer abuse  from  her  mother  and
family in India. He considered that the  appellant  could  return  to  India
where she would not be ostracised by her family or others  in  the  village,
that  her  mother  would  accommodate  her  or   assist   her   in   finding
accommodation and that her brother in the UK would continue to  support  her
financially until she became self-sufficient. Judge Mailer  found  that  the
appellant had not shown that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
integration in India and  that  she  could  not  meet  the  requirements  in
paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules. He considered  that  the  best
interests of the appellant's child were to reside with his  mother  wherever
she was and that their removal would not be disproportionate  in  breach  of
Article 8. He accordingly dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on  the  grounds  that  the
judge had materially erred in law  by  relying  on  the  findings  of  Judge
Hussein, in regard to the appellant's contact  with  her  mother  in  India,
when Judge Hussein's decision had been set aside  in  its  entirety  by  the
Upper Tribunal. It was asserted that that error infected  the  remainder  of
Judge Mailer's decision.

Permission was granted on 26 March 2020.

The case was then reviewed by the Upper Tribunal due  to  the  circumstances
relating to Covid 19. In a Note and Directions sent  out  on  11  May  2020,
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith indicated that she had  reached  the  provisional
view that  the  question  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
involved the making of error of law and, if so, whether the decision  should
be set aside, could be made without  a  hearing.  Submissions  were  invited
from the parties.

Written submissions have been received from  both  parties.  In  a  response
dated 3 June 2020, Mr S Kotas for the respondent responded  to  the  grounds
of appeal and made no objection to the matter being decided on  the  papers.
The appellant's representatives made written submissions  on  4  June  2020,
which included an objection to the matter being dealt  with  on  the  papers
under rule 34.

I have  had  careful  regard  to  the  objection  made  by  the  appellant's
solicitors to the matter being decided without  an  oral  hearing  and  have
considered Rule 5A as inserted into the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008, as well as Rule 34. Rule 5A(3) makes it clear  that  a  decision
to determine a matter without a hearing is not restricted to the  conditions
in 5A(2). The appellant's objection to a determination  without  a  hearing,
at [3] of the submissions,  is  simply  that  "it  is  unfair  that  she  be
deprived of an oral hearing", but no details are given as to  why  it  would
be unfair or how she would be prejudiced by such.  I  have  the  benefit  of
submissions from both parties as well as the detailed grounds of appeal  and
take note of the very limited nature of the challenge in the grounds. I  can
find no reason why a consideration of  those  grounds  and  submissions,  as
opposed to hearing from counsel in person, would prejudice the appellant  in
this particular case. I do not accept that deciding  the  matter  without  a
hearing would give rise to any unfairness and I consider  that  I  am  able,
fully and fairly, to consider the error of law issue on  the  basis  of  the
papers before me in accordance with rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.

I have therefore  proceeded  to  consider  whether  or  not  Judge  Mailer's
decision contains errors of  law  such  that  it  should  be  set  aside.  I
conclude that there are no errors of law in his decision. I do  so  for  the
following reasons.

The only issue raised  in  the  grounds  is  Judge  Mailer's  reliance  upon
previous findings made by Judge Hussein, despite the fact that the  decision
of the latter had been set aside in its entirety by the Upper  Tribunal  and
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo  hearing.  However,  as
properly stated by Mr Kotas in his submissions, Judge Mailer  did  not  rely
upon the findings made by Judge Hussein, but rather on  the  evidence  which
was before him, which was an  entirely  different  matter.  The  appellant's
evidence before Judge Hussein, as recorded at  [13]  of  his  decision,  was
that she had ongoing contact with her mother after the birth of  her  child,
and that her mother called her regularly to  check  on  the  baby's  health.
That was a matter of record. Judge Mailer was fully  and  properly  entitled
to consider all of  the  evidence,  including  the  evidence  previously  on
record, as found in the case of EN (abandonment -  first  decision  nullity-
Devaseelan applied) Cameroon [2005] UKAIT 00146.  Indeed  he  gave  specific
consideration to his ability to rely on that evidence, at [90] to  [93]  and
[[99] to [102], noting that the evidence before Judge  Hussein  formed  part
of the Upper Tribunal's consideration and that there had been  no  challenge
to the evidence itself, only to the findings arising out  of  the  evidence.
As such, it seems to me that it was entirely appropriate  for  Judge  Mailer
to note the inconsistency between that evidence given before Judge  Hussein,
and the evidence given before himself that the appellant's  mother  had  cut
off all contact with the appellant  after  learning  of  the  birth  of  her
child, and to draw the adverse conclusions that he did as a result.

For all these reasons it seems to me that the judge was  perfectly  entitled
to conclude that the appellant had not provided a  credible  account  before
him. He was entitled to conclude that she had a support  network  on  return
to India and that she  had  not  shown  that  there  were  very  significant
obstacles to her return to that  country,  nor  any  other  reason  why  her
removal would breach her Article 8 rights. The grounds do not  disclose  any
errors of law in the judge's decision.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 20 July
2020
