
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06585/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2018                           |On 24 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                               Mrs Rita Darpoh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
promulgated on 27 June 2018 to dismiss her appeal against the respondent's
decision to refuse a humanitarian protection claim under Article 8 of the
European Convention on Human Rights.

2.   The background to this application is that the appellant entered the
UK with entry clearance as a working holidaymaker in 2005 and has been
given various extensions of her leave since as a visitor and subsequently
she applied for leave to remain as a spouse on 10 August 2012 but this was
refused. Her appeal rights were exhausted as long ago as 11 October 2013.
Finally, she applied for leave to remain on the basis of her family or
private life, but this was refused on 27 June 2016. Her human rights
application was subsequently certified as being unfounded but by consent
the Upper Tribunal allowed the respondent to withdraw that decision. The
respondent subsequently judge me decision also refusing the appellant's
human rights claim it would seem on 11 May 2017.

3.   The appeal which was before the First-tier Tribunal at the hearing
which took place at Hatton Cross 22 May 2018 was the appellant's appeal
against the refusal of leave to remain on human rights grounds and that was
on the specific basis that she had become the carer for one Mr Lamprey,
who, sadly, suffered from a debilitating form of illness, a neurological
condition which necessitated care by the appellant on a more or less daily
basis, or at least that was her case.

4.   The judge who heard her appeal, Mr Rhys-Davies, considered that the
appellant had not established that she would qualify under the Immigration
Rules, having had regard to the guidance issued by the respondent, in
particular, the IDI guidance.  He regarded the equivalent care as being
available to the appellant under the local authority's care requirements or
obligations, if not from local Social Services. A suitable level of care
would be provided by the National Health Service and, therefore, the
Immigration Judge was not satisfied that the appellant qualified under
Article 8.  Having found that the Article was engaged, he did not consider
that the balance came down in favour of the appellant on the facts of the
case.

5.   The appellant appealed that decision by applying first for permission
to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal but that initial application was refused by Judge Alis on 4 August
2018.  However, she renewed her application to the Upper Tribunal and
application that came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Shaerf, who gave
permission to appeal on the basis that in his view, paragraph 17.5 of the
IDI guidance had not been fully considered by the judge and that placed an
obligation on the respondent to ascertain the care arrangements that would
be in place for Mr Lamprey if the appellant was removed from the UK.  This
affected the proportionality assessment and there was an arguable error of
law.

6.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Kotas has placed before
me a fax received on 5 December 2018 at the Presenting Officers' Unit in
Central London.  Unfortunately, the fax was not received by the Courts &
Tribunals Service but I have had an opportunity to read its contents. It
states that the solicitors who were instructed on behalf of the appellant,
a firm of solicitors called M A Consultants of Whitechapel Road, London,
E1, would not be attending the Tribunal but Upper Tribunal was invited to
determine the appeal "on the papers", drawing attention to the fact that,
sadly, Mr Lamprey, the appellant's uncle, had, sadly, passed away.  A
medical certificate is supplied, confirming that that gentleman had died of
a heart condition, myocardial infarction, as certified by the doctor as
long ago as 29 July 2018.  It is somewhat unfortunate that the information
was not relayed to the Tribunal until recently.

7.   In the light of that important piece of information, Mr Kotas invites
me to dismiss the appeal, pointing out there is in fact no error of law in
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. It would seem academic to consider
whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was made following a
material error of law. Even if it was, it is not material to the outcome of
the case because, ultimately, any Tribunal remaking the decision based on
the facts as they are known today conclude that the appellant is no longer
a long-term carer for Mr Lamprey. In the circumstances, having fully taken
into account the grounds of appeal and the basis for this appeal, I find
there to be no material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal. Accordingly, that decision stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appeal  against  the
respondent's refusal to grant  further  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
grounds stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 11 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 11 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

