
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/06927/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1st March 2019                        |On 19th March 2019                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Mr mohammed idrees
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hodgetts, Counsel instructed by Prime Law
Solicitors Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Mr Idrees is a citizen of India whose date of birth is recorded as  7th
    November 1983.  On 25th August 2017 he made application for  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of ten years' lawful
    residence.  On 27th February 2018 the Secretary of  State  refused  the
    application relying on paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules.   It
    was the Secretary of State's position that the Appellant's conduct  was
    such that he ought not  to  obtain  the  relief  sought.   It  was  the
    Secretary of State's position that the Appellant had used deception  in
    the preparation of  accounts  upon  which  he  had  relied  in  earlier
    applications and that he had  only  corrected  the  position  when  the
    Secretary of State had  pointed  out  to  him  that  on  the  basis  of
    information he had received the accounts were wrong and importantly  so
    far as the Secretary of State was concerned, there had been  as  I  say
    deception or dishonesty.

 2. Mr Idrees appealed and on 31st October 2018 his  appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Morgan sitting at Taylor House.  Judge
    Morgan had the benefit of hearing from the  Appellant.  It  is  not  in
    dispute that the Appellant relied on his witness statement  dated  24th
    October 2018 which runs to 23 paragraphs.  The Appellant in the  First-
    tier Tribunal, Mr Idrees,  was  cross-examined  and  having  heard  the
    evidence and the submissions that were made Judge Morgan made important
    findings.  At paragraph 9 it reads:

         "In the light of the submissions and the evidence outlined above  I
         find that, contrary to the assertion in the refusal, the  Appellant
         has  not  fabricated  earnings  for  the  purpose  of  gaining   an
         immigration advantage.  The earnings submitted  to  the  Respondent
         were an accurate reflection of the Appellant's total earnings  from
         self-employment.  Those earnings were accepted by the Respondent in
         both of the successful applications of 2011 and  2013  for  further
         leave as a Tier 1 Migrant.  Where the problem arose was because the
         Appellant's former accountants did not submit accurate tax  returns
         to HMRC.  However, I am persuaded by Mr Biggs' submission that  the
         Respondent has not discharged the burden of demonstrating that this
         was because of the dishonest actions of the Appellant."

 3. Judge Morgan went on to allow the appeal on human rights  grounds  such
    being the basis of course of the application.

 4. Not content with that decision by Notice dated 16th November  2018  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Although the grounds are quite lengthy,  Ms  Isherwood
    accepts that in summary there are two bases of attack.  The first is on
    the basis of the reasoning in cases such as R (on  the  application  of
    Khan) -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department  (dishonesty,  tax
    return, paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 00384  (IAC).   The  guidance  in
    that line of cases is that it is not sufficient for an applicant simply
    to blame his  or  her  accountant  for  an  error  in  relation  to  an
    historical tax return, that is not the end of the matter.  However,  it
    is common ground that it is for the Secretary of State to discharge the
    legal burden establishing dishonesty.  If an applicant  does  not  take
    steps within a reasonable time to remedy the situation,  the  Secretary
    of State may be entitled to conclude  that  this  failure  justifies  a
    conclusion that there has been deceit or dishonesty.  Certainly,  where
    there has been a significant difference in the figures submitted, there
    is a prima facie case.  The evidential burden then is on the  Appellant
    to offer an innocent explanation but the legal burden always stays with
    the Secretary of State.

 5. The second ground upon which the Secretary of State relies is  that  it
    was said that there was inadequate reasoning on the part of the  judge.



 6. As to the first point of dishonesty, having read the  judge's  decision
    taken together with the witness statement, I come to the view  that  it
    was open to the judge to conclude  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    dishonest. When I say the Appellant, I mean the Appellant in the First-
    tier Tribunal.  It may be that Mr Idrees had  been  careless  but  that
    does not equate necessarily with dishonesty.

 7.  As to the adequacy of reasoning,  my  preliminary  view,  having  read
    paragraph 10 of the Decision and Reasons was that it was not clear what
    the "plausible explanation" was to which the judge referred.  He  says,
    "I find that the Appellant had provided a plausible explanation for why
    there is an income differential between the declared income on his  tax
    returns and that relied upon in the applications and  the  Respondent's
    evidence falls far short of  establishing  dishonesty".   However,  the
    Decision and Reasons, in this case, have to be read together  with  the
    witness statement because clearly that was the evidence upon which  the
    decision was made.

 8. Before concluding I asked the parties  whether  there  were  any  other
    matters which they felt I should deal with more fully both were content
    to leave matters as they were.

 9. Ms Isherwood very  realistically  and  reasonably  in  her  submissions
    relied on the grounds without more.

Decision

In the circumstances the appeal of the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  Upper
Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  affirmed


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 18 March 2019






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

