
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06436/2018
                                                               HU/08847/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th May 2019                      |On 6th June 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                         Mr ANTHONYPILLAI KAMALADAS
                          Mrs PRASHNTANI KAMALADAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Sharma
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants, born on 7th April 1982 and 5th May  1988  respectively,
    are both citizens of Sri Lanka and are married.  Applications had  been
    made by the Appellants for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the
    grounds of ten years' long residency.  In February and April  2018  the
    Respondent had refused the Appellants' applications and the  Appellants
    appealed that decision.  Their appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Isaacs sitting at Hatton Cross  on  19th  February  2019.
    The judge had dismissed the appeals on all grounds.

 2. Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made and
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 10th April  2019.   It  was  said
    that it was arguable that the judge had failed to direct  herself  with
    regard to the burden and standard of proof in relation to questions  of
    dishonesty under paragraph 322(5).   Directions  were  issued  for  the
    Upper Tribunal firstly to decide whether an error of law had been  made
    in this case and the matter comes before me in  accordance  with  those
    directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellants

 3. Mr Sharma submitted in line with the Grounds of Appeal noting that  the
    judge had failed to correctly establish  the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof in cases of this nature.  It was said that at  paragraph  58  the
    judge had simply gone straight to  the  issue  of  finding  a  lack  of
    credibility on the Appellant's account and therefore placed the  burden
    of evidence on the Appellant.  It was said  the  judge  had  failed  to
    properly explain the second stage of the burden and standard of  proof,
    namely that  the  Appellant  needed  to  demonstrate  if  necessary  an
    innocent explanation by meeting a basic level of plausibility.  It  was
    further submitted that the judge  had  misunderstood  the  accountant's
    evidence in respect of how they had failed to notice matters because of
    a problem with their software.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 4. It was submitted the issue was whether or not the error of law, if  one
    occurred, was material.  It was said that as a  fact  it  was  accepted
    that no accounts had been submitted by the  Appellant  for  the  period
    2010 to 2015, and therefore it could  properly  be  inferred  that  the
    Respondent  had  discharged  the  initial  burden  of  disclosing  real
    suspicion in the  instant  case  thereby  establishing  the  evidential
    burden of proof.

 5. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    and evidence in this  case.   I  now  provide  that  decision  with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The Respondent had refused the first Appellant's appeal under paragraph
    322(5) of the Immigration Rules, and that of the  second  Appellant  in
    respect of her application to remain on the basis of  her  family  life
    with her husband.

 7. The judge noted the Appellants' representative accepted at  the  outset
    that the second Appellant's appeal stood or fell in line with  that  of
    the first Appellant (paragraph 7).

 8. It was an accepted fact that the Appellant had  failed  to  submit  tax
    returns for the period 2010 to 2015.  The Appellant's case was that was
    the fault of his accountants.

 9. Having set out the facts, submissions and relevant law the judge  began
    his assessment of the case at paragraph 58.  He stated  as  follows  "I
    did not find the Appellant's explanation for the failure  to  file  tax
    returns which declared the dividends he says he received  between  2010
    and 2015 credible for the following reasons".

10. The case of Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673 amongst other matters, found
    that the approach taken by the Home Office in respect of refusal  under
    paragraph 322(5), insofar as this  class  of  case  was  concerned  was
    flawed.  Firstly, if the Home Office found on  the  evidence  available
    there was real suspicion of dishonesty they should  have  provided  the
    Appellant an opportunity to give an  innocent  explanation.   Secondly,
    even after a definitive finding of dishonesty it could not  necessarily
    be concluded that rendered a person undesirable under paragraph  322(5)
    given that factors would need to be considered in the round.   Where  a
    person had been provided with an appeal a refusal by the  Home  Office,
    in those circumstances, did mean that the appeal system allowed for  an
    Appellant found to be dishonest and refused by the  Home  Office  under
    paragraph 322(5) to provide such an explanation.   If  the  appeal  was
    based under Section 82 of the 2002 Act on the basis that  the  proposed
    removal was an unlawful or disproportionate breach of Article 8 of  the
    ECHR then that meant inevitably facts would be considered in the  round
    (paragraph 221 to 223).

11. The judge at paragraph 8 set out his self-direction on the  burden  and
    standard of proof in the case,  namely  that  the  burden  was  on  the
    Appellant and the standard of proof was  a  balance  of  probabilities.
    That was a misdirection.  It did not take account of the need  for  the
    Respondent initially to discharge the evidential burden of there  being
    a  real  suspicion  in  those  cases  where  the  Respondent   asserted
    dishonesty/deception.  Only if such evidential burden was met was there
    then a need for the Appellant to provide  an  innocent  explanation  by
    meeting the basic level of plausibility.  In cases where the Respondent
    asserts something as serious as dishonesty/deception, it  is  important
    that there is an adherence to the recognised procedure and discharge of
    the burden and standard of proof and the case of Balajigari underscores
    that need for fairness in such proceedings.  In those circumstances  it
    was a material error for the judge to misdirect himself and  thereafter
    consider the evidence in line with that misdirection in a case of  this
    nature.

Notice of Decision

12. A material error of law was made by the judge in this case  and  I  set
    aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  direct  that  the
    matter be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
