
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06998/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th November 2018                          |On 30th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                 JOTSHNA [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Moore promulgated on 18th June 2018 dismissing her appeal on the  basis
    of her human rights.  The decision of Judge Moore was appealed  against
    and permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Page  in  the
    following terms:

         "The application for permission to appeal unhelpfully runs into six
         pages of disagreement instead of being limited, as it  should  have
         been, to a series of succinct Grounds of Appeal.  It  may  be  that
         much of this amounts to disagreement with what the judge decided on
         the evidence but one Ground of Appeal merits consideration  by  the
         Upper Tribunal.  That is that the judge placed little weight on the
         psychiatric report dated 16th  April  2018  which  highlighted  the
         potential risks associated  to  the  Appellant's  daughter  if  the
         Appellant departed from the UK.  The report  has  stated  that  the
         Appellant's daughter will become socially isolated if the Appellant
         was removed.  The complaint is made that the judge has given little
         weight to this report and has  stated  at  paragraph  30  that  the
         medical expert went beyond her remit.  The Grounds of Appeal  argue
         that a medical report has a duty to impose a  medical  opinion  and
         not be influenced by a lay person.  A complaint is  made  that  the
         judge has speculated about this  and  the  approach  taken  to  the
         report is incorrect.  Permission  to  appeal  is  granted  on  this
         ground alone".

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 reply by the Secretary of  State  but
    was given the indication that the appeal was resisted.

Error of Law

 3. At the close of the  hearing  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give.  I  do  not  find  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision,  such  that  it  should  be  set
    aside.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 4. In respect of the sole Ground  of  Appeal,  the  criticism  is  broadly
    pleaded as summarised by Judge Page,  against  paragraph  30  of  Judge
    Moore's decision.  I thus turn to that paragraph to  see  the  impugned
    findings in context, which read as follows:

         "Regarding the psychiatric report of 6th April 2018 it would appear
         that the report writer has perhaps gone beyond her  remit.   Whilst
         the  report  details  the  diagnosis  of  severe  depression   with
         psychotic symptoms, the report writer states in the report that she
         would like to support the Appellant in her court hearing for  leave
         to remain in the UK.  She later in the  report  adds  that  if  the
         Appellant was to be removed  the  daughter  would  become  socially
         isolated.  Such comments in my view should not be in a  psychiatric
         report, and it would seem that the medical expert opined that there
         would be social isolation on the  part  of  the  daughter,  without
         stating how such a conclusion was reached, presumably as  a  result
         of what the report writer had been told by the daughter".

    As can be seen from that paragraph the remark made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that the report writer went beyond her remit was in fact
    premised upon the criticism that the report did  not  specify  how  the
    conclusion was reached that  the  daughter  would  suffer  from  social
    isolation.  That is quite different from the remark  being  made  in  a
    vacuum without any basis being given for it.  Thus, I do not find  that
    there is any  error  that  is  material  in  this  remark  being  made,
    particularly where the judge has justified it being given in,  in  that
    he was of the  opinion  that  the  medical  report  writer  would  have
    specified reasons why the daughter would suffer from  social  isolation
    and not made an unreasoned remark.  Notwithstanding that  finding,  the
    judge has also stated that this finding was made presumably as a result
    of what the report writer had been told by the  daughter.   That  is  a
    presumption that the judge was entitled to make, however if this was to
    be challenged as  a  material  error  of  fact,  it  was  open  to  the
    Appellant's representatives to contact the report writer and  obtain  a
    response to this remark made by Judge Moore, given that it  would  have
    only arisen for the first time in his decision.  That was not  done  by
    the Appellant's representatives.  Nor  surprisingly  were  any  of  the
    other Grounds of Appeal renewed when  permission  to  appeal  had  been
    refused on all other grounds by Judge Page.  Had that  been  done,  the
    appeal may have fared differently, but it was not, and  so  there  only
    exists one ground of challenge before me.

 5. This is an unhappy appeal in that I am given to understand  that  there
    is a volume of evidence which could support the  Appellant's  position,
    according to Mr Shah, but Mr Shah's  unnamed  'colleague'  whom  is  in
    charge of this matter has  not,  for  reasons  unexplained,  sought  to
    either obtain that evidence nor sought to place it  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal or even the Upper Tribunal on appeal.

 6.  There  is  some  further  evidence  submitted  under  a  Rule   15(2A)
    application.  This is evidence  that  was  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which the Appellant seeks to rely upon in this appeal.  Before
    I can consider that evidence, as Rule 15(2A)(a)(ii) states, 'if a party
    wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider such evidence that was not before
    the First-tier Tribunal they must not only send or  deliver  notice  to
    the Upper Tribunal and the Respondent'  but  must  also  indicate  'the
    nature of the evidence' and most important of all 'explain why  it  was
    not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal'.  These are factors that  the
    Upper Tribunal must  have  regard  to  as  to  whether  there  was  any
    unreasonable delay in  producing  the  evidence.   Notwithstanding  the
    element of delay in this matter, Mr Shah was  unable  to  give  me  any
    explanation as to why  the  evidence  that  is  now  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the form of the letter from King's Health  Partners  (South
    London and Maudsley NHS Trust) of 1st November 2018 from  a  specialist
    perinatal mental health nurse had not  been  sought  and  obtained  and
    placed before the First-tier Tribunal by his colleague.   Indeed,  this
    is evidence that one would have expected any conscientious and  careful
    legal representative to obtain given that the  previous  evidence  from
    the mental health nursing team (at Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Trust)  was
    dated 10th March 2016 (seen at page 45 of the Appellant's bundle and as
    referred to by Mr Shah).  Thus,  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was out-of-date and this is evidence which  should  have  been
    produced earlier for which no explanation has been given.

 7. Notwithstanding that no explanation has been given, I have  decided  to
    admit that evidence and to consider it as part of the consideration  of
    whether there is a material error of law or not in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In respect of this  evidence  I  am  inclined  to
    accept Ms Everett's submissions that in paragraphs  29  to  31  of  the
    decision, the judge has in fact, as she puts it, "put a lot of  effort"
    into filling in the blanks and gaps in the  Appellant's  evidence,  and
    which filling in even goes in the Appellant's favour.   An  example  of
    this is the judge stating at paragraph 29 that the Appellant  is  still
    in receipt of a care plan which will continue - even though  there  was
    no evidence of its continuation before him.  Thus, given that  the  new
    letter from the South London and Maudsley Trust refers to the Appellant
    providing care on a daily basis for her daughter's children  (i.e.  her
    grandchildren) and that she will require  continued  support  from  her
    mother and mental health services, there is  nothing  sufficiently  new
    and detailed in this letter that the judge has not already presumed and
    given the benefit of doubt in favour of the Appellant  (notwithstanding
    that there was no evidence before him on  this  issue).   Thus,  in  my
    view, the new evidence produced under Rule 15(2A)  does  not  reveal  a
    material error of fact in the judge's decision nor a material error  of
    law in any other respect.  I note that the judge has accepted that  the
    Appellant is fully supporting her daughter, however, as  harsh  as  the
    findings may seem, there is  no  perversity  in  them  as  when  taking
    paragraphs 29 to 31 of the judge's judgment and the  remainder  of  the
    decision as a whole, the judge has fully  and  fairly  weighed  up  the
    evidence before him, and gone to extra lengths to find in favour of the
    Appellant on other matters not before him, but still  ultimately  found
    against the Appellant in terms of the proportionality of the  Secretary
    of State's decision, which was entirely open to him to do.

 8. Finally, before concluding this decision I note that, as  I  have  said
    above, this is an extremely unfortunate and unhappy appeal, in that  it
    is said that the grandchildren of the Appellant will be taken into care
    if the Appellant is removed, however there is still  no  evidence  that
    has been placed either before the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  the  Upper
    Tribunal which expressly points to this conclusion.   I  note  that  Mr
    Shah said that the Appellant's daughter  being  a  British  citizen  is
    entitled to social support but that being so he was unable  to  explain
    why that social support had not been sought  and  why  the  Appellant's
    supporting presence  would  still  be  necessary,  notwithstanding  the
    availability of that support.  However, if further evidence  does  come
    into the Appellant's hands of such a nature which would show  that  the
    children would be placed into care, notwithstanding the social  support
    apparently available, the Appellant is of course at liberty to  make  a
    fresh claim and present that evidence before the  Secretary  of  State.
    Although that claim would also need to deal with the  finding  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge at  paragraph  31  that  the  Appellant's
    daughter could apparently obtain domestic  support  or  cook  or  clean
    herself and therefore provide the necessary care for  her  children  in
    the Appellant's (her mother's) absence.

 9. Therefore, in light of the  above  findings,  the  appeal  against  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal does not reveal a material error of
    law such that the decision should be set aside.

Notice of Decision

10. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby affirmed.

12. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 25 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

