
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06119/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 November 2018                           |On 6 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    T A B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Elliott-Kelly, Counsel instructed by Hoole & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.
    Anonymity is granted in order to prevent serious harm arising for TAB's
    minor child.

 2. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to TAB as the appellant and  to
    the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  as  the  respondent,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. TAB is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1995.  This decision is remaking of
    TAB's appeal against deportation, brought on Article  8  ECHR  grounds.
    The remaking of the appeal  is  required  following  an  error  of  law
    decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb dated  16  February  2018  which
    found a material error of law when set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 26th September 2017 which allowed TAB's  appeal
    against deportation.

 4. The background to this matter is that TAB came to the UK in 1999 at the
    age of 4.  He has remained here ever since.  He was granted  indefinite
    leave to remain on 9 November 2010.

 5. The appellant has three criminal convictions.  The first conviction was
    on 12 October 2012 for possessing a knife or blade in  a  public  place
    for which he  was  sentenced  to  a  referral  order  and  six  months'
    deprivation.  The second conviction was on  28  October  2015  for  two
    counts of possessing a Class A drug (cocaine and heroin) with intent to
    supply.  For that offence the appellant was sentenced  to  a  suspended
    sentence  of  24  months'  imprisonment  and  200  hours  unpaid   work
    requirement.  The third conviction was on  24  November  2016  for  two
    counts of possessing a Class A drug  (crack  cocaine  and  heroin)  for
    which he was sentenced to three and half years in prison.

 6. The legal framework for considering the appellant's Article 8 rights is
    that set down by Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 and paragraphs 398-399A of the Immigration Rules.

 7. A number of matters are no longer in dispute.  It is accepted that  the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  daughter,
    M, who is a "qualifying child" for the purposes of  Section  117(5C)(v)
    and paragraph 399(a). The finding of the First-tier Tribunal that it is
    in M's best interests to remain in the UK and to "retain  contact  with
    both of her biological parents" is also accepted.  The respondent  also
    concedes that it would be  "unduly  harsh"  to  expect  M  to  live  in
    Jamaica.  The critical assessment to be re-made now  concerning  M  is,
    therefore, that contained in paragraph 399a(ii)(b), whether it will  be
    unduly harsh for her to remain in the UK without the appellant.

 8. Further, it is conceded for the appellant that his  index  offence  was
    "particularly serious", stated to be so by  the  sentencing  judge  and
    reflected in the imposition  of  a  three  and  a  half  year  sentence
    notwithstanding his being given full credit for a guilty  plea  and  an
    acceptance by the sentencing judge that by the time  of  sentencing  he
    had "begun to turn his life around".  There is also no  challenge  from
    the respondent to the finding of the First-tier Tribunal that there  is
    a low risk of reoffending and that the custodial sentence had  been  "a
    life changing experience" for the appellant, both issues falling to  be
    set against the public interest in his deportation.

    Would the Effect of the Appellant's Deportation be Unduly Harsh for M?

 9. The Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53 at  [27]  approved  the  meaning  of  "unduly
    harsh" provided by the Upper Tribunal in the case of MK (Sierra  Leone)
    v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC):

         "...  'unduly  harsh'   does   not   equate   with   uncomfortable,
         inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses  a
         considerably more elevated threshold.   'Harsh'  in  this  context,
         denotes something severe, or  bleak.   It  is  the  antipathies  of
         pleasant or comfortable.  Furthermore, the addition of  the  adverb
         "unduly" raises an already elevated standard still higher."

10. Lord Carnwath also indicate in KO that;

         "The expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly intended to  introduce
         a  higher  hurdle  than  that  of  "reasonableness"  under  Section
         117B(6), taking account of the public interest in  the  deportation
         of foreign  criminals.   Further,  the  word  "unduly"  implies  an
         element of comparison ... one is looking for a degree of  harshness
         going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced
         with a deportation of a parent."

11. The Supreme Court in KO also clarified that  the  "relative  levels  of
    severity of  the  parents'  offence  other  than  is  inherent  in  the
    distinction drawn by the section itself by reference to the  length  of
    sentence" is not something that should be weighed  against  the  child.
    in the unduly harsh assessment, reflecting the principle from Zoumbas v
    SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 "that the child should not be held responsible  for
    the conduct of the parent".

12. The Supreme Court also indicated that the "unduly harsh" test is not to
    be equated with the requirement to show "very compelling circumstances"
    which would be a mere  replica  of  the  additional  test  provided  in
    Section 117C(6) for more serious offending.  The Supreme  Court  in  KO
    confirmed the "Zoumbas" principle "that the child should  not  be  held
    responsible for the conduct of the parent".

13. The First-tier Tribunal found that it would be unduly harsh  for  M  if
    the appellant were to be deported.  The Upper Tribunal found that  this
    assessment was an error of law given the high threshold for  a  finding
    of undue harshness and the limitations of the evidence before the First-
    tier Tribunal of the consequences  for  M  were  the  appellant  to  be
    deported.  The material before the First-tier Tribunal was found to  be
    incapable of showing the requisite level of severity  or  bleakness  to
    reach a finding of undue harshness.

14. I had additional evidence on  this  issue,  however,  in  the  form  of
    further witness statements from the appellant,  his  partner,  CW,  the
    mother of M and a psychology report from Dr Abdelnoor dated 11 November
    2018.

15. As above, there is no dispute  that  TAB  has  a  loving  and  positive
    relationship with M. The evidence of CW,  and  TAB  showed  that  their
    close, relationship has resumed since he was released from detention.

16. In her first statement provided for the First-tier Tribunal hearing  CW
    confirmed that the appellant had a strong relationship with M and  that
    when he went to prison M became "really upset".  She went on  to  state
    in paragraph 11 of that statement "I don't think my daughter would cope
    with the separation being permanent, and  I  firmly  believe  that  she
    would be emotionally devastated by that experience".

    In her second statement dated 12 November 2018 CW stated that since the
    appellant had  been  released  from  prison  M  had  been  "happier  in
    herself".  The appellant had resumed a strong position as  her  father,
    helping with the running of the household and care of M.  CW  commented
    that:

         "the emotional impact of her father being taken away would  be  too
         much for me  and  her  to  bear.   The  physical  impact  would  be
         horrendous as she has grown dependent  on  him.   She  prefers  her
         father to help her with her homework and to read her  story  before
         bed".

17. In her oral evidence CW confirmed that there had been some support from
    the appellant's family and her own family but did not  feel  that  this
    would be sufficient to ameliorate M's difficulties in the event of  the
    appellant being deported.

18. The appellant also confirmed in his witness statement dated 12 November
    2018 that his daughter is an extremely important focus in his life.  He
    has taken up a full role as father since being  released  from  prison,
    providing for  her  when  he  can,  given  his  own  limited  financial
    resources,  attending  meetings  at  school,  assisting  her  with  her
    homework  and  so-on.   He  considered  that  M  was  a  "more  stable,
    confident, and stronger child" since  his  release  from  detention  in
    return to her home.

19. At paragraph 10 of his most  recent  witness  statement  the  appellant
    refers to M being less well behaved whilst he was in prison and both he
    and CW stated in their oral evidence that this was the  case.   It  was
    not my conclusion that the behaviour that they  had  noted  could  have
    been particularly serious, however, where it was not mentioned  in  any
    of the school documents concerning M or in the psychology report.

20. The high point of Dr  Abdelnoor's  psychology  report  is  set  out  in
    paragraph 10 which states

         "(i) I  am  convinced  that  the  impact  of  deportation  will  be
             immensely damaging for M,

         (ii) M will be permanently changed by this course of events and may
             have difficulties with attachment  and  relationships  in  the
             future."

    That conclusion and  his  other  observations  appeared  to  me  to  be
    consistent with the evidence of the appellant and CW.

21. As above, it is not disputed that it is clearly in M's  best  interests
    for TAB to remain with her in the  UK.  There  is  no  doubt  from  the
    evidence set out above that if the  appellant  is  deported  this  will
    bring a great deal of distress and unhappiness to the appellant, CW and
    M.  The consistent evidence is that the damage  it  will  do  to  their
    family relationships and to M's future will be "severe, or bleak".

22. The difficulty here, however, is that these harsh consequences are  the
    expected outcome of deportation. Following the learning of the  Supreme
    Court, "one is looking for a degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what
    would necessarily be involved for any child faced with a deportation of
    a  parent."  I  have  thought  very  carefully   about   whether   that
    "considerably  more  elevated  threshold"  is  met  here  and   I   am,
    regretfully, not able to conclude that the evidence shows  that  to  be
    so. The difficulties M will experience are at the level of harshness to
    be expected in the context of deportation.  The unduly harsh  test  set
    out in Section 117C(5) and paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) is not met here.

    Very Compelling Circumstances Over and Above Paragraphs 399 and 399A

23. Where the exceptions in s.117C and paragraphs 399 and 399A are not made
    out, a further assessment is required of whether there would  be  "very
    compelling circumstances"  over  and  above  those  exceptions  if  the
    appellant were to be deported  and  outweighing  the  public  interest;
    Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 applied.  The test is not  merely  for
    there to  be  "compelling  circumstances"  but  imposes  a  still  more
    stringent threshold for the situation to  be  "very  compelling"  to  a
    level over and above the  factors  in  the  exceptions  in  s.117C  and
    paragraphs 399 and 399A.

24. The appellant accepts  that  statute  provides,  as  he  is  a  foreign
    criminal, that his deportation is in the public interest. Further,  the
    public interest weighs more heavily against  him  as  his  offence  was
    particularly serious.

25. I can deal briefly with the comments of Dr Abdelnoor,  for  example  at
    paragraph 11 of his report, that he did not  consider  the  appellant's
    deportation to be in the public interest. I did not find  the  comments
    to be of assistance.  The role of the public interest here is fixed  by
    statute and not susceptible to the approach he  takes.  Any  additional
    weight attracting to the public interest and  the  factors  capable  of
    weighing  against  it  are  matters  for  judicial  consideration  with
    reference to the  correct  legal  matrix  and  case  law.  It  is  also
    expedient to indicate here that Dr  Abdelnoor's  comments  on  how  the
    appellant will cope in Jamaica were also without force where he was not
    instructed to comment on that issue and he  concedes  in  paragraph  19
    (viii) that he is "not an expert on Jamaica".

26. There are a number of factors that I must  take  into  account  on  the
    appellant's side of the balance. The appellant  has  conducted  himself
    positively since he was arrested for the index offence.  He  entered  a
    guilty plea at the earliest opportunity. A police  officer,  a  support
    worker from a charity working with young people and his employer  spoke
    positively about him at his  sentencing  hearing.  The  police  officer
    considered the appellant was not an entrenched drug dealer but had made
    bad decisions for which he  was  remorseful  and  was  trying  to  make
    amends. The sentencing judge commented on the "exceptionally  positive"
    comments and found that they showed:

         "... somebody who really wants to turn their life  around,  and  in
         each element of your life you have started to engage positively."

27. The appellant's conduct since release from prison has  justified  those
    positive  reports.  Nothing  suggests  other  than  that  his  risk  of
    reoffending is low. He has moved  away  from  the  area  where  he  was
    involved in drug dealing. He has formed a stable relationship with  M's
    mother and been a good father to M. His immediate family have continued
    to support him and have offered employment if he permitted to work.

28. These are clearly matters weighing in  the  appellant's  favour  but  I
    would sound a somewhat cautious note as to how highly  they  can  weigh
    where, firstly, some of their force has already been reflected  by  the
    sentencing judge in what remains  a  very  serious  sentence  and  good
    conduct after criminal offending  is  what  can  be  expected  from  an
    offender. That is the base-line, not  re-offending  with  credit  being
    given for being law abiding.

29. The harshness for CW and M, considered above, also weigh on his side of
    the balance as does the distress for his immediate family in the UK  if
    he is deported. CW has stated that she will not take  M  to  visit  the
    appellant in Jamaica as she had a difficult time when she went there on
    holiday in the past. I did not find that could be a significant  factor
    where the situation would be different now as she would be visiting the
    appellant and if she still  felt  unable  to  travel,  the  appellant's
    immediate family, his father, uncle or siblings,  all  originally  from
    Jamaica could consider taking M to see her father.

30. I also weigh in the appellant's favour that he has been resident in the
    UK since the age of 4 year's old. He was granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in 2010 and had that status until 2017. All of his education has
    been in the UK. There is also no dispute as to  his  no  longer  having
    ties to Jamaica and not having returned there since coming to the UK in
    1999. If he goes to Jamaica he will face the emotional difficulties  of
    being separated from his child, his partner and his immediate family. I
    accept that there will be  hardship  and  uncertainties  on  return  to
    Jamaica. That is ameliorated, however, by  there  being  charities  and
    NGOs able to assist with accommodation, free medical  care  and  skills
    and vocational training, as identified by  the  respondent  before  the
    First-Tier Tribunal, and the appellant is a young, healthy  person  who
    has shown determination in taking positive steps in his life.

31. Are these factors capable of amounting to very compelling circumstances
    such that the public interest is outweighed? In reaching  a  conclusion
    on that assessment, I also referred to the comments in Maslov v Austria
    [2009] INLR  at [75], where the ECtHR said:

         "In short, the court considers that for a settled migrant who has
         lawfully spent all or the major part of his or her childhood and
         youth in the host country, very serious reasons are required to
         justify expulsion. This is all the more so where the person
         concerned committed the offences underlying the measure as a
         juvenile."

32. I did not find it easy to make this assessment.  I recognise the  steps
    the appellant has made to turn  his  life  and  his  daughter's  future
    around. It is impossible not be concerned about  the  consequences  for
    her if he is deported.  It is still my  conclusion,  however,  that  in
    this case that there are very serious reasons requiring the appellant's
    deportation which are not outweighed by the factors  considered  above,
    even  taking  them  cumulatively  and  at  their  highest.  The   "very
    compelling circumstances" test is a stringent one, additionally so here
    where the public interest is so high in light of the seriousness of the
    offences.  I am not able to conclude that the evidence shows  that  the
    test is met here.

33. For these reasons, I remake the appeal as refused.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be remade.

I remake the appeal as refused under Article 8 ECHR.


Signed: [pic]                                Date: 17 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt







