
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06070/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th November 2018                          |On 29th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                tamim nickyar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal of Counsel instructed by Sky Solicitors
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  and  against  the  decision  of  Judge
    Malcolm made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 2nd May 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 2nd March  1987.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent, dated 19th April 2017,
    refusing his application for indefinite leave to remain as a victim  of
    domestic violence.

 3. He has a complex immigration history.  He first arrived in  the  UK  on
    19th January 2010 and made an in-time application for leave  to  remain
    as a student.  It was rejected but subsequently allowed on  appeal  and
    he was granted leave to remain until 22nd September 2011.  He then made
    a further in-time application for leave to remain as  a  student  until
    27th January 2014 but his leave was curtailed  with  effect  from  10th
    September 2012.  On 7th September 2012 he made an  in-time  application
    for leave to remain under Article 8, varied to an application for leave
    to remain as a spouse which was subsequently granted until  22nd  April
    2016.  On 6th June 2014 he made an in-time  application  for  leave  to
    remain outside  the  Immigration  Rules  under  the  domestic  violence
    concession and then a further application on  4th  September  2014  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a  victim  of  domestic  violence.   That
    application was refused with a limited right of appeal on 25th November
    2015.

 4. The Immigration Judge  allowed  the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
    Secretary of State make a fresh decision, it having  been  accepted  by
    the respondent that she was no longer relying on paragraph 322  of  the
    Immigration Rules and therefore no longer alleging that there had  been
    deception  or  that  the  suitability  requirements   were   not   met.
    Accordingly there had been no assessment under paragraph 276ADE of  the
    appellant's right to private life.

 5. The decision before Immigration Judge Malcolm was  the  result  of  the
    reconsideration by the respondent following the remittal.

 6. In her decision the respondent noted that any submissions made  by  the
    appellant relating to his human rights had not been  considered  as  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain  as  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence because the domestic violence provisions were  not  considered
    to be human rights based applications.  The respondent's  position  was
    that if the appellant wished to apply for  leave  to  remain  based  on
    human rights grounds he ought to apply using an appropriate application
    form.  Since the original application was made on  4th  September  2014
    and therefore received before 6th April 2015 the appellant was given  a
    limited right of appeal against the refusal under the domestic violence
    Rules.  However the human rights and exceptional factors under  Article
    8 could not be considered.

 7. Judge Malcolm dealt with the appeal on the basis that the  only  matter
    to be considered by him was whether the appellant had been a victim  of
    domestic violence.  He decided  that  he  was  not  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    was wrong not to consider human rights arguments in his  decision.   It
    was mandatory for a public authority to consider the rights safeguarded
    by Article 8 in their decision-making and  mandatory  to  consider  all
    grounds specifically raised by an appellant in their Grounds of Appeal.



 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Boyes on 24th September 2018.
     In his reply dated 22nd October 2018  the  respondent  maintained  his
    position.

10. The reply reads as follows:

         "As stated in the reasons for refusal letter dated 19th April  2017
         the application for indefinite leave  to  remain  as  a  victim  of
         domestic violence was refused as the appellant failed to  meet  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules under paragraph  D/DVILR.1.3.
         Any submissions made relating to human rights were  not  considered
         as an application for ILR as a victim of domestic violence  is  not
         considered to be a human rights based application.   The  appellant
         was informed that if he wished to apply for leave to  remain  based
         on human rights or other compassionate factors it was open  to  him
         to apply using an appropriate application form.

         Appendix AR  of  the  Immigration  Rules  sets  out  the  types  of
         application for which there is no right of appeal but there is  the
         right to request an administrative review of a decision made by the
         Secretary of State.  Under  paragraph  AR3.2.C  of  Appendix  AR  a
         decision made after 6th April 2015 on an application for indefinite
         leave to remain as a victim of domestic violence does not attract a
         right of appeal although an applicant can request an administrative
         review of such a decision.

         However the application was made in time on 4th September 2014  and
         so was received before 6th April 2015.  The appellant was therefore
         given a limited right of appeal in that he could appeal against the
         refusal under  the  domestic  violence  Rules.   Human  rights  and
         exceptional factors under Article 8 of the ECHR were not considered
         as a part of the decision and the appellant did not have a right of
         appeal against any human rights  issues.   The  respondent  submits
         that the determination discloses no material error of law and  that
         it is still open to the appellant to make a fresh application if he
         wishes  to  rely   on   human   rights   or   other   compassionate
         circumstances."

Discussion

11. The appellant originally specifically raised human  rights  grounds  in
    his grounds of appeal maintaining that the  respondent's  decision  was
    unlawful under Section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  as  being
    incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights that is  his  right
    to a private life if removed from the UK.

12. Mr Avery, for the respondent, says that for the purposes of  this  case
    he accepted that the  judge  ought  to  have  considered  human  rights
    grounds when making his decision in this appeal.

13. Mr  Iqbal  said  that  he  respected  the  pragmatic  position  of  the
    Presenting Officer but it was a change from the  respondent's  position
    as set out in the Rule 24 and he asked for an adjournment in order that
    his instructing solicitor who was presently outside the UK  could  take
    further instructions in relation to the appellant's private life.

14. I refused the application for an adjournment.  It has always  been  the
    appellant's  case  that  he  wishes  his  human  rights  claim  to   be
    considered.  It is up to him to provide  the  evidence  upon  which  he
    intends to rely.  It is inconceivable that  his  instructing  solicitor
    can properly be said to be unprepared for this matter to  be  resolved.
    In any event it would appear that there is no dispute as to the facts.

Findings and Conclusions

15. The appellant came to the UK in January 2010 and has remained here  for
    nearly nine years.  He did however make a visit to Afghanistan  between
    January and May 2014.  He has no family here and his  stay  has  always
    been precarious although Mr Iqbal properly pointed out always lawful.

16. Mr Iqbal's main submission was that the appellant said  that  his  wife
    had involved in his debt and he wanted to be able to clear his name.

17. The appellant cannot meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    which is the starting point for an assessment of his claim. None of the
    judge's credibility findings are challenged either in  the  grounds  or
    today.

18. He has provided no evidence of any particular  ties  here  although  he
    will have made some having been in the UK for a fairly  length  period.
    On the other hand, he has made a relatively recent  and  lengthy  visit
    back to his home country. His evidence of having been  the  subject  of
    domestic violence was found not to be credible or persuasive,  and  his
    contention that he wants to clear his name in relation to debts must be
    seen in that context. No compelling  or  exceptional  or  compassionate
    circumstances  have  been  raised  which  would  render   his   removal
    disproportionate.

Decision

The original judge erred in law.  His decision is set aside  to  the  extent
that he failed to  consider  the  appellant's  human  rights.   However  the
appellant's human rights appeal is dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed            [pic]                 Date 24 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
