
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06340/2016
     hu/06344/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 April 2018                         |On 23 April 2018                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                          mr biswajeet Kumar Barua
                               mrs rupna barua
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Aly, Counsel instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Connor promulgated on 4 April 2017.  The  judge  was  dealing  with  an
    appeal from the Secretary of State's refusal to grant leave  to  remain
    in respect of these two adult appellants.

2.   The grounds of appeal took  as  their  primary  focus  case  management
    decisions on the  judge's  part  not  to  adjourn  the  matter  and  no
    permission has been granted in respect of those  allegations.  However,
    in granting permission to appeal on 22  January  2018,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Allen said this:

         "Although no application for international protection had been made
         by the appellants, the  issue  of  fear  of  persecution  and  ill-
         treatment on return was raised in  the  original  application,  and
         arguably  therefore  required  to  be  considered  when  the  judge
         addressed the extent to which paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) had been met."

3.   The decision in this instance  is  fully  reasoned  and  sets  out  the
    background, the appellants' case, the respondent's  case,  the  matters
    dealing  with  refused   adjournment,   the   evidence,   and   closing
    submissions. The judge said, in Findings, Analysis  and  Conclusion  at
    paragraph 54, that the appellant's claim under Article 2 and 3 is a new
    matter and the appellants should make a protection claim which  can  be
    considered by the respondent.

4.   In relation to paragraph 276ADE, however, the test  to  be  applied  is
    whether "there would be very significant obstacles to  the  applicant's
    integration into the country to which he would have to go  if  required
    to  leave  the  UK".   In  a  lengthy  analysis  the  judge  considered
    "significant  obstacles"  very  fully  in  relation  to   family   life
    considerations. However issues relating to fear  of  persecution,  were
    not factored into the analysis, notwithstanding that  as  a  matter  of
    fact, these may have  a  bearing  on  "significant  obstacles".  It  is
    conceded by Ms Ahmad for the Secretary of State that there  is  nothing
    in the wording of 276ADE to suggest that "significant obstacles" should
    be read down and limited purely to family life considerations.

5.   That the broader consideration of fear of persecution was  not  brought
    to bear in the overall 276ADE  consideration,  amounts  to  a  material
    error of law. The analysis under Section 276ADE  should  have  included
    the fear of persecution issues which were raised  both  in  the  letter
    which accompanied the application and in the  evidence  which  was  put
    before the First-tier Tribunal, none of which was  dealt  with  by  the
    judge. It is therefore inevitable that this determination must  be  set
    aside.

6.   The proper course is the decision to be set aside and  remitted  for  a
    fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. The first appellant is in the
    room here with me. His wife is outside with childcare responsibilities.
    I want it to be made clear to them, and I hope that their counsel  will
    reinforce it, that there is a distinct likelihood that when the  matter
    is looked at afresh, precisely the same  conclusion  will  be  reached.
    They should not raise their hopes of a different outcome.

Notice of Decision

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

      2) The matter is remitted to Hatton Cross for a  fresh  hearing  by  a
         judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Connor.

      3) No findings of fact are preserved.

      4) No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         20 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
