
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
hu/06655/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 December 2017                         |On 8 February 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR MD DALIM BOKSH PIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah, Counsel instructed by Jalalabad Law
Associates


                        AMENDED DECISION AND REASONS

          I am issuing this amended decision in response to  a  letter  sent
    by the claimant's representatives on 25 January 2018 asking whether the
    appeal was allowed or whether this was a slip or mistake.  I  issue  it
    pursuant to rule 42 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, as my statement at the end that the claimant's appeal was allowed
    was a clerical error.

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen of Bangladesh  and
    is aged 40.  In a decision sent on 5 July 2017 Judge Sweet of the First-
    tier Tribunal allowed his appeal against a decision  of  the  appellant
    (hereafter the Secretary of State or SSHD) refusing to grant him  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom under para 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The decision of Judge Sweet was appealed by the  SSHD.   On  23
    October 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge (DUTJ) Chapman set  aside  the
    FtT decision on the footing that there had been a failure to give clear
    or adequate reasons for allowing the  appeal  with  reference  to  para
    276ADE(vi).

2.   I heard submissions from Ms Pal and Mr Miah.

3.   The claimant's appeal can only  succeed  on  the  basis  of  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The FtT judge  considered  he  met  the
    requirements of para 276ADE because in the judge's view there would  be
    very significant obstacles to his integration into Bangladesh.   Having
    considered the evidence accepted by the judge, I am unable to  come  to
    the same conclusion.  The claimant had spent the majority of  his  life
    there and there was  no  evidence  to  show  that  he  did  not  retain
    cultural, social and linguistic ties in that country.  In addition,  on
    the basis of the claimant's own evidence, he still had family  ties  in
    Bangladesh, albeit his father had died and all his three  siblings  are
    in the UK.  The claimant still has a mother living there and  the  fact
    that she lives elsewhere in Bangladesh with maternal uncles  is  not  a
    sufficient basis to conclude the claimant could not get some degree  of
    support from family members in a country where extended family ties are
    the norm.  The claimant has suffered from TB  and  has  undergone  five
    operations on his leg, and the medical evidence does not indicate  that
    he is in danger of losing a leg even if he is not getting better.

4.   It is not in dispute that the claimant  has  extensive  inter-medullary
    osteomyelitis with sequestration and sinus to  skin  and  that  he  had
    relapses.  Mr Miah seeks to rely on the medical evidence that is before
    the Tribunal to establish  that  the  claimant's  TB  would  cause  him
    serious  difficulties  on  return.   He  submits  that  this   evidence
    establishes that there would be no available treatment for his type  of
    TB.  In this context he refers to the letter dated 5 October 2017  from
    Professor Bari of the Bio  Centre  in  Dhaka.   He  states  that  "[I]n
    Bangladesh, TB treatment is widely available throughout the country but
    not for the one in which [the claimant] has been  suffering".   In  the
    previous paragraph he refers to being shown medical papers from the  UK
    showing "he has been suffering  from  disseminated  tuberculosis  since
    September 2010", and "...anti-TB failed to  work".   There  is  also  a
    letter dated 15 November 2011 from a Dr Kabir, a  Consultant  Physician
    and Orthopaedic Surgeon of Samorita Hospital Ltd stating  that  doctors
    in the UK "opined that only 10% of his illness was cured in the last  7
    years.  With this scenario, treatment options available  in  Bangladesh
    may not help him at all."

5.    I do not consider I can attach  significant  weight  to  that  letter.
    THE COI evidence on the subject does not identify any inability on  the
    part of Bangladesh medical services to treat all aspects of TB; and the
    Home Office response to a COI request  (response  dated  11  May  2016)
    identifies a wide spectrum of  available  treatments.   Neither  doctor
    explains the extent  of  their  knowledge  of  available  treatment  in
    Bangladesh  countrywide.   Further,  the  letter  sent  by  Dr   Sabet,
    Consultant Neurosurgeon at Samorita Hospital Ltd, whilst describing the
    claimant's as a "difficult" case does not say that he cannot be treated
    in Bangladesh, only that it can "better be treated" in the UK.

6.   The balance of the medical evidence suggests that  neither  in  the  UK
    nor in Bangladesh is it likely there will be a complete  cure  for  the
    claimant; it is rather a matter of managing his condition.  Whilst  the
    inferior quality of treatment available in Bangladesh may present  some
    difficulty for the claimant, I do not  consider  it  would  be  a  very
    significant one.

7.   The claimant has also stated in  a  recent  statement  that  a  further
    difficulty be would face on return is that he has been  involved  in  a
    long-standing land dispute.  However, given that he does not see fit to
    mention this in his application, I do not consider this can present him
    with any significant difficulty on  return.   I,  of  course,  have  to
    consider whether the difficulties facing the claimant on return,  taken
    cumulatively, would be very significant.  Even so  I  do  not  consider
    that the evidence, properly assessed, establishes that.

8.   The claimant's failure to satisfy me he meets the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules means that I must commence assessment of his  Article
    8 circumstances on the basis that the Rules reflect  the  Secretary  of
    State's view of the public interest, to which  some  weight  should  be
    attached.  When I turn to consider the considerations to which  I  must
    have regards  under  s.117B  of  the  2002  Act,  the  public  interest
    considerations in  his  case  are  considerable.   He  is  a  long-term
    overstayer (since August 2005).  He is not financially independent  and
    has also been a burden on the public purse for a  considerable  period.
    He speaks little English.  In addition, for  reasons  I  have  set  out
    earlier when dealing with his circumstances under paragraph 276ADE, the
    claimant still has family, cultural,  social  and  linguistic  ties  in
    Bangladesh, On the other side of the balance, it would appear  that  he
    has a family life with his sister, Julfa Begum.  He lives with her  and
    is supported by her, giving him food, shelter and expenses. His  sister
    looks after him several hours a day and takes him to hospital.  He  has
    been in the UK since 2005.  He has had TB for a lengthy period of time,
    necessitating five operations. He is still having medical treatment  in
    the UK.  As regards his conduct and character and involvement with  the
    wider community, a letter from Sue Wilders of the Tuberculosis Outreach
    Team Lead dated 21 November 2017  states,  inter  alia,  that  "he  has
    successfully made a life for himself in the UK", that he "has been  law
    abiding and respectful to all he meets and would be  an  asset  to  the
    UK".  In an earlier letter of 4 March 2016, she describes him as "well-
    integrated into the community he lives in here".

9.   The point was not advanced before me by Mr Miah but Ms Wilders  in  her
    early letters refers to the claimant's concern that  the  community  in
    the claimant's village have reacted with "great hostility" towards him.
     The claimant has not produced any evidence to substantiate that  claim
    and in any event, there are clearly a range of  places  in  Bangladesh,
    most notably Dhaka, where the claimant could access treatment  for  his
    TB, including as an inpatient away from any village hostility.

10.   In  weighing  up  the  factors  for  and  against  the  claimant  when
    concluding the proportionality assessment, I remind myself that when it
    comes to health cases brought on Article 8  grounds  the  threshold  of
    harm that has to be shown is a high one both in respect  of  Article  3
    and Article 8 ECHR: see GS(India) [2015] EWCA Civ   40. In my  judgment
    the claimant's health circumstances,  even  when  taken  together  with
    other  circumstances particular to him, do not  suffice  to  cross  the
    threshold so as to show they are compelling or otherwise entitle him to
    succeed on Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT judge has already been set aside for material  error
of law.
The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed:                                 Date: 5 February 2018

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



