
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06471/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 February 2019                            |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                             JAMES TOLU SOLOMON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Olabamiji, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of Nigeria, born 20 February 1976, has
    been granted permission to appeal against the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge David Clapham, who for reasons  given  in  his  decision
    dated 19 September 2018 dismissed the appeal against the  Secretary  of
    State's decision refusing the appellant's  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'
    continuous and lawful residence based on his private life.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge proceeded in the absence of the appellant
    who had notified the Tribunal that he would be unable to attend because
    he had hay fever.  The judge concluded that he did not consider this to
    be a matter that justified an  adjournment  and  dismissed  the  appeal
    essentially on the basis that the appellant had not  demonstrated  that
    he met the requirements of the relevant Immigration Rule.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge E Simpson
    having decided that despite the application having been  lodged  nearly
    five weeks late  to  extend  time.   The  challenge  was  made  on  the
    appellant's behalf by his solicitors who in addition to the application
    produced an affidavit in support by the appellant identifying error  by
    the First-tier Tribunal in proceeding despite the appellant's inability
    to attend and furthermore the appellant had been denied the opportunity
    of preparing adequately for the hearing due  to  late  service  of  the
    respondent's bundles.

 4. By way of background, although it is disputed, the appellant's case  is
    that he entered the United Kingdom in  June  2012  on  a  twelve  month
    visitor visa.  It is not disputed however that he successfully  applied
    for an EEA residence card on 13 February 2004 based on his marriage  to
    a Portuguese national on 30 October 2003.  He  applied  for  a  further
    residence card on 30 March 2011 and again was successful.  He separated
    from his wife in March 2015.  He applied for a further  residence  card
    on 18 July 2016 but was unsuccessful and withdrew  his  appeal  against
    this decision prior  to  hearing.   His  most  recent  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain was made on 6 November 2017.

 5.  At  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Matthews  explained  that  the
    respondent's bundle had not been produced until 27  June  2018  and  he
    further accepted that the appellant could not  have  possibly  received
    the bundle in compliance with directions.  The  bundle  had  been  sent
    either on 27 or 28 June, the latter being  the  date  of  hearing.   In
    those circumstances he explained that it was not difficult to see  that
    it was unfair in all the circumstances for the judge to have proceeded.

 6. Not surprisingly Mr Olabamiji did not pursue the first ground.  He  was
    correct to take this course. There was no medical evidence provided  to
    the judge to indicate that the appellant's condition for which  he  was
    self-medicating affected his mobility to the extent that he was  unable
    to attend or that the condition undermined his  health  to  the  extent
    that he was unable to present his case.

 7. Both representatives indicated the appropriate course in the absence of
    a fair hearing would be for the case to be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I am satisfied they were correct  to  make  this  submission
    particularly in the light of  the  relatively  complex  nature  of  the
    appellant's immigration history which will require detailed findings of
    fact and furthermore, it having been accepted that  the  appellant  had
    been denied a fair hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  due  to  a
    failure by the Secretary of State to serve the bundle in good time.

 8. It is a matter of concern that the conceded error was not addressed  in
    a rule 24 response which  could  have  resulted  in  the  appeal  being
    disposed of without a hearing. The appeal is  allowed  and  the  matter
    remitted to a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 14 February 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
