
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06941/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th November 2017                        |On 8th December 2017          |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                               ekin can aktas
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire, Counsel instructed by Ashton Ross Law
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of Turkey born  on  24th  March  1989.  His
    appeal against the refusal of indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  the
    European Community Association Agreement (ECAA) was allowed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor on 17th November 2016.

2.   On 24th July 2017, I found that there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I set the decision  aside.  The
    judge erred in law in failing to  apply  sections  82  and  84  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (6th  April
    2015). The judge reviewed the decision to refuse  indefinite  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 4 of HC 510 on the basis  that  it  was  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules. However, the appeal was  limited
    to an appeal on human rights grounds.

3.   I directed that the first point to address at the resumed  hearing  was
    whether there was a right of appeal to the Tribunal  under  section  82
    and that skeleton arguments should be filed and served  seven  days  in
    advance of the date of  hearing.  Neither  party  complied  with  those
    directions.

4.   At the resumed hearing Mr Melvin  submitted  a  skeleton  argument  and
    submitted there was no right of  appeal  to  the  Tribunal.  Mr  Claire
    accepted that position and did not seek to persuade  me  otherwise.  He
    accepted that any challenge was by way of judicial  review.  Mr  Melvin
    submitted that a further application may succeed  since  the  24  month
    period would no longer apply.

5.   The Respondent  accepted  that  there  was  an  error  in  the  refusal
    decision stating that there was  a  right  of  appeal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in failing to dismiss  the  appeal  for  want  of
    jurisdiction. The Appellant was not at fault in  pursuing  his  appeal.
    The point was not taken until the error of law hearing before the Upper
    Tribunal. The parties did not seek to argue the point  at  the  resumed
    hearing.

6.   The Appellant had not made a human rights claim and the Respondent  had
    not refused a human rights claim. There was no right  of  appeal  under
    section 82 and the appeal was dismissed for want of jurisdiction.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of  indefinite  leave  to  remain
under the ECAA is dismissed for want of jurisdiction.

No anonymity direction is made.



              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 8 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


