
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06331/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 26 March 2021                 |On 20 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                              MR prem raj shahi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jaja, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup (hereinafter referred  to  as  the
         "FtTJ") promulgated on the 20th of December 2019.

      2. The FtTJ did not make an anonymity order  and  no  application  was
         made for such an order before the Upper Tribunal.

      3. The hearing took place on 26 March 2020,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face -to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended as  did  the
         appellant's sponsor  remotely  via  video.  There  were  no  issues
         regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical  problems   were
         encountered during the hearing and I am  satisfied  both  advocates
         were able to make their respective cases by the chosen means.

Background:

      4. The appellant is a national of Nepal who was born on 31 July 1968.

      5. The appellant is the son of a former  Gurkha  soldier.  His  father
         enlisted in the brigade in 1958 before  his  marriage.  His  father
         served in the brigade of Gurkhas between  1958  and  November  1968
         when he died in service after falling ill whilst in  Singapore.  He
         had been taken to the UK from Singapore for treatment and had  died
         in the UK in November 1968.

      6. In July 1991, the appellant married his  wife  and  in  1993  their
         daughter was born followed by a second daughter in 1996.

      7. In 2006 the appellant left Nepal to work in  Macau  as  a  security
         officer and supported his wife and children living  in  Nepal  from
         his employment.

      8. In 2009 the appellant's mother (the sponsor)  had  an  accident  in
         which she suffered a broken hip  and  an  operation  in  Nepal  was
         unsuccessful.

      9. The "historic injustice" experienced by former Gurkha soldiers  and
         their families were rectified over time by  changes  in  government
         policy and the Immigration Rules.

     10. On 11 December 2009, the sponsor applied for entry clearance to the
         UK and on 19 June 2010 the sponsor was granted indefinite leave  to
         enter the UK.

     11. At the time of the appellant's mother went to live in the  UK,  the
         appellant was still living outside of Nepal working in Macau.

     12. The appellant remained outside of Nepal in  Macau  until  September
         2018 having lost his employment. It is said that the appellant came
         back to Nepal regularly once or twice a year, but  the  appellant's
         mother did not see him in Macau nor did his wife and children.

     13. On 1 November 2018, the appellant made  an  application  for  entry
         clearance to come to the UK as the adult  dependent  child  of  his
         mother, Gyan Kumari Shahi who is the widow of his late  father  who
         was formerly a Gurkha soldier.

     14. On 19 February 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's
         application for entry clearance. The decision was later  maintained
         by the entry clearance manager. The decision letter considered  the
         application as a dependent relative under paragraph  EC-DR  1.1  of
         Appendix FM and also under  the  policy  outlined  the  eligibility
         requirements that adult dependent children of former Gurkhas as set
         out in the discretionary policy for  Gurkha's  discharge  before  1
         July 1997 and their family members, as amended on 5 January 2015.

     15. The entry clearance officer was not satisfied that  he  could  meet
         the provisions of Appendix FM on the  basis  that  he  provided  no
         evidence that he had any disability or would be unable to care  for
         himself. Whilst  he  had  stated  he  was  unemployed  and  he  was
         supported by his mother, no details as to his financial commitments
         in Nepal had  been  provided.  Even  if  financial  assistance  was
         received, the  entry  clearance  officer  was  satisfied  from  the
         evidence he was a fit and capable adult who was able to look  after
         himself. Furthermore he had not  demonstrated  that  any  financial
         assistance received could not continue.

     16. As to the policy, it was noted that the former Gurkha sponsor  must
         have settlement under the 2009 discretionary arrangements or be  in
         the process of  being  granted  settlement  in  the  UK  under  the
         discretionary arrangement at the same time  as  the  applicant.  In
         this case the former Gurkha parent has not been and was not in  the
         process of being granted settlement under  the  2009  discretionary
         arrangements. There is no provision for adult children  of  an  ex-
         Gurkha widow in the policy. The application was  therefore  refused
         because he did not meet  the  eligibility  requirements  for  adult
         dependent  children  of  former  Gurkhas  as   set   out   in   the
         discretionary policy.

     17. The case was also considered on a discretionary basis to  establish
         if there were  any  compassionate  circumstances  relating  to  his
         individual case. It was noted that  he  had  other  adult  siblings
         living in Nepal and was the satisfied he had close  family  members
         for support. It was further noted that he had grown up in Nepal and
         that his mother had chosen to apply for settlement  visas  when  he
         was already an adult in the full knowledge that adult  children  of
         the widow of a former Gurkha  did  not  automatically  qualify  for
         settlement. The entry clearance officer considered that  there  was
         no bar to his mother  returning  to  Nepal  either  permanently  or
         temporarily. The entry clearance officer was not satisfied that  it
         establish family life with his parents over and above that  between
         an adult child and his parent or that  he  demonstrated  "real"  or
         "committed" or "effective" support from the  parent  and  therefore
         article 8 was not engaged. In the alternative, if family  life  was
         engaged, there were reasons  for  refusing  the  application  which
         outweighed any consideration of historic injustice noting  that  he
         had grown up in Nepal, his mother chose  to  apply  for  settlement
         Visa when he was already an adult in the full knowledge that  adult
         children did not automatically qualify  for  settlement.  Thus  the
         application was refused.

     18. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         entry clearance came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Widdup)
         on the 12 December 2019.

     19. In a determination promulgated on the 20th of  December  2019,  the
         FtTJ dismissed the appeal concluding at [53] that family  life  was
         not engaged and that the remaining Razgar questions were  therefore
         not relevant. The FtTJ therefore dismissed the appeal.

     20. Permission to appeal  was  issued  and  permission  to  appeal  was
         refused but on further application permission to appeal was granted
         by UTJ Sheridan on 25 July 2020 stating:-

             "Given the judge's finding that family  life  existed  between
             the appellant and sponsor when the sponsor left Nepal in  2010
             and that there has  been  ongoing  financial  support,  it  is
             arguable that the  significance  the  judge  attached  to  the
             sponsor choosing to settle permanently in the UK  without  the
             appellant was inconsistent with Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA Civ  320
             where at paragraph 38 concentration on the  parent's  decision
             to leave Nepal without focusing on the practical and financial
             realities was described as a mistaken approach."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     21. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 25 July 2020, inter alia, indicating that it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face -to -face hearing. Following  submissions
         sent on behalf of the  respondent  dated  11  September  2020,  and
         further directions were given for a remote hearing  to  take  place
         and that this  could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both  parties  have
         indicated that they were content for the hearing to proceed by this
         method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to  enable  oral
         submissions to be given by each of the parties with the  assistance
         of their advocates.

     22. Ms Jaja   appeared on behalf  of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the
         written grounds of appeal. There was a Rule 24  response  filed  on
         behalf of the respondent dated 11 September 2020.

     23. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear and helpful  oral  submissions
         during the hearing.

The submissions:

     24. There are three grounds advanced on behalf of the appellant;

          1) failure to apply the law;

          2) adopting the wrong approach;

          3) failing to consider material evidence.

     25. Dealing with ground 1, Ms Jaja submitted that  this  was  the  most
         important ground. She submitted that the FtTJ cited the decision of
         Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320 in the decision ("Rai") and  at  [40]  made
         reference to the test of  "real",  or  "committed"  or  "effective"
         support. However after referring to the decision the  judge  failed
         to apply the test.

     26. Ms Jaja referred to paragraph 28 of Rai where it  was  stated  that
         the question that should have been asked  was  "whether  "real"  or
         "committed" or "effective" support was shown to exist in this case,
         but that the judge failed to do this. Ms Jaja submitted  that  this
         was an error of law on its own.

     27. She referred  to  the  written  grounds  at  section  L  where  the
         misdirection in law was set out in full. At [26] the judge set  out
         that "I find the fact that the appellant and his family live in the
         mother's home in Nepal and that  she  sends  the  money  for  their
         support" and at (42] the judge stated, "I  find  that  family  life
         existed in 2010 when the mother came into the UK and at [51] stated
         "I find that even if  family  life  continued  after  the  mother's
         departure from Nepal,  it  weakened  as  time  went  by.."  However
         following those findings at [54] the FtTJ stated that  he  did  not
         need to go on to consider the remaining Razgar  questions  and  did
         not take into account the "historic injustice issue because that is
         relevant only to proportionality". Thus Ms Jaja submitted that  the
         judge was in error as the appellant is the son of a Gurkha and that
         the only reason his mother was in the United  Kingdom  was  because
         the respondent had recognised the service of the appellant's father
         and by recognising the historic injustice in terms  of  settlement.
         She submitted that once the FtTJ made finding that there was family
         life the FtTJ was duty-bound to consider the question  of  historic
         injustice but failed to do so.

     28. In summary she submitted the judge  dismissed  the  appeal  without
         applying the legal test for family life and by misdirecting himself
         on the law by making a finding of family life but  not  considering
         the issue of proportionality by reference to the historic injustice
         point.

     29. Dealing with ground 1, Ms Jaja submitted that the judge  adopted  a
         mistaken approach and one which had been rejected by the  Court  of
         Appeal in the decision of Rai at [38] and[ 39] where there had been
         repeated references to the choice made by the parents to settle  in
         the UK. The Court of Appeal rejected this as a  mistaken  approach.
         In this appeal the judge precisely did the same as can be  seen  at
         [42] where the judge found that family life existed  in  2010  when
         the appellant's mother came to the UK and at [45] the  judge  again
         referred to this at [45] stated "in 2010 mother chose  to  come  to
         the UK and settle down there". At [51] the  judge  stated  "I  find
         that even if family life continued  after  the  mother's  departure
         from Nepal it weakened as time went by. I find that her decision to
         live permanently in the UK have the consequence  that  family  life
         ceased and that the relationships which continue form part  of  the
         private lives of the mother  and  the  appellant."  Therefore,  the
         judge erroneously found the family life it ceased, and  this  is  a
         mistaken approach and one that was rejected in the decision of Rai.

     30. Ms Jaja submitted  that  the  strongest  point  in  behalf  of  the
         appellant is that the  significant  or  the  sole  reason  for  the
         dismissing appeal was based on the appellant's mother's  choice  to
         come to the UK and settle. Thus the mistaken approach is  the  main
         reason for dismissing the appeal and is a material error of law.

     31. As to ground 2 it was submitted that the judge failed to apply  the
         law in 2 ways:

          1) the  test  of  whether  there  was  "real",  "effective",  and
             "committed" support had not been applied by the judge which is
             what was the real issue in the case, but the judge had made an
             assessment based on the appellant's mother's choice to  settle
             in the UK.

          2) Ms Jaja submitted that the decision was silent on whether  the
             factual matrix and the evidence  taken  together  amounted  to
             family life of dependency with real  effective  and  committed
             support.

     32. Dealing with ground 3, this was  a  failure  to  consider  material
         evidence which had it been considered a different decision may have
         been reached.

     33. Ms Jaja submitted that in relation to the appellant's  mother,  the
         appellant was the only child and as far as she  had  concerned  her
         only family life. She had made four visits to the UK;  she  was  75
         years of age with mobility difficulties and the only way  that  she
         could remain in contact with the family was  to  travel  to  Nepal.
         This had an effect upon her, and a relevant decision is that of the
         Beouku-Betts and to consider the  effect  on  the  sponsor  of  the
         refusal of entry clearance to the appellant and the effect of  this
         which would be to extinguish her family life.

     34. The second part  of  the  submission  related  to  the  proceedings
         themselves. Ms Jaja submitted that no Home  Office  presenting  was
         present at the hearing and  the  judge  recorded  that  he  had  no
         questions for  the  sponsor  and  therefore  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant sponsor was unchallenged and  undisputed.  It  refers  to
         efforts made in 2011 and 2013 to apply for the appellant to come to
         the United Kingdom. It could have been a joint application  because
         the  financial  realities  meant  that  they  could  not  make  the
         application together at the time. Those were relevant factors  that
         had not been taken into account.

     35. It was further submitted by Ms Jaja  that  the  appellant's  father
         died in operational service and all the policies of  the  Secretary
         of State made reference to this. The ashes of her husband  remained
         in the UK thus it is reasonable for her to remain in  the  UK.  The
         appellant and his family have a "unique factual profile"  and  that
         should have been considered when coming to a decision in this case.
         The written grounds referred to the particular "historic injustice"
         by the sponsor not being permitted to accompany her injured husband
         to the UK for medical treatment and he subsequently died in the UK.
         Had she been permitted to accompany her injured husband to  the  UK
         where he subsequently died at a time when the  appellant  may  well
         have been born in the UK as she was pregnant with him at the  time.
         Thus the respondent's  refusal  to  permit  her  to  accompany  her
         husband to the UK may be a historic injustice that affected article
         8 family life (loss of husband). The same refusal  meant  that  the
         appellant could have been not born in the UK.

     36. Ms Jaja again referred to the decision in Rai and that  members  of
         the family unit need not reside in the same country  and  therefore
         being in different countries is not inconsistent with the  decision
         in Rai and that  family  life  can  still  be  continued  in  those
         circumstances.

     37. In summary she submitted that the cumulative effects taken together
         demonstrate that the decision  should  be  set  aside,  and  a  new
         decision made.

     38. Ms Pettersen relied  upon  the  rule  24  response.  She  made  the
         following submissions:

          1) The  facts  were  of  importance.  Before  the  judge  Counsel
             accepted that the appellant could not meet the requirements of
             Annex K because he was not under  30  years  of  age  and  had
             formed a family unit of his own (at [31]).  When  the  sponsor
             came to the UK in 2010 the appellant fell outside Annex K  due
             to his age and because he had married in the early 90s and had
             two children born in 1993 and 1996. In 2010 the appellant  was
             working outside of Nepal and was sending  money  home  to  his
             family (see witness statement; p12).  The  appellant  did  not
             give evidence but stated in his evidence  since  2006  he  had
             left Nepal and worked in Macau for employment purposes.  These
             were relevant facts as to whether the appellant could  qualify
             for settlement.

          2) Whilst it had been argued that the appellant could  not  apply
             to enter the United Kingdom with his mother due  to  financial
             reasons, the reality was the appellant was outside  the  scope
             of Annex K because he had formed an independent family life of
             his own. In 2010 he was already outside the scope of Annex K.

          3) Turning to the issue materiality and  the  argument  that  the
             judge misapplied the  decision  of  Rai,  she  submitted  that
             between 2010 - 2018  when  the  appellant  returned  to  Nepal
             having finished employment there  was  no  dependency  on  his
             mother because he was responsible for supporting his wife  and
             children in Nepal and that any  later  dependence  had  arisen
             relatively recently.

          4) Furthermore, the judge set out his findings on family life  in
             paragraphs 43 -  53  at  the  decision  and  gave  sustainable
             reasons why Article 8 (1) was not engaged in the circumstances
             at paragraph 53 and  therefore  did  not  need  to  conduct  a
             proportionality assessment. As to the decision in Rai,  whilst
             the grounds refer to paragraph 38, the judge's findings should
             be read in conjunction with paragraph 38 and also paragraph 39
             and that the issue was  not  only  whether  family  life  that
             existed at the time of their departure to settle in the United
             Kingdom but whether it had enjoyed beyond it (see paragraph 39
             of Rai). The judge directed his mind to the intervening period
             between when sponsor left Nepal and the hearing  date  finding
             at paragraph 51 - 52 that family  life  for  the  purposes  of
             article 81 weakened as time  went  by  and  that  the  sponsor
             formed  relationships  and  friendships  within  the  Nepalese
             community in the UK.

          5) She submitted that even  if  the  judge  erred  in  not  going
             through the proportionality assessments if they  were  applied
             and taking into account historic  injustice  it  was  relevant
             that the sponsor could not meet annex K.

          6) Whilst the grounds criticised the judge for  making  reference
             to the sponsor's choice it did not detract from the  appellant
             circumstances whether it was a matter of choice  because  when
             his mother left the appellant was  not  living  in  Nepal,  he
             could not meet the criteria in 2010 as he was already over  32
             years of age. Thus, any errors were  not  material  given  the
             factual matrix of this particular appeal.

     39. By way of reply, Ms Jaja  submitted that the judge  found  at  [42]
         that he found that family life existed in 2010 when the appellant's
         mother came to the UK and that whatever was said about his  working
         in Macau the judge still found that  there  was  family  life  four
         years later in 2010. The appellant had married in 1991 and had  two
         children all of  which  had  happened  before  2010  and  therefore
         against that background the judge still made the finding that there
         was family life. It is not possible to ignore that factual finding.

     40. As to Annex K, this was not announced until 2015 after  the  Gurkha
         litigation and it was accepted that those over 18 could have family
         life with their parents.

     41. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserve my decision which  I
         now give.

Analysis:

     42. I have considered with care the submissions made on behalf  of  the
         appellant and have done so in the context of the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ and the particular factual matrix.  Having  done  so,  I  have
         reached the conclusion that  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  did  not
         involve the making of a material error on a point of law.  I  shall
         set out my reasons for reaching that decision.

     43. The judge set out his findings of fact and analysis of  the  appeal
         at paragraphs 20 - 54 of the determination.

     44. The judge properly identified at [21] that this was a human  rights
         appeal, and that the decision was also considered under the  policy
         guidance contained in Appendix K of  the  Home  Office  policy  IDI
         chapter 15 2A 13.2  and the decision had to be seen in this context
         ( at [30]).

     45. It had been accepted on behalf of the appellant by counsel that  he
         could not meet the requirements of Annex K  because  the  appellant
         was over 30 years of age (in fact at the date of the hearing he was
         51 years of age) and the appellant's father had  died  (  see  [31-
         [32]). In addition, the judge found that the  appellant  had  lived
         apart from his mother for  nine  years  and  in  contrast  Annex  K
         allowed for a maximum period of two years  separation.  Importantly
         the judge noted that Annex K did not apply if the adult had  formed
         an independent family life. On the facts which were not in  dispute
         the appellant had married in 1991 and had adult  children.  He  was
         working and supporting his family when he lived  in  Macau  between
         2006 and 2018. The judge therefore concluded  that  "the  appellant
         fell substantially short of meeting the requirements of Annex K and
         his appeal could succeed, if at all, only outside of the rules" (at
         [35]).

     46. The FtTJ then made a self-direction at  [36]  that  notwithstanding
         the non-compliance with Annex K "I  must  consider  whether  family
         life continues to exist between the appellant and his parent."

     47. The relevant law has been stated in a number  of  cases.  The  FtTJ
         directed himself to the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Rai  v
         ECO New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320  at  [37]-40]).  Rai  involved  a
         claim by an adult child of a former Ghurkha soldier who  sought  to
         join his family in the UK relying on Art 8.  In that case,  drawing
         on the earlier case law of the Court of Appeal, Lindblom  LJ  (with
         whom Beatson and Henderson LJJ agreed) set out the legal principles
         at [16-20].

     48. In the case of Rai (as cited) the Court of Appeal set out the legal
         principles relevant to determining whether  there  is  family  life
         engaged in appeal such  as  this  from  paragraph  17  onwards.  It
         observed that in the case of Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  EWCA  civ  31,
         Sedley  LJ  referred  to  dependency  as  "real"   "committed"   or
         "effective" support and that the Upper Tribunal had accepted in the
         case of Ghising (family life - adult  -  Gurkha  policy)  that  the
         judgement in Kugathas "had been interpreted  too  restrictively  in
         the past "and that it  ought  to  be  read  in  the  light  of  the
         subsequent decisions of the domestic and Strasbourg courts"  (  see
         paragraph [18]).

     49. At  paragraph  19,  the  court  cited  Lord  Dyson  M.R  who  would
         emphasised when giving the judgement of the  court  in  Gurung  (at
         paragraph 45), "the question whether an  individual  enjoys  family
         life is one of fact and depends on a careful consideration  of  all
         the relevant facts of the particular case." In some instances,  "an
         adult child (particularly if he does not have a partner or children
         of his own) may establish that  he  has  a  family  life  with  his
         parents."

     50. At paragraph 20 the  court  also  cited  the  observations  of  Sir
         Stanley Burnton in Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at [24]:

             "24. I do not think that the judgement which I  have  referred
             leads to any difficulty in determining the correct approach to
             Article 8 cases involving  adult  children.  In  the  case  of
             adults, in the context of immigration  control,  there  is  no
             legal or factual presumption as to the existence or absence of
             family life the purposes of Article 8. I point  out  that  the
             approach of the European  Commission  of  Human  Rights  cited
             approvingly in Kugathas did not  include  any  requirement  of
             exceptionality. It all depends on  the  facts.  The  love  and
             affection between an adult and his parents  or  siblings  will
             not of itself justify a finding of family life. There  has  to
             be something more. A young adult living with  his  parents  or
             siblings will normally have a  family  life  to  be  respected
             under article 8. A child  enjoying  a  family  life  with  his
             parents does not suddenly cease  to  have  a  family  life  at
             midnight as he turns 18 years of age. On  the  other  hand,  a
             young adult living independently of his parents may  well  not
             have a family life the purposes of Article 8."

     51. Lord Justice Lindblom made reference to the decision of  the  Upper
         Tribunal in Rai and observed that the single factor which  seem  to
         have weighed most heavily in the conclusion of the  judge  in  that
         case was the Appellant's parent's willingness  to  leave  Nepal  to
         settle in the UK when they did without focusing  on  the  practical
         and financial realities entailed in that decision. At [39] the real
         issue under Article 8 (1) was whether, as a  matter  of  fact,  the
         Appellant had demonstrated that he  had  a  family  life  with  his
         parents, which had existed at the time of their departure to settle
         in United Kingdom and had endured beyond it, notwithstanding  their
         having left Nepal when  they  did  (  see  [39]).  The  court  made
         reference to the circumstances of the Appellant and his family  and
         the fact that he and his parents would have  applied  at  the  same
         time for leave to enter the United  Kingdom  and  would  have  come
         together as a family unit had they been able to afford  to  do  so.
         The court considered that this was a factor that had not been taken
         into account when  it  should  have  been.  Thus  the  question  of
         whether, even though the Appellant's parents had  chosen  to  leave
         Nepal to settle in United Kingdom when they did,  his  family  life
         with his parents subsisted then, and was still  subsisting  at  the
         time of the Upper  Tribunal's  decision;  this  was  "the  critical
         question under Article 8 (1)."

     52. As the decision in  Rai  makes  plain,  the  critical  question  is
         whether as a matter of fact, the Appellant demonstrated that he had
         family life with his parents which had existed at the time of their
         departure to settle in the UK and that it endured  beyond  it  (see
         paragraphs [39] [42] of Rai). This is  of  particular  significance
         because of the particular factual matrix in this appeal.

     53. As will be clear, the need to establish "family life"  is  a  fact-
         sensitive issue.  It will not be presumed to  exist  between  adult
         siblings or between an  adult  child  and  parent.   What  must  be
         established is "more than normal emotional ties".   There  must  be
         "support" which is "real" or "committed" or "effective".

     54. In Uddin v SSHD [2020]  EWCA  Civ  332,  the  Senior  President  of
         Tribunals (Sir Ernest Ryder, with whom Bean and King  LJJ  agreed),
         having set out extracts from the decision in Kugathas, said this at
         [31]:

             "Dependency, in the Kugathas sense, is accordingly not a  term
             of art.  It is a question of fact; a matter of  substance  not
             form.  The irreducible minimum of  what  family  life  implies
             remains that  which  Sedley  LJ  described  as  being  whether
             support is real or effective or committed".

         (See also [40(i)].)

     55. There is no dispute between the parties that  the  judge  correctly
         cited relevant parts of the decision in Rai (I refer to  paragraphs
         37 - 39 of his decision. What is an  issue  is  whether  the  judge
         applied the law to the factual matrix before him?

     56. Whilst Ms Jaja has sought to identify  parts  of  the  decision  in
         which the judge stated he  found  family  life  was  established  (
         reference is made to paragraph 42, where the FtTJ  stated  "I  find
         the family life existed in 2010 when the mother came to the UK.."),
         in my judgement that misreads the decision. When that paragraph  is
         read in light of the later paragraphs at paragraphs 43, 50 and  51,
         it is plain that the judge did not make a finding that family  life
         was established as at the date of the hearing  as  demonstrated  at
         [43] where the judge stated, "in considering whether or  not  there
         is still ( my emphasis) family life between the appellant  and  his
         mother I have taken into account the following circumstances.."  At
         that paragraph, the judge took into account factual  matters  which
         are not in dispute, that the appellant married  his  wife  in  1991
         when he was 23 years of  age,  he  and  his  wife  have  two  adult
         children, in 2006 he left Nepal and went to work in Macau where  he
         remained until 2018 during the time he supported  the  family.  The
         judge concluded at [44] that the three  factors  "clearly  indicate
         that the appellant formed his own family, and  his  present  family
         life continues to be with that family (my emphasis)."

     57. In my judgement the use of the phrase  whether  there  is  "  still
         family life" at [43] is significant and is wholly  consistent  with
         the decision in Rai at [38] that it is not sufficient to  establish
         family life at the date of the parties separation  but  whether  it
         was still subsisting and that  this  is  the  "critical  question".
         Further significance in my view is attached to the factual  finding
         made by  the  judge  that  the  appellant's  "present  family  life
         continues to be with that family." That was a finding open  to  the
         judge to make on the evidence before him  which  demonstrated  that
         for a significant period of  time,  the  appellant  had  formed  an
         independent family life of his own  with  his  wife  and  children,
         which existed independently to that of the sponsor.

     58. Whilst Ms Jaja submitted that the circumstances of the  appellant's
         marriage and children and work history was the same  in  2010  when
         the judge found family life to exist, that submission fails to take
         into account the judge's findings considered as a  whole  and  that
         not only taken together indicated that he had formed an independent
         family life of his own  but  also  importantly,  that  his  present
         family life continued to be with that family.

     59. Furthermore at [45] the FtTJ addressed  the  circumstances  of  the
         sponsor's departure from Nepal. At  [46]  the  judge  set  out  the
         reasons for the appellant's mother and sponsor  coming  to  the  UK
         which was to obtain surgery and that she had no family in the UK  .
         It was open to the judge to place weight on  the  evidence  in  the
         appellant's witness statement at para [20] that the expectation was
         that his mother would return to Nepal  and  that  her  reasons  for
         remaining and therefore living apart from her son  was  the  choice
         made in this context. The judge also concluded at  [51]  that  even
         if family life continued after his mother's departure, family  life
         "weakened as time went by" and that "I find that  her  decision  to
         live permanently in the UK  had  the  consequence  of  family  life
         ceased."

     60. In my judgement the FtTJ was entitled to consider  the  pattern  of
         dependency between a parent and child  can change as here and  that
         family life even if it had been established earlier had changed  so
         that by the continuing establishment of his own  family  life  with
         his wife and children which was formed independently of his mother,
         taken with the appellant's  move  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  the
         particular factual circumstances was sufficient to demonstrate that
         whatever  family  life  there  had  been  before  was   no   longer
         subsisting. This approach is entirely consistent with the  decision
         in Rai ( at [38]).

     61. This leads to the point relied upon by Ms Jaja  where  she  submits
         that the judge erred in his approach to the issue of separation and
         that the sole reason for dismissing the appeal  was  based  on  the
         appellant's mother's choice to settle in the UK  (I  refer  to  her
         oral  submissions).  She  further  submits  that  his  approach  is
         inconsistent with the decision in Rai.

     62. I do not accept that submission. A careful reading of the  decision
         demonstrates that the reason for  dismissing  the  appeal  was  not
         solely based on the choice made by the appellant's mother  to  come
         to the UK but by considering the particular  factual  circumstances
         of the appellant that he was now age 51 years  having  lived  apart
         from his mother since 2010 (although in fact they lived apart since
         2006 when he left to work in Macau), he  had  established  and  was
         continuing to establish a firm an independent family  life  of  his
         own, independent of his mother with a wife and  children  and  that
         the financial support given to him by the sponsor was  not  unusual
         (at (49), and that whilst he lived in the family home, the  sponsor
         had no use of it herself ( at [48]).

     63. Furthermore, the judge was entitled to consider the  issue  of  the
         separation between them based on the fact specific circumstances of
         the appeal. The judge set them out at [46] where reference is  made
         to her having left Nepal  and  the  main  reason  was  for  medical
         treatment. When she left  in  2010  it  could  not  have  been  the
         intention of the appellant to join  her  in  the  UK  when  he  was
         married with two children. To do so would have meant severing  that
         family life or making a choice to do so. Whilst Ms Jaja  refers  to
         the sponsor's witness statement at paragraph 29 - 32  which  refers
         to attempts made for settlement but that it was not possible due to
         "financial reasons", that  submission  fails  to  engage  with  the
         reality of the factual circumstances that to do so would mean  that
         he would leave  his  own  independent  family  unit.  There  is  no
         reference in the appellant's witness statement to any  applications
         made  and  both  witness  statements  are  silent  concerning   the
         consequences of such an application made in the light  of  his  own
         family in Nepal, if made in 2011 and 2013. Furthermore, the factual
         circumstances failed to explain the length of the delay  from  2001
         until 2018 when the application was made  which  is  a  significant
         period of time.

     64. It is also advanced on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the  judge
         failed to take account of material evidence  in  terms  of  support
         relevant to the issue family life.

     65. At [41] the judge set  out  the  appellant's  case  which  included
         financial and emotional support;  the  financial  support  was  the
         maintenance of the mother sent from the UK, and the fact  that  the
         appellant and his family lived in her old home. The FtTJ considered
         those issues and made factual findings at  [47]  and  [49]  finding
         that whilst the appellant continued to live in the mother's home as
         she has no use of it herself, but  that  did  not  demonstrate  any
         effective support at [49] whilst the judge accepted that  she  sent
         financial assistance to the appellant, the judge found that it  was
         not unusual for such a UK-based  parent  to  do  so  if  they  were
         financially able to do so and that the circumstances of the sponsor
         were more favourable  than  those  of  the  appellant.  As  to  the
         emotional support, the judge considered this at [50] but  noted  it
         in the context of the family history and the  inference  raised  is
         that the parties lived apart for significant periods  from  2006  -
         2018, where the appellant's evidence was that he only  returned  to
         Nepal once or twice a year and that the emotional support was  thus
         from the appellant's family.

     66. Therefore, contrary to the  grounds,  the  judge  did  address  the
         material evidence and made factual findings upon it.

     67. Dealing with the last point, it is submitted  that  the  judge  was
         wrong at [54] by his  refusal  to  take  account  of  the  historic
         injustice point. That submission needs  to  be  considered  in  the
         light of the decision made where  the  judge  found  that  even  if
         family life was established in 2010, it was not  subsisting  as  at
         the date of the hearing in the  light  of  the  particular  factual
         circumstances identified. That being the case, Article 8 (1) is not
         engaged and the issue of historic injustice which was  relevant  to
         the issue of proportionality did not arise. Consequently, there  is
         no error of approach identified.

     68. Drawing together those issues, in my judgement the decision reached
         by the judge that family life was  not  established  under  Article
         8(1) was a conclusion that was reasonably open to the judge to make
         on the particular factual matrix that  he  had  before  him.  I  am
         therefore satisfied that the judge did not make an error on a point
         of law and the decision stands. The appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision.

     69. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore the decision stands.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated    8 April 2021





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

