
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06217/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2019                              |On 25 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  Qamar [i]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adewoye, Solicitor of Prime Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant a national of Pakistan  has  permission  to  challenge  a
    decision of Judge Moore of the First-tier Tribunal sent on 30  November
    2018 dismissing his appeal against a decision made by the respondent on
    19 February 2018 to refuse leave to remain in the UK.

2.   The appellant's grounds of appeal were in essence three in number.   It
    was contended that the judge erred in: (1)  concluding  that  paragraph
    322(1C) of the Immigration Rules applies to his case;  (2)  failing  to
    properly consider the application of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act in
    relation to the appellant's relationship with his child who has been in
    the UK for more than seven years; and (3)  failing  to  make  a  proper
    analysis of the appellant's application outside the Rules.

3.   I am grateful  to  both  parties'  representatives  for  their  concise
submissions.

4.   In relation to ground (1), it is  clear  that  the  judge  did  err  in
    relation to paragraph 322(1C) of the Rules which is a general ground of
    refusal.  This paragraph provides that "where  the  person  is  seeking
    indefinite leave to enter or remain: ..." Since the appellant  was  not
    seeking indefinite leave to  remain  but  discretionary  leave  at  the
    relevant time, this paragraph had no application.  The judge  erred  in
    following the respondent in considering that  this  general  ground  of
    refusal was applicable. However, I am not persuaded that this error had
    any material effect on the judge's subsequent assessment of  the  case.
    Turning to ground (2), the focus of this challenge is on paragraphs  32
    and 33 of the judge's decision:

         "32. I am not satisfied that the requirements under  Paragraph  276
             ADE of the  Rules  have  been  met.   Whilst  the  appellant's
             daughter has lived in the UK for at least 7 years,  she  would
             not be leaving the UK, since she would continue to  live  with
             her  mother  as  her  primary  carer.   I  find  it  would  be
             reasonable for the appellant to return to Pakistan,  where  he
             could continue to maintain contact through modern  methods  of
             communication or by letters or by  occasional  visits  if  the
             appellant's daughter so desired.  I am  also  aware  that  the
             appellant was sentenced  to  15  months  imprisonment  on  6th
             August 2006.  I am satisfied  that  there  would  be  no  very
             significant obstacles to this appellant returning to  Pakistan
             notwithstanding that he has resided in the UK since May  2000.
             It is quite clear from  the  appellant's  immigration  history
             that for many years this appellant has endeavoured  to  remain
             in the UK by any means possible, though I accept that  between
             2011 and 2014 discretionary leave had been granted.


         33.  In reaching a decision I have paid due regard to  the  Supreme
             Court decision in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD (2016) EWCA Civ 617  and
             in particular Paragraph 17  -  19.   The  Supreme  Court  made
             reference to Section 117B of the  2002  Act  (as  amended)  in
             their decision.  The question was asked what is reasonable for
             the child.  I  find  that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
             appellant's daughter to remain with her mother in the UK, with
             whom she has lived all her life.  It would not  be  reasonable
             to expect the child to leave the UK with  her  father  but  to
             remain in the UK, once I was satisfied that the appellant  had
             a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship   with   a
             qualifying child."

5.   In submitting that the judge erred in so treating the issue of  Section
    117B the judge erred, Mr Adewoye prayed in aid two recent decisions  of
    the Upper Tribunal, in particular  JG  [2019]  UKUT  72  in  which  the
    President held that "Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act requires  a  court
    or Tribunal to hypothesise that the child in question would  leave  the
    United Kingdom even if this is not likely  to  be  the  case,  and  ask
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to do so.".  Despite
    Ms Everett's forceful submissions to the contrary, I am persuaded  that
    the judge did fall into error in applying Section 117B of  the  Act  in
    that, if the judge had properly directed himself as  to  the  ambit  of
    this provision, he would have concluded that the appellant came  within
    its terms.  It is important to note that the respondent had accepted in
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter that the appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the child.  On the judge's findings it was
    unlikely that the child would accompany the appellant abroad. The final
    sentence of the judge's decision at paragraph  33  is  opaque  but  the
    paragraphs makes clear first of all:

    (1)  that  the  judge  found  that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
         appellant's daughter to remain with her mother in the UK; and


    (2)  that it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave the UK.

    On that basis, applying the guidance given in JG, the only  answer  the
    judge could give in this case was that the terms of Section 117B(6) had
    been met.  On the given facts in this case the child lived for most  of
    the time with her mother and did not reside with the appellant. In such
    circumstances to expect her to uproot herself and go with the appellant
    to Pakistan would be entirely unreasonable.


    As regards ground (3), I would observe  that  whilst  in  light  of  my
    conclusions on ground (2) it is not relevant to the outcome my error of
    law decision, the points raised rely on  mere  disagreements  with  the
    judge's findings of fact.


6.   For the above reasons I conclude that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge must be set aside for material error of law.

7.   I consider that I am in a  position  to  remake  the  decision  without
    further ado.  In light of the judge's findings as regards the nature of
    the child's relationship with the mother, I see  no  alternative  to  a
    conclusion that the appellant satisfies  the  requirements  of  Section
    117B(6).  The child had resided in the UK continuously  for  more  than
    seven years.  It is unreasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK.
    The appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with the child.
     Accordingly, the decision I remake is to allow the appellant's appeal.



         I am allowing it on human rights grounds, in particular Article  8,
    but in the context stated of the appellant being found  to  be  someone
    who meets the requirements of Section 117B(6) and someone therefore  in
    respect of whom there is not a public interest in their removal.

         I would point out  that,  had  I  not  felt  bound  by  the  proper
    statutory construction of Section 117B(6) to apply it and  so  then  be
    engaged in an unvarnished proportionality assessment outside the Rules,
    I would  have  reached  a  different  conclusion.  The  proportionality
    assessment  outside  Section  117B(6)  pointed  strongly  against   the
    appellant.  His immigration status was precarious.  He had  a  criminal
    conviction and a fifteen month custodial sentence imposed in  September
    2006 which although now over thirteen years ago is a factor pointing to
    a public interest in his departure.  Although the  respondent  accepted
    that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  the
    child, on the judge's findings the contents of  this  relationship  was
    thin.  There was a dearth  of  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's
    personal family circumstances with his present wife NM.   But  for  the
    Section 117B(6) issue therefore I would have concluded that  the  judge
    had sound reasons for concluding that the appellant could  not  succeed
    on the basis of Article 8 outside the Rules.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]                      Date: 20 March 2019

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
















