
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06917/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 January 2019                            |On 13 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     mfe
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chimpango, Crown & Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant in this case is the mother of a  girl  born  in  June
         2016 who I shall I refer to as M.  M was diagnosed with  unilateral
         retinoblastoma when her mother was in the  last  trimester  of  her
         pregnancy.  Retinoblastoma is a malignant childhood eye cancer that
         affects approximately 50  children  per  year  in  the  UK  and  is
         therefore rare.  M's affected left eye was graded the most  serious
         (at E) and her eye was therefore surgically removed.



Background

      2. The appellant's claim to remain in the United  Kingdom  ('UK')  was
         based upon a fear  that  M  would  be  subject  to  female  genital
         mutilation ('FGM') in her home country of Nigeria and that  in  the
         alternative it would be a breach of human rights for the appellant,
         her  husband  and  her  daughter  to  be  removed  because  of  her
         daughter's rare medical  condition.   The  respondent  refused  the
         appellant's application to remain in the UK in a decision dated  26
         February 2018.  This sets out the appellant's immigration  history,
         which I summarise here.  The appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  as  a
         student in October 2011.  Her leave to remain was curtailed  on  28
         July 2015.  She applied for leave to  remain  under  the  family  /
         private  life  provisions  on  24  September  2015,  but  this  was
         rejected.  She applied for leave under the family  life  provisions
         again in February 2016, but this was certified in a decision  dated
         28 July 2016.  As I have indicated M was born in June 2016.

      3.  A  further  application  was  made  to  remain  in  light  of  M's
         circumstances in the UK as well as what was feared in Nigeria.  The
         respondent did not accept that there was a real risk of FGM  for  M
         and did not accept that her medical condition  was  such  that  she
         should be allowed to remain exceptionally with her parents.



FTT

      4. The appellant appealed that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         ('FTT').  In a decision dated 25 October 2018, the FTT rejected the
         submission that M's relationship with her grandmother in the UK was
         sufficient to engage Article 8.  The FTT also found that there  was
         not the slightest risk  that  the  appellant's  children  would  be
         subjected to FGM if returned to Nigeria.  The FTT regarded it to be
         significant but the appellant did not mention this  when  she  made
         her previous application to remain on the basis of  Article  8  and
         believed that the appellant had fabricated the evidence at the last
         resort.  In any  event,  the  FTT  found  that  the  appellant  had
         provided no credible reason why she could not live with the rest of
         her family in an area away from her own and her husband's family to
         protect the children from any risk of female genital mutilation.

      5. The FTT went on to deal with Article 8 but did not  deal  expressly
         with the submission that M's medical condition  was  such  that  it
         would be a breach of Article 8 and her best interest if she were to
         be removed from the UK.  The FTT therefore dismissed the appeal  on
         all grounds.





Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

      6. Grounds of appeal prepared by Crown & Law  Solicitors  submit  that
         the FTT erred in law in two respects.  First, in its  consideration
         of the  risk  of  FGM  and  secondly  in  failing  to  address  the
         submissions relevant to M's medical condition.  In a decision dated
         13 November 2018 the FTT granted permission to appeal.  When giving
         its reasons for that decision the FTT said this:

             "Background evidence that  suggests  FGM  is  practised  in  a
             country is not of itself evidence that a particular individual
             will in fact be subject to that practice particularly when the
             evidence relied upon  is  not  the  most  up-to-date  evidence
             available.  The judge found that the appellant's evidence  her
             daughter would be subject to FGM was not  credible  and  found
             that the appellant had not given a credible  reason  why  they
             could not live separately from the family in a different  part
             of Nigeria to avoid the risk.  This was a conclusion that  was
             open to the judge.  In relation to M's medical  condition  the
             FTT however said this in its reasons for  its  decision.   The
             judge did not mention the medical condition of the appellant's
             daughter much less make findings in relation to it or  how  it
             impacted on the best interests of the child or where they lay.
              The judge did not consider this evidence in his  evidence  of
             proportionality."

      7. In a Rule 24 response dated 29 November 2018 the  respondent  noted
         that permission to appeal on the risks arising in relation  to  FGM
         had not been granted.  In relation to  the  medical  evidence,  the
         respondent pointed out that the relevant material was  analysed  in
         detail in his decision letter and the FTT was not obliged to repeat
         this information when making its  findings.   The  respondent  also
         noted that the children were not qualifying children and  that  the
         family could be returned as a unit.



The hearing before me

      8. At the hearing before me Mr Chimpango  initially  sought  to  place
         reliance upon the ground of appeal relevant to the risk of FGM.   I
         invited Mr Chimpango to take some  time  to  provide  me  with  the
         correct procedural regime said to support an application to rely on
         that particular ground, bearing in mind the FTT's observations.   I
         stood the matter down to enable him to consider this  and  to  take
         instructions.  Having done so, Mr Chimpango made it clear  that  he
         did not wish to pursue the ground of appeal relevant to the risk of
         FGM and wished to rely solely upon the ground of appeal relevant to
         the medical condition of M.  Mr Chimpango submitted  that  the  FTT
         wholly failed to engage with the medical evidence when  determining
         Article 8.

      9. Mr Tan in response accepted there was no  reasoning  regarding  the
         medical evidence albeit that the submissions that were recorded  in
         the decision referred to that evidence.  Mr Tan  however  submitted
         that had the FTT paid regard to the medical evidence it would  have
         been obliged to dismiss the Article 8 appeal.  In other words,  the
         failure to refer to the medical evidence made no difference to  the
         outcome.

     10. In his response, Mr Chimpango submitted that it could have  made  a
         difference and  it  could  not  be  said  that  the  outcome  would
         inevitably have been the same if  the  medical  evidence  had  been
         taken into account.  He submitted that there was the requirement of
         more than just monitoring of M's condition post-surgery.  I invited
         him to take me to the medical evidence to  support  his  submission
         that there was a necessity for medical treatment that went over and
         above monitoring.  Mr  Chimpango  was  only  able  to  submit  that
         monitoring was necessary  to  check  whether  there  would  be  any
         deterioration in the other eye and that it  was  right  and  proper
         that  M  continued  to   receive   that   monitoring   from   those
         professionals who had been involved in her care.  He invited me  to
         find  that  this  is  a  case  that   involved   very   exceptional
         circumstances and as such could not be said to inevitably  lead  to
         the conclusion that Article 8 would not succeed.

     11. I also invited Mr Chimpango to take me to any evidence relevant  to
         Nigeria to support the submission that M would not have the medical
         oversight or monitoring of her condition there  that  is  necessary
         for her care.  Mr Chimpango indicated that there was  very  limited
         evidence on the medical facilities in Nigeria  but  that  what  was
         available was set out within the respondent's decision letter.



Error of law discussion

     12. I wholly accept that having  set  out  the  submissions  from  both
         parties regarding the medical evidence concerning M, the FTT failed
         to take that medical evidence into account when making its  Article
         8 assessment.  That is a prima facie error of  law.    The  parties
         agreed that I should in these circumstances  consider  whether  the
         decision to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds would have been
         inevitable, if the medical evidence was taken into account.  It  is
         important to note, as accepted by Mr Chimpango, that  M  is  not  a
         qualifying child and  there  are  no  qualifying  children  in  the
         family.  The test of reasonableness therefore does not apply.  This
         means that there is a need for  unjustifiably  harsh  circumstances
         for M if she is returned to Nigeria in order for any argument based
         on Article 8 to succeed.  Mr Chimpango accepted that  this  is  the
         correct way to approach the matter but submitted  that  there  were
         very exceptional circumstances.  This turns on the medical evidence
         to which I now turn.

     13. The medical evidence is very limited indeed.  It is to be found  in
         a letter dated 11 July 2018 from the  retinoblastoma  team  of  the
         Birmingham Woman's and Children's  Hospital.   This  describes  the
         removal of M's left eye having  been  successfully  undertaken  and
         that this was followed by an uneventful recovery.   The  management
         is said to include inoculation of the left eye on 10 October  2018.
         No further details are given regarding that.  The letter  describes
         M as having  been  diagnosed  from  a  very  early  age  of  having
         malignant childhood eye cancer that is very rare but  that  it  was
         only found in her left eye.  The letter also states this:

             "Research informs us that  retinoblastoma  carries  a  genetic
             factor for all children with tumours in both eyes and a  small
             percentage of those with only one eye affected.   M's  genetic
             results  show  that  she   has   the   non-genetic   form   of
             retinoblastoma and will  require  regular  monitoring  of  her
             socket and remaining eye until she is 10 years  of  age.   The
             assessment of M's socket and fitting of artificial  eyes  will
             also mean lifelong appointments for M.  Having only one seeing
             eye means that M and her parents will need to take care of her
             remaining eye in regards to playing and sporting activities as
             well as visual acuity."

     14. It is very clear from this evidence that since her operation, M has
         only required monitoring of her socket and remaining eye.  In other
         words, nothing more was envisaged other than  continued  monitoring
         of her socket, her remaining eye and the  possible  fitting  of  an
         artificial eye (albeit with no time period or further  particulars)
         and that that would continue until she was 10 years of age.   As  I
         have already indicated Mr Chimpango was unable to take  me  to  any
         evidence in relation to Nigeria  to  support  the  submission  that
         monitoring and the procedures  I  have  summarised,  could  not  be
         accessed there.  M had her successful operation to remove her  left
         eye as long ago as October  2017,  according  to  the  respondent's
         decision  letter.   That  decision  letter  also  refers   to   the
         availability of medical treatment in Nigeria.  It may not be at the
         same level of the facilities in the UK but it  is  available.   The
         respondent also referred to M being able to travel and  that  there
         was no evidence  that  she  required  any  urgent  treatment.   The
         respondent concluded her condition to no longer be life threatening
         and there was no evidence that she would face  any  detriment  upon
         return to Nigeria.

     15. These are all matters that the FTT would have been obliged to  take
         into account had it engaged  with  the  limited  medical  evidence.
         When all of that evidence is considered in the round, and viewed at
         its highest, I am satisfied that it  is  inevitable  that  the  FTT
         would have come to the conclusion that the  medical  evidence  only
         supported continued monitoring, which could take place in  Nigeria.
         There being no other compelling or exceptional circumstances in the
         case, it is inevitable that the FTT would  have  reached  the  same
         conclusion on Article 8, given  the  current  legal  framework  (as
         summarised by the FTT at paragraphs 52 to 59).





Conclusion

     16. I therefore conclude that although the FTT committed  an  error  of
         law in failing to properly engage with the  medical  evidence,  the
         decision should not be set aside.  This is because the error of law
         was not material, in that had the  medical  evidence  been  engaged
         with, the decision would inevitably have been the same.



Notice of decision

17. The FTT decision does not contain an error of law such that  it  should
    be set aside.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

UTJ Plimmer
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     31 January 2019



