
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/05828/2017
     hu/06094/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th October 2018                           |On 8th November 2018          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                 Mirsida [L]
                                    [I A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Lams, instructed by Oak Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are both Albanian nationals, a  mother  and  son.   They
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 7th February 2017 to refuse their applications for leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of  their  human  rights.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley dismissed the appeals in a  decision
    promulgated on 23rd May  2018.   The  Appellant  now  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on 23rd August 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the first  Appellant  claimed  to
    have entered  the  UK  on  8th  October  2013  illegally.   The  second
    Appellant, her child, was born in the UK on 6th  September  2014.   The
    first Appellant's partner  had  been  granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain in the UK in 2011 for a period of three years.  He was granted a
    further three year period of discretionary leave in December 2014.  The
    Appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK on  20th  August  2015.
    Her partner made an application for indefinite leave to remain  on  8th
    January 2018.

 3. The Secretary of State refused the application on the  basis  that  the
    Appellants did not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  as
    the first Appellant's partner was not British or settled in the UK.  It
    was not accepted that there were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellants' integration  in  Albania  and  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to justify a grant of leave to remain under Article 8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the  appeal  finding  that  the
    Appellants did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to the family  continuing  their
    family life outside of the UK, and that the decision  is  proportionate
    under Article 8.

The Grounds of Appeal

 5. The Grounds of Appeal contend that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed
    to make findings on the Appellants' claim that their removal  would  be
    in breach  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   It  is  contended  that  the
    Appellants' case put at the hearing  was  that  the  first  Appellant's
    partner's application for indefinite leave to remain had  been  pending
    since January 2018 and was to be decided within six months i.e. by July
    2018 and that the judge failed to consider the submission that  (as  at
    the date of the hearing) the Appellant would return to Albania with two
    children out of wedlock. It is  contended  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider whether the Appellant had  established  that  there  would  be
    "very significant obstacles" to her integration in Albania without  her
    partner. It is contended that that issue went to the heart of the  case
    and is accordingly a material error of law.  It is contended that as  a
    consequence of this mistake  the  judge  failed  to  consider  or  make
    findings on the proportionality of the Appellant and children remaining
    in the UK pending the resolution of the partner's indefinite  leave  to
    remain application.  It is further contended that the  judge  erred  at
    paragraph 28 in failing to consider or make relevant  findings  on  the
    Appellant's case that she would  be  stigmatised  for  having  children
    outside of wedlock and faced hostility from her family.  It  is  argued
    that the  judge's  observation  that  this  account  lacked  supporting
    evidence is not a reasoned finding on the oral evidence  provided.   It
    is further contended that the judge's observation  that  the  Appellant
    did not claim protection on arrival must be seen in the  light  of  the
    fact that she did not have any children at that time and  had  not  met
    her partner at that time.

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Lams  submitted  that  the  judge  did  not
    engage with the arguments put  forward  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    ostracised by her family if she were to  return  to  Albania  with  her
    children.  He contended that the judge  failed  to  consider  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) in the decision.  He pointed out that this issue had been
    raised in the skeleton argument and  it  had  been  considered  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter. He  contended  that  there  is  no  overlap
    between EX.1 which was considered by  the  judge  and  relates  to  the
    family life continuing in Albania, and 276ADE(1)(vi) which  relates  to
    the Appellant's reintegration in Albania.

 7. Mr Lams referred to paragraph 3 of the  Appellant's  witness  statement
    and submitted that it was a significant part of  the  Appellant's  case
    that she would be going home to Albania in circumstances where she  had
    children born outside of wedlock and where she had  not  undertaken  an
    arranged marriage and would  be  ostracised  by  her  own  family.   He
    contended that there is support for the  Appellant's  position  in  the
    case of TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092  (IAC)  where
    the Tribunal highlighted that one of the factors relevant to  potential
    persecution of a trafficked woman was whether there was an illegitimate
    child.  He referred to paragraph 49 of the decision  in  TD  where  the
    Tribunal considered the evidence of an expert which states that mothers
    of illegitimate children are not well received  in  social  groups  and
    found it difficult to work long hours to make the money needed to cover
    living expenses.  He submitted that  illegitimate  children  can  bring
    particular dishonoured families and can lead to honour killings.

 8. Mr Lams submitted that it is clear from paragraph  6  of  the  skeleton
    argument which was before the First-tier Tribunal that the  Appellant's
    partner would remain in the UK whilst his  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain was being decided.  He  contended  that  otherwise  his
    leave to remain under Section 3C would have  lapsed.   The  Appellant's
    partner would have to remain in the UK to Sponsor  an  application  for
    entry clearance.  He contended that the judge erred in failing to  take
    that into account.

 9. Mr Lams referred to paragraph 24 of the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    where the judge found that there was "no credible evidence" before  the
    Tribunal to indicate support for the assertion that the  Appellant  and
    her partner and children would be unable to relocate  to  Albania.   At
    paragraph 25 the judge found that the Appellant's partner would be able
    to secure similar employment in Albania.  At  paragraph  20  the  judge
    found that there were no insurmountable obstacles for the Appellant and
    her partner and children to be required to leave  the  UK.   Whilst  Mr
    Lams accepted that  this  was  a  consideration  relevant  to  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM, he suggested that otherwise there was a failure to look at
    the factual situation of the Appellant returning to Albania on her  own
    with the child.

10. Mr Lams referred to the fact that there had  been  an  application  for
    adjournment  which  had  been  refused.   He  contended  that  it   was
    unfortunate in hindsight that the case had not been adjourned  so  that
    the factual scenario could have been considered properly by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  He contended  that  there  is  an  implication  in  the
    witness  statement  from  the  Appellant's  partner  that  he  was  not
    intending to go to Albania for example where he said at paragraph 2;

         "There is no reason I should not now be granted settlement  in  the
         United Kingdom.  Once I have been granted  settlement  my  children
         will be eligible to be registered  as  British  citizens  and  [the
         first Appellant's] case will clearly fall within EX.1  of  Appendix
         FM of the Immigration Rules".

    He also pointed out that in her witness statement the  first  Appellant
    said that there was little provision in Albania for single mothers  and
    that she would be ostracised by her  family.   In  his  submission  the
    judge should have accepted that it would be  disproportionate  for  the
    Appellant's partner to have abandoned his  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain in order to go with her to Albania and whilst there was
    the prospect of the children being  entitled  to  register  as  British
    citizens.  Mr Lams submitted that this error was material  despite  the
    current change of circumstances whereby the Appellant's partner has now
    been granted indefinite leave to remain.

11. In his submissions Mr Tufan submitted that the crux of the  application
    to the Upper Tribunal is that the  judge  did  not  consider  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  However he pointed out that at the stage when the First-
    tier Tribunal was dealing with the appeal the Appellant's  partner  did
    not have indefinite leave to remain and the children were not  entitled
    to register as British citizens.  He pointed out that 276ADE(1)(vi) was
    mentioned in the skeleton argument at paragraphs 1 and 12 but that  the
    rest of the skeleton argument looks at Article 8 and the best interests
    of the children.  He submitted  that  the  skeleton  argument  must  be
    looked at in the context of the witness statements which do  not  raise
    significant issues in relation to 276ADE.  In fact he pointed out  that
    at paragraph 2 of the witness statement the first Appellant highlighted
    that in the reasons for refusal  letter  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    mistakenly said that she was a national of Algeria and she said

         "In  response  to  this  I  respectfully  submit  that  whilst  the
         Secretary of State may be correct in claiming I  do  not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules I am  not
         a national of Algeria, neither have I lived in the  United  Kingdom
         all my life".

    In his submission that amounts to a tacit  acceptance  that  the  first
    Appellant does not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  In these
    circumstances he submitted that the judge had  no  reason  to  go  into
    paragraph 276ADE.  In any event he submitted that paragraph 20  of  the
    decision amounts to an implied consideration of paragraph  276ADE.   He
    pointed out that  at  paragraph  21  the  judge  was  critical  of  the
    Appellant's immigration history and the findings at paragraphs  24  and
    25 in his submission were relevant to the issue of paragraph 276ADE and
    consideration of whether there were very significant obstacles  to  the
    first Appellant's reintegration in Albania.  Mr  Tufan  relied  on  the
    case of Agyarko v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 and referred to paragraph  25  of
    the Court of Appeal decision. He pointed out  that  in  this  case  the
    judge could not be criticised for reaching the conclusion on the  basis
    of the facts at the date of the hearing.  He pointed out that  any  new
    issues arising could form the basis for  a  fresh  application  to  the
    Secretary of State.

12. In reply Mr Lams referred to the grant of permission  to  appeal  which
    points out that at paragraph 25 and in other paragraphs of the decision
    the judge solely contemplates return to Albania  with  the  Appellant's
    partner but had not contemplated return without her partner and had not
    considered arguments as to the Appellant's vulnerability  as  a  single
    parent.  He rejected the submission made by Mr Tufan that the  skeleton
    argument in the First-tier Tribunal largely put forward asylum grounds.
     He relied also on paragraph 6 of the skeleton  argument  pointing  out
    that the Appellant's partner would not be able to  gain  employment  in
    Albania.  In his submission the cumulative points had been made out  as
    to why it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  Appellant's  partner  to
    relocate to Albania.

Error of Law

13. I accept Mr Tufan's submission that the judge was required to deal with
    the circumstances at the  date  of  the  hearing.   The  Appellant  had
    applied  for  an  adjournment  in  advance  of  the  hearing  and  that
    application had been refused as the Tribunal decided that it could  not
    adjourn the hearing to a date which may be years  into  the  future  to
    await a separate outcome which was  not  guaranteed  (letter  from  the
    Tribunal  of  3rd  May  2018).   There  is  no  indication  that   that
    application was renewed in the First-tier Tribunal at  the  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In any event there is  no  challenge  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal to the decision not to adjourn the hearing.  At  that
    stage there was no guarantee  as  to  when  the  Appellant's  partners'
    decision on his  application  would  be  made  and  the  grant  of  any
    adjournment for an indefinite period would not have been appropriate.

14. At paragraph 13 the  judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  said  in  oral
    evidence that she had travelled to the UK illegally to  meet  a  friend
    and had never applied for status and that  she  had  "effectively  fled
    from Albania and the prospect of having to marry there against her free
    choice".  Accordingly, the observation by the  judge  at  paragraph  28
    that the Appellant did not make a claim  for  international  protection
    when first arriving in the UK was in my view open to him on  the  basis
    of this oral evidence.

15. It is clear from the  decision  that  the  judge  was  aware  that  the
    Appellant's  partner  was  waiting   for   an   application   for   the
    determination of his application for settlement as noted  at  paragraph
    14 and elsewhere.  The judge noted at paragraph 16 that the Appellant's
    partner accepted that he had  entered  into  a  relationship  with  the
    Appellant when he knew that she had unresolved  immigration  status  in
    the UK and when he had only been  granted  a  period  of  discretionary
    leave [26].  The judge was clearly aware that  the  Appellant  had  two
    children born in the UK on 6th September 2014 and 14th March 2017.

16. The judge noted at paragraph 17 that in oral evidence  the  Appellant's
    partner said;

         "He had travelled to Albania in May and October 2015 where  he  had
         seen friends would had (sic) relocated from Macedonia  to  Albania.
         He stated that he could not live in Macedonia which was unsafe  and
         nor did he feel he could relocate to Albania as he had invested too
         much time in the United Kingdom".

17. The Appellant's partner also accepted that although his  son  had  been
    born before he made an application for leave  to  remain  in  September
    2014 he had indicated in the application that he  was  single  with  no
    dependants [17].

18. The Grounds of Appeal contend that the judge failed to consider whether
    the first Appellant and the second Appellant met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which states as follows;





         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:
          ...
          (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
          lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
          any period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
          obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
          he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

19. At paragraph 20  the  judge  said  "I  have  considered  the  important
    exception provisions in relation to paragraph EX.1  and  conclude  that
    there are no  insurmountable  obstacles  were  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner and children to be required to leave the United Kingdom".   The
    judge accepted that the Appellant and her partner have  made  it  clear
    that they would prefer to stay in the UK which offers better employment
    opportunities and that they have both chosen effectively to  remain  in
    the UK.  The judge noted that they both accepted that  they  were  each
    aware of the others unresolved immigration status and  did  so  at  the
    time when the Appellant became pregnant in December  2013.   The  judge
    considered that the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  a  "wholly  cavalier
    attitude and a blatant disregard for proper immigration control in  the
    United Kingdom." [21]

20. The judge went on to undertake an assessment  in  accordance  with  the
    guidance in Razgar finding that  the  Appellant  and  her  partner  and
    children had established family life in the United Kingdom.  The  judge
    was aware that the Appellant's  partner  was  awaiting  a  decision  in
    relation to indefinite leave to remain [23].  The judge  noted  that  a
    grant of indefinite leave to remain cannot be guaranteed and took  into
    account that the Appellant and her partner  appeared  to  have  made  a
    "joint lifestyle  decision  to  ignore  the  others  wholly  unresolved
    immigration status by having two young children whom they now  seek  to
    rely upon in pursuit of Article 8 grounds justifying an imperative need
    to remain in the United Kingdom." [23]

21. The judge found at paragraph 24 that there was no credible evidence  to
    support the assertion that the Appellant and her partner  and  children
    will be unable to relocate to Albania.  The  judge  took  into  account
    that the partner had returned to Albania on two previous  occasions  in
    May and October 2015 where he stayed with friends  who  themselves  had
    also relocated to Albania from Macedonia.  The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant's partner would be able to secure  employment  and  said  the
    fact that he may not earn an equivalent  salary  in  Albania  does  not
    "give  rise   to   insurmountable   obstacles   or   very   significant
    difficulties" [25]. The judge found that both the Appellants along with
    the younger child would be able to return  to  Albania  as  a  complete
    family unit along with the Appellant's partner.

22. At the time of the hearing the first Appellant's partner did not have a
    resolution to his application for indefinite leave to remain. In  these
    circumstances the judge considered the appeal on  the  basis  that  the
    family could travel to Albania together.  I  do  not  accept  Mr  Lams'
    suggestion that  it  is  implicit  in  the  witness  statement  of  the
    Appellant's partner that he would not go to Albania because he  had  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain pending.   I  cannot  accept
    that it can be assumed as suggested by Mr Lams that anyone who  has  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK  would  not  leave
    the UK or that anyone who has been granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    in the UK would not leave or could not be expected to leave the UK.

23. In his witness statement the Appellant's partner said that he would not
    receive any assistance from the Appellant's family and might experience
    outright hostility from them.  However he did not specify why he  could
    not or would not live in Albania.  In fact the judge  recorded  in  his
    oral evidence at paragraph 17 as considered at paragraph  24  that  the
    partner had been to Albania on two previous occasions  and  had  stayed
    with friends who had relocated from Macedonia to Albania.   The  reason
    he put forward in oral evidence for not going to Albania  was  that  he
    had invested too much time in the United Kingdom.  This falls far short
    of amounting to very significant difficulties for her refusal to go  to
    Albania.

24. In her witness statement the Appellant said that if she were forced  to
    return to Albania she would not receive any  support  from  her  family
    because she would have brought shame on them for giving to birth  to  a
    child outside of wedlock.  However it  is  clear  that  the  judge  had
    issues with the Appellant's credibility in this regard noting that  the
    Appellant had not claimed asylum when she arrived  in  the  UK  despite
    claiming that she fled because of a fear of an arranged  marriage.  The
    judge also  considered  that  the  first  Appellant's  credibility  was
    damaged by her blatant disregard for proper immigration  control  [21].
    The judge also considered that there  was  no  supporting  evidence  to
    suggest that the first Appellant's family had disowned her or that they
    disapproved of her giving birth outside of wedlock [28].

25. The judge found that the Appellant's partner had not being candid  with
    the immigration authorities as to having a partner and child in the  UK
    when he made an application for leave to remain in 2014  [26].   It  is
    clear also that the judge took into account that the Appellant and  her
    partner made a joint lifestyle decision to ignore  the  other's  wholly
    unresolved immigration status by having two children [23].

26. In these circumstances I consider it was open to the judge to find that
    he did not accept the Appellant's claims that she would  be  ostracised
    by her family.  In any event the  Secretary  of  State  suggested  that
    there was nothing to prevent the Appellant and her  partner  relocating
    in living elsewhere in  Albania.   The  Appellant  has  failed  to  put
    forward any reason why she and her partner could not live elsewhere  in
    Albania.  The judge clearly made findings that that would be reasonable
    at paragraphs 24 and 25.

27. In my view it  is  clear  that  in  making  these  findings  the  judge
    considered that there were no insurmountable obstacles  to  the  family
    returning in accordance with EX.1. I accept that the judge did not make
    specific reference to paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi). However in my view  the
    references to 'very significant difficulties' at paragraphs 25  and  20
    along with the findings at paragraph 24 are in my  view  sufficient  to
    indicate that the judge had in mind this provision when considering the
    evidence.

28. Accordingly I find that the judge has in fact  considered  the  factors
    relevant to an assessment as to whether there would be very significant
    difficulties for the Appellant returning to Albania.  The judge clearly
    contemplated that the Appellant's partner would be  able  to  accompany
    her there.  This was a conclusion open to the judge on the basis of the
    evidence.  I do not accept that the judge made any error in failing  to
    specifically consider whether the Appellant would face very significant
    difficulties returning alone  given  that  this  was  not  specifically
    pleaded in the evidence before the judge.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not  contain  a  material
error of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

The appeals have been dismissed and there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 30th October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

