
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06228/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Glasgow  Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 7th February 2019   On 11th March 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                           MR PAUL DUMAGO AMORADO
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr. T Haddow, Counsel, instructed by McGill and Co
For the respondent:    Mr Govan, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of the Philippines born on 17 August
       1988. He came to the United Kingdom on the 30th September 2009 on a
       marriage Visa. He subsequently obtained various leaves, the last of
       which expired on 12 March 2016.

    2. On 9 March 2016 he applied for indefinite leave to remain as the
       civil partner of a British national. This was in relation to a Mr
       [WM], hereinafter referred to as the sponsor. He is from Scotland and
       was born on 14 April 1944. The account was that the relationship
       began in 2007 and they started living together in September 2009.
       They then had a civil partnership ceremony on 28 January 2010.

    3. His application was refused on 21 February 2018, with the respondent
       not accepting the relationship as genuine and subsisting, with the
       parties intended to live together permanently. This was necessary
       under paragraph 287 of the immigration rules.

    4. There had been difficulties in the relationship, with periods of
       separation with Mr [M] at one stage contacting the respondent to
       advise of this.



The First tier Tribunal

    5. The appeal was heard by First-tier Immigration Judge RG Handley at
       Glasgow on 7 August 2018. In a decision promulgated on 5 September
       2018 the appeal was dismissed. The judge heard from the appellant and
       Mr [M] and had the benefit of separate interviews that were carried
       out by the respondent.

    6. The judge accepted that their responses at interview were broadly
       consistent. The judge also accepted they had spent some time living
       together. The judge referred to the interview which took place on 30
       January 2017. In May 2017 the sponsor advised the respondent that the
       appellant had not been living with him for 2 years. The judge
       referred to evidence indicating the appellant had been getting mail
       at the sponsor's address.

    7. The judge concluded the relationship had deteriorated with the
       appellant spending less and less time with the sponsor. Whilst the
       sponsor wanted the relationship to continue his actions indicated an
       acceptance that matters had deteriorated and the relationship was at
       an end. The judge concluded the relationship was not genuine and
       subsisting.



The Upper Tribunal

    8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis
       it was arguable that the judge misunderstood the requirements of
       paragraph 287. It was suggested he incorrectly believed the appellant
       had to demonstrate the relationship was subsisting throughout.
       Furthermore, it was argued the judge had not given adequate reasons
       for rejecting the evidence of the appellant and his sponsor that the
       relationship was still subsisting despite past difficulties. It was
       arguable the judge's findings only dealt with relationship in the
       past and was not forward-looking.

    9. Mr Haddow and Mr Govan were both in agreement that the test for
       whether the relationship was genuine and subsisting related to the
       current state of affairs, that is at the time of decision making, and
       there was no need to demonstrate this had been the position
       throughout. Mr Haddow pointed out that whether the judge understood
       the requirements was linked to the challenge as to the adequacy of
       reasoning. If the reason was adequate then it would demonstrate the
       judge was aware of the requirements.

   10. Mr. Haddow referred me to the decision of South Buckinghamshire
       District Council -v- Porter (No 2) [2004] 1 WLR 1953 where the House
       of Lords at paragraph 35 said that a decision must be intelligible
       and adequate so that the reader can understand why the matter was
       decided as it was. In particular, he emphasised that the decision
       given must not give rise to substantial doubt as to whether there was
       an error in law, for instance, by a misunderstanding of a fact. In
       the instant case he submitted there was doubt as to whether the First-
       tier Tribunal was considering the relationship at the time of hearing
       or whether it felt there was a need to show the relationship was
       ongoing from the outset.

   11. I was also referred to MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
       00641 which again emphasise the need for a reasons behind the
       decision and why the evidence of a witness was believed or not.

   12. I was then referred to the impugned decision at paragraph 10 onwards,
       with the observation being that much of the discussion related to
       past events. Mr. Haddow submitted that there was a leap from these
       past events up to March 2017 to the situation at the time of hearing
       in August 2018.I was then referred paragraph 14 of the skeleton
       argument which sets out findings which Mr Haddow submitted should
       have been made but were not. He also contended that the credibility
       assessment was flawed and I was referred to paragraph 19 of the
       skeleton argument.

   13. Mr Govan submitted that the judge did apply the law correctly this
       and gave sufficient reasons. The appellant and Mr [M] both gave
       evidence and their credibility was in issue. He accepted that there
       had been a previous grant of leave the correctness of which was not
       challenged but the issue arising was whether the relationship was
       subsisting. He said that at paragraph 5 the judge identified the
       relevant immigration rule. He submitted that the judge would be
       required to consider the history of the relationship in assessing
       whether it was subsisting. He pointed out that the appellant in his
       oral evidence said he had only been away for a matter of days, as
       recorded at paragraph 12 of the determination. It was put to him that
       this statement was at odds with other evidence which indicated they
       had been apart for a substantial period of time. I was referred to a
       letter which mentioned he would go away for 12 weeks at the time only
       calling for money. The judge refers to this at paragraph 18.



Consideration

   14. There are 2 challenges to the decision of First-tier Immigration
       Judge RG Handley.The 1st is the suggestion that the judge mistakenly
       believed the appellant had to show the relationship had been
       subsisting on a continuous basis. The 2nd challenge associated with
       this was that the judge did not consider matters at the time of
       hearing. Related to these 2 challenges is the suggestion that the
       judge did not provide adequate reasons.

   15. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on a Visa on 30 September
       2009. He was then granted various other leaves until on 9 March 2016
       he submitted an application for indefinite leave to remain as a civil
       partner. The refusal letter refers to the relevant rule at paragraph
       287 of the immigration rules. This is concerned with the requirements
       for indefinite leave to remain as a spouse or civil partner of
       someone present and settled in the United Kingdom. In particular, the
       judge at paragraph 5 sets out the requirement that the applicant is
       still the civil partner of the person concerned and that each of the
       parties intends to live permanently with the other as their civil
       partner. Both representatives have confirmed, as is obvious from the
       wording of the rule, that this is a forward-looking provision.

   16. At paragraph 6 the judge refers to the reasons for refusal letter and
       the respondent not being satisfied they were in a subsisting
       relationship. The judge referred to the respondent's refusal being
       based upon a large number of discrepancies and credibility issues
       about the relationship, including the content of an interview on 30
       January 2017. Significantly, there was a letter from the sponsor
       dated 4 March 2017 to the effect that the relationship had broken
       down and he was no longer supporting the application.

   17. The judge was hearing the appeal on 3 August 2018, a year later. The
       appellant was present as was the sponsor. The judge records at
       paragraph 11 the appellant's evidence was that the relationship had
       not broken down but he had left for a time. In cross-examination he
       was referred to the content of the interview. However, the appellant
       denied he and the sponsor had broken up but claimed to have only left
       the house for a few days. He also denied habitually staying with
       friends.

   18. This was in contrast to the sponsor's evidence contained in his
       letter where he indicated the appellant had been away for 2 years. In
       his interview he had said the relationship had broken down for 2
       years but changed this to the appellant leaving for periods. There
       was reference to the appellant being in London for 12 weeks. The
       sponsor's oral evidence was that they were now back together again.
       Clearly there were significant differences between the accounts given
       by the appellant and the sponsor at different stages.

   19. At paragraph 17 on the judge made his findings. The judge accepted
       they had spent some time living together based upon the common ground
       displayed in their respective interviews. At paragraph 18 the judge
       sets out the history of the relationship, with it starting in 2007;
       with them living together in September 2009; followed by the civil
       partnership ceremony on 28 January 2010. The judge then referred to
       the sponsor's letter of 22 August 2016 where the sponsor did not know
       the appellant's address or phone number and indicated he only visited
       to collect mail and have been absent in London for 12 weeks and
       calling when he needed money.

   20. The judge concluded that in August 2016 the appellant was an
       infrequent visitor. Given the evidence before the judge this was a
       finding that was open. The judge then refers specifically to the
       sponsor's letter where he indicated the relationship was no longer
       subsisting.

   21. I can see no evidence whatsoever in the decision that the judge
       believed the relationship had to be ongoing. The judge identified
       inconsistencies between the appellant's claims about the sponsor and
       the sponsor's evidence. The sponsor in his letter had clearly
       indicated the relationship was at an end albeit by the time of the
       hearing he had aspirations and it could be rekindled.

   22. At paragraph 21 the judge refers to the interview of 30 January 2017
       where the appellant accepted there had been a break in the
       relationship. He also accepted in the past 2 years he had hardly been
       in the house. However, in his oral evidence a different account was
       given. Clearly therefore there were credibility issues arising.

   23. The judge concluded at paragraph 23 by accepting that the appellant
       and the sponsor were previously in a relationship. The judge then
       went on to say that the evidence clearly indicated the relationship
       had deteriorated, with the appellant spending less and less time with
       the sponsor. The judge reached the conclusion that the sponsor now
       wanted the relationship to continue. The judge suggests that whilst
       the sponsor had a hope the relationship would revive there was an
       acknowledgement that it had ended.as I read this the judge is
       contemplating the past history of the relationship, the present and
       the future.

   24. I am satisfied that the judge was aware he was looking at matters as
       at the time of hearing. There was strong evidence from the interview
       to suggest the relationship had ended. The appellant at hearing gave
       an account which was at odds with his earlier interview. The findings
       the judge made when ones open to the judge. I see nothing to suggest
       the judge did not appreciate the forward-looking nature of the
       provisions. The judge has given clear and sustainable reasons for the
       findings made. In conclusion therefore, I find no material error of
       law established.



Decision

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge RG Handley. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appeal shall stand.


DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

