
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06027/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 01  May 2018                               |On 08 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                            MRS JUSTICE O'FARRELL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 RILDWAN [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Waheed (instructed by David & Vine Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of Rildwan [A]  against  the  determination  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal Judge Carroll's decision dated  16  February  2018,
    promulgated on 23 February 2018,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent Secretary of State for the Home  Department,
    on 18 April 2017 to make a deportation order and on 21  April  2017  to
    refuse the appellant's human rights claim.



Factual background

 2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria. He was born on [ ] 1986 in  the
    United Kingdom but does not have British citizenship and does not  have
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. The appellant's mother is [FA], who was refused leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom in 2008 and now lives in Nigeria.

 4. On 16 February 2011, the appellant submitted an application  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom on the basis of 14 years long residence. This was
    rejected but the respondent agreed to reconsider the application  which
    was submitted on 2 April 2014. The  application  was  refused  with  no
    right of appeal.

 5. On 20 November 2012, child A was born to the appellant and his partner,
    Ms [O].

 6. On 8 November  2013  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  conspiracy  to
    defraud. He was sentenced to 7  years'  imprisonment  together  with  a
    concurrent sentence of 18 months in respect of a further fraud to which
    he pleaded guilty.

 7. In May 2016 the appellant was released from prison on licence.

 8. On 1 August 2016 the appellant was served  by  the  respondent  with  a
    decision to make a deportation order in accordance with section 32  (5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 9. On 18 April 2017 the respondent notified the appellant that  his  human
    rights claim had been refused and the decision to deport him  from  the
    United Kingdom was maintained.

10. The appellant and Ms [O] are expecting child B in June 2018.

FTT Decision

11. On 7 February 2018 the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision was  heard  at  Hendon  Magistrates  Court  before  FTT  Judge
    Carroll. The basis of the  appeal  was  that  deportation  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights. The  appellant
    relied upon the fact that he has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    birth, he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms [O], who is
    a British Citizen, they are the parents of child A, born in the  United
    Kingdom on 20 November 2012, and Ms [O] is expecting their second child
    in June 2018.

12. FTT Judge Carroll dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of appeal

13. The appellant appeals to the upper Tribunal on the grounds that:

          i) the FTT Judge erred in law in failing to address adequately or
             at all the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  child  when
             considering the Article 8 claim; and

         ii) the FTT Judge failed to carry out a well-rounded assessment of
             the child's welfare, including the impact of  the  appellant's
             deportation on her emotional stability, and weigh that against
             the other considerations.

Legal Framework

14. The appellant is a 'foreign criminal' is within the meaning of  section
    32 (1) of the UK Borders act 2007 because he is not a British  citizen,
    he was convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence and was  sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months.

15. Section 32(4) of the 2007 Act states:

         "For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
         (c.77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive  to  the
         public good."

16. Section 32(5) of the 2007 Act states:

         "The secretary of state must make a deportation order in respect of
         a foreign criminal (subject to section 33)."

17. Section 33, Exception 1 provides that sections 32 (4) and  (5)  do  not
    apply where the removal of a foreign criminal would result in a  breach
    of Article 8 of the Convention.

18. Article 8 of the Convention provides that:

          i) Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.

         ii) There shall be no interference by a public authority with  the
             exercise of this right except such as easy in accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

19. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002
    Act") applies wherever a court or tribunal  is  required  to  determine
    whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a  person's
    rights under article 8 and would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.

20. Section 117C sets out the following considerations in  cases  involving
    foreign criminals:

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 4 years or more,  the
             public interest requires C's deportation unless exception 1 or
             exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where (a) C has been lawfully resident  in
             the United Kingdom for most of C's life, (b) C is socially and
             culturally integrated into the United Kingdom  and  (c)  there
             would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration  into
             the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of  imprisonment  of  at  least  4  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections 1 to 6 are to be taken  into
             account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
             deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason
             for the decision was the offence or  offences  for  which  the
             criminal has been convicted.

21. Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules provide:

         Where a person claims that their deportation would be  contrary  to
         the U.K.'s obligations under article 8 ... and

         (a)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
             public good and in the public interest because they have  been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to
             a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years...

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

22. Paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules provides:

         This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (B) or (C) applies if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British citizen; ... and ...

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                      country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                      the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen  or  settled
             in the UK and

             (i)  the relationship was formed as a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

             (ii)     it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM; and

             (iii)    it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported....

FTT decision

23. For the purpose of this appeal the material parts of the  FTT  decision
    are:

         "[29].   Ms [O] is now pregnant for the second time and the baby is
         due in June 2018. Much of the  oral  evidence  given  both  by  the
         appellant and Ms [O] focused on the role the appellant plays in the
         life of [child A] in terms of taking her to and from school and  in
         terms the appellant's role in the home in the context  of  shopping
         and preparation of food. This allows Ms [O] to work full-time.  She
         said that if the appellant were to be deported it would  give  rise
         to  financial  and  practical  difficulties  in  the   context   of
         childcare. Ms [O] has, of course, looked after her child while  the
         appellant was in prison and, in any event, it is not  open  to  the
         appellant to resist deportation on the grounds that, as he  put  it
         in his oral evidence -  "it  would  make  things  easier  me  being
         around."

         [30].    There is very  limited  evidence  before  me  relating  to
         [child A]. A letter from her school says  that  the  appellant  has
         "dropped off and collected  her".  There  is  no  evidence  of  any
         concerns relating to her health or any other aspect  of  her  well-
         being. The best interests of the child are a primary  consideration
         under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
         2009. They are, however, not sole or paramount but must be balanced
         against other factors. Only the strongest claim will  outweigh  the
         public interest in deporting an individual sentenced to at least  4
         years imprisonment. The issue is not whether  the  appellant  is  a
         good father but whether the very strong public interest  in  favour
         of deportation is trumped by the best interests of the  appellant's
         child or children. Neither the British nationality of the  children
         nor their likely separation from their father for a long period  of
         time amounts to exceptional circumstances such as to  outweigh  the
         public interest in  his  deportation.  That  deportation  does  not
         oblige either Ms [O] or [child A] to leave the United Kingdom.

         ...

         [34].    In the light of all the of the evidence  for  the  reasons
         given above and for the reasons given by  the  respondent,  I  find
         that the appellant has failed to demonstrate that  there  are  very
         compelling circumstances such as to outweigh the public interest in
         deportation and that the respondent's decision does not  give  rise
         to a disproportionate breach of Article 8."



Applicant's submissions

24. Reliance is placed on the principles set out in Kaur  (Children's  best
    interests / public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014, in  which  it
    was emphasised that the best interests of a child are an integral  part
    of the proportionality assessment under Article 8. In such  cases,  the
    best interest of the child is a primary consideration: ZH (Tanzania)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]  UKSC  per  Baroness
    Hale at paragraph [23], although not the sole,  primary  consideration:
    Zoumbas v the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74
    per Lord Hodge, giving the judgment of the court, at paragraph [10].

25. Mr Waheed, on behalf of the appellant, submitted that the  summary  set
    out in paragraphs [29] and [30] of the FTT Decision did  not  represent
    accurately the evidence that was before the  Tribunal.  The  FTT  Judge
    failed to consider adequately the evidence of  the  appellant  that  he
    provided a stable influence in the home and had  regular  contact  with
    child A through  prison  visits.  Further,  the  FTT  Judge  failed  to
    consider adequately the evidence of Ms [O] that child A had  maintained
    contact with the appellant when in prison and subsequently;  also  that
    she would have difficulty in coping with  their  second  child  if  the
    appellant  were  deported.  Although  the  FTT  Decision  referred   to
    practical difficulties in the context of childcare, it did not consider
    the increased difficulties caused by the imminent birth of child B.

26. Mr Waheed submitted that the FTT Judge failed to  carry  out  a  proper
    assessment of the best interests of child A.  That renders  flawed  the
    balancing exercise required in respect of the  child's  best  interests
    and the public interest in deportation. He invites this Court to  allow
    the appeal and remit the case to the FTT for re-hearing.

Respondent's submissions

27.  The  respondent's  case  is  that  the  FTT  Judge  directed   herself
    appropriately. She properly considered the best interests of the  child
    and balanced the competing  interests  of  the  appellant  against  the
    public interest. The FTT Judge was entitled to conclude that there were
    no exceptional circumstances that would outweigh the public interest in
    deportation.

28. Reliance is placed on AJ (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2016] EWCA 1012  per  Elias
    LJ at paragraphs [12] to [17], including the following:

         "12. It is now firmly established that in  any  decision  affecting
             children, the best interests of the children must be a primary
             (but  not  the  paramount)  consideration  but  they  can   be
             outweighed by the cumulative effect of  other  considerations:
             see ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
             [2011] UKSC 4 paras. 27-28 per  Baroness  Hale.  However,  the
             very strong weight given to the public interest  in  deporting
             foreign criminals is not diluted where the rights of  children
             are affected.

          1. This court has on a number of occasions had cause to emphasise
             that the mere fact that there will be a detrimental effect  on
             the best interests of the children where  the  parent  (almost
             always the father) is  deported  in  circumstances  where  the
             children cannot follow him does not by  itself  constitute  an
             exceptional circumstance...

          1. These cases show that it will be rare for the  best  interests
             of the children to outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in
             deporting foreign criminals. Something  more  than  a  lengthy
             separation  from  a  parent  is  required,  even  though  such
             separation is detrimental to the child's best interests.  That
             is commonplace and not a compelling circumstance.  Neither  is
             it looking at the concept of exceptional circumstances through
             the lens of the Immigration  Rules.  It  would  undermine  the
             specific exceptions in the  Rules  if  the  interests  of  the
             children in maintaining a  close  and  immediate  relationship
             with the deported parent were as a matter of course  to  trump
             the  strong  public  interest  in  deportation.  Rule   399(a)
             identifies the particular circumstances where it  is  accepted
             that the interests of  the  child  will  outweigh  the  public
             interest in deportation. The conditions are onerous  and  will
             only rarely arise. They include the requirement that it  would
             not be reasonable for the child to leave the UK  and  that  no
             other family member is able to look after the child in the UK.
             In  many,  if  not  most,  cases  where  this   exception   is
             potentially engaged there will be the normal  relationship  of
             love  and  affection  between  parent  and  child  and  it  is
             virtually always in the best interests of the child  for  that
             relationship to  continue.  If  that  were  enough  to  render
             deportation a disproportionate interference with family  life,
             it would drain the rule  of  any  practical  significance.  It
             would   mean   that    deportation    would    constitute    a
             disproportionate  interference  with  private  life   in   the
             ordinary run of cases where children  are  adversely  affected
             and the carefully framed conditions in rule  399(a)  would  be
             largely otiose.  In  order  to  establish  a  very  compelling
             justification  overriding  the   high   public   interest   in
             deportation, there must be some additional feature or features
             affecting the nature or quality of the relationship which take
             the case out of the ordinary."

29. Mr Melvin, on behalf of the  respondent,  submits  that  there  are  no
    exceptional circumstances that would outweigh the  public  interest  in
    deportation in this case. The appellant has not produced evidence as to
    the adverse effect on Ms [O] for child A. There is no evidence that  Ms
    [O] was unable to cope with child A when the appellant was in prison or
    that she will be unable to cope with 2 children.

30. Mr Melvin submits that there is no material error of  law  in  the  FTT
    Decision. However, if he is wrong, he invites us to consider  the  case
    law and facts and make a fresh decision.

Discussion and conclusion

31. There is no merit in the grounds of appeal relied on by the appellant.

32.  There  was  no  error  of  law.  The  FTT   Judge   directed   herself
    appropriately. She referred to section 55  of  the  2009  Act  and  the
    requirement to properly consider the best interests of the  child.  She
    correctly identified what  is  a  high  hurdle  for  the  appellant  to
    establish very compelling circumstances that would outweigh the  public
    interest in his deportation.

33. The appellant's contact with  child  A  and  his  contribution  to  the
    household were considered, as was the forthcoming birth of  the  second
    child. It was not necessary for the FTT Judge  to  set  out  in  detail
    every part of the evidence relied on by the appellant.

34. The FTT Judge balanced the competing interests of  the  appellant,  his
    partner and child, against the public  interest  and  was  entitled  to
    conclude that there were no very compelling  circumstances  that  would
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.

Notice of Decision

The first-tier tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
    a point of law.

The decision shall stand.


Signed:                                 Date: 2nd May 2018

Mrs Justice O'Farrell







