

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06680/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2019                            |On 14th March 2019            |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                      K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:        Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
Brown, Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr   A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. On 20 October 2015 the appellant, a citizen of  Pakistan,  applied  for
    leave to remain in the UK, based on family life as a parent.

 2. The appellant has a son, born in June 2011, but  no  relationship  with
    him.

 3. From a second marriage,  the  appellant  has  two  daughters,  born  in
    January 2013 and   June 2014,  with  whom  he  does  claim  to  have  a
    relationship.

 4. The SSHD refused his application by a letter dated  24  February  2016.
    As to the immigration rules, the key reasons are at page 3: no  "direct
    access in person and ... not maintaining contact" with the children; no
    evidence of proceedings to obtain a contact order;  "not  accepted  ...
    you are taking, and intend to continue to take, an active role" in  the
    children's upbringing.

 5. On article 8 ECHR, outside the rules, the key reasons are at page 5: no
    proceedings commenced; an obligation to pay child maintenance, but that
    could be paid from Pakistan; no exceptional circumstances.

 6. FtT Judge Wylie heard the appeal on 19 October 2018 and dismissed it by
    a decision promulgated on 1 November 2018.  By that time, as stated  at
    [34] of the decision,  the  appellant  had  taken  proceedings  in  the
    Sheriff Court, and had recently been granted contact once a  month  for
    one hour at a supervised contact centre.

 7. Judge Wylie held that the appellant could not satisfy the  requirements
    of the rules on an active role in the children's upbringing,  and  that
    the human rights grounds could not be met through  the  medium  of  the
    rules.  The appellant does not dispute that.

 8. Mr Caskie submitted that  there  was  obvious  error  of  law,  through
    absence of an assessment of the best interests  of  the  children,  and
    error in finding there to be no  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with the children.

 9. The finding of no relationship was key to  the  outcome  under  section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act.   The two children live with their mother  and
    older half-siblings, all of whom appear to be UK  citizens.   The  SSHD
    did not suggest in the refusal letter or in  the  FtT,  and  could  not
    reasonably suggest, that the children could be expected  to  leave  the
    UK.  A finding of a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  would  have
    determined proportionality, and the appeal would have succeeded.

10. The FtT recorded at [53] that the Sheriff found in her judgement (dated
    3 September 2018) that  contact  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  It would have taken strong further evidence for the  FtT  to
    decide, very shortly afterwards, anything but  that  it  was  in  their
    interests for him to remain in  the  UK  for  that  purpose.   To  what
    extent, of course, would be another question.

11. The FtT observed at [53] that the Sheriff had to take  the  welfare  of
    the children as paramount, and held at [56] that as  the  children  did
    not have a subsisting relationship  with  the  appellant,  his  removal
    would be proportionate.

12. That might be read as a finding that the benefit to the children was so
    minor as not to tip the scales, bearing in mind that for the FtT  their
    best interests were  primary  but  not  paramount.   However,  such  an
    important issue should have been resolved explicitly.

13. The appellant had a relationship with the two children  from  birth  at
    least until July 2015.   The  FtT  says  at  several  points  that  the
    relationship did not exist at the date of the hearing [46, 49, 50, 56].
     At [49] it is stressed that the relationship must be in  the  present,
    not looking to the future.  For the FtT to be right,  the  relationship
    must at some date have been extinguished, and any  future  relationship
    would be a new one.

14. It cannot be that any interruption to a relationship brings  it  to  an
    end.  An unjustified refusal by one parent to allow  contact  with  the
    other surely does not have that immediate effect. The question must  be
    one of fact and degree, according to the circumstances of each case.

15. The  FtT's  decision  on  relationship  would  be  supportable  if  the
    appellant's family litigation had been entirely  cynical,  as  the  FtT
    hints at [48].  However, that does not sit well with  [37],  where  the
    FtT records the Sheriff's finding that while the desire  to  remain  in
    the UK had a significant part to play, the appellant "is also motivated
    by a desire to maintain a relationship" with  the  children.   The  FtT
    judge observed in the same paragraph that he had "shown some commitment
    to the children".

16. Taking proper account of the Sheriff's judgment,  the  FtT  might  have
    found the relationship between the appellant and  his  children  to  be
    weak, but given his active interest in maintaining it, I do  not  think
    the FtT was entitled to find it non-existent.

17. The FtT's decision is set aside, for the errors of  (a)  absence  of  a
    finding (or of a sufficiently explicit and clear finding) on  the  best
    interests of the children, and (b) a finding of no relationship,  which
    was not supported by the evidence.

18. Parties agreed that if the decision were to be set aside, the UT should
    proceed to remake it.

19. The relevant updating information is not disputed, and is  as  follows.
    The appellant  says  that  he  has  made  arrangements  for  supervised
    contact, including payment of fees, but all efforts have  been  ignored
    by his wife, who is failing to comply with the order of the Court.   He
    produces a copy of his summary application for her to appear before the
    Court to  explain,  or  to  be  held  in  contempt.   A  proof  on  the
    application is expected to take place in April 2019.

20. It is usually in the interests of children to  have  relationships  and
    contact with both parents.  The Sheriff  Court  has  found  it  in  the
    interests of the children to have contact with the appellant.  He  does
    not appear to have delayed in his attempts to establish  that  contact.
    It is in their interests that he should remain here at least until that
    matter is resolved.

21. Given the whole of the Sheriff's findings, the likely  benefit  to  the
    children from contact with the appellant  may  not  be  much;  but  the
    extent of their benefit is not the decisive issue.


22. On the evidence to date, the appellant continues to have a relationship
    with the children.  It may be weak, and it is not one of direct current
    contact, but it is genuine and subsisting.   That  is  enough  for  the
    appeal, as originally brought to the FtT, to be allowed.

23. No anonymity direction was made in the FtT, and none was  requested  in
    the UT.  However, the matter relates to  family  proceedings  involving
    young children.   While this decision does not include any details  the
    revelation of which might be significantly injurious to their  welfare,
    I consider that an order is preferable.

24. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      [pic]

      12 March 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




