
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06045/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3rd October 2018             |On 23rd October 2018            |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                  Mr D C O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adebayo, Greenland Lawyers LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer

                  ________________________________________

                             DECISION & REASONS
                  ________________________________________

1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
Nigeria, born on 10.8.84. He entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in
September 2010 and thereafter overstayed. He applied for leave to remain on
12 December 2013, as a result of which he was granted leave to remain until
10 August 2016.

2. On 19 July 2016, the Claimant made an in time application for further
leave to remain on 19 July 2016, on the basis that he is separated from his
partner but has contact with his daughter and that he was in the process of
seeking an Order for contact from the Family Court. This application was
refused in a decision dated 18 April 2017. The Secretary of State stated
that he had written to the Claimant on 7 March 2017 requesting further
information but had received no response and thus refused the application
with reference to the suitability requirements: S-LTR 1.7 of the
Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the
Claimant had continuing involvement in his child's life.

3. The Claimant appealed against this decision on 4 May 2017. His appeal
came before First tier Tribunal Judge Hanley for hearing on 9 May 2018. In
a decision and reasons promulgated on 24 May 2018 he allowed the appeal.

4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal, in time, to the
Upper Tribunal on the basis that the Judge had erred materially in law in
taking into consideration a Child Arrangements Order from the Family Court,
which cannot be disclosed to any third party, including the Tribunal,
without express permission from the Family Court and no such permission had
been provided. Thus the Judge was in breach of the Protocol on
communications between the Judges of the Family Court and Immigration and
Asylum Chambers of the First tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal (hereafter
the "Family Protocol"). Consequently, the Presenting Officer, Mr Vaghela,
withdrew from the proceedings and the hearing and the Judge's findings were
vitiated by procedural irregularity and unfairness.

5. Permission to appeal was granted by First tier Tribunal Judge I D Boyes
in a decision dated 24 August 2018 on the basis that: "the extent to which
compliance with the protocol is necessary or proportionate is a matter
which deserves consideration in the UT."


Hearing

6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Willocks Briscoe served
copies of the Presenting Officer's minute and a copy of the Family
Protocol:

https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/JCO/Documents/Protocols/spt-pfd-
joint-protocol-comms-judges-0713.pdf

7. Ms Willocks Briscoe submitted that the Secretary of State's challenge
was one based on procedural fairness; that the Judge was directed to the
Duty Judge by the Presenting Officer to seek directions as he was in breach
of the guidance set out in the Family Protocol. She submitted that there
was also the wider consideration of the Secretary of State not being put in
a position where they could potentially be compromised. When asked why the
Presenting Officer would be compromised by remaining in court to assist in
the proceedings, she stated that it was clear from the guidance set out in
the Protocol was not to be disclosed. Consequently, the Judge should have
risen and sought a direction from the Duty Judge to the Family Court for
permission to rely on the Order and that adjournment was the only option.

8. In respect of [26] of the Judge's decision to her, where the Judge
indicated that he would consider the Protocol after having heard evidence
and decide at that stage what directions to make, Ms Willocks Briscoe
submitted that the Presenting Officer could not anticipate what would
happen or be said by witnesses and on that basis proceeding with the appeal
would have put the Presenting Officer in a situation of difficulty. She
submitted that the Presenting Officer was careful not be seen as flouting
the Family Court's position on such issues.

9. Ms Willocks Briscoe submitted that the onus was upon the Claimant's
solicitors to get permission to disclose the Family Arrangements order. She
submitted that one had to bear in mind that it was a float case, both in
terms of the Presenting Officer's conduct and the Tribunal proceeding with
the appeal. She has submitted that in effect the Secretary of State had
been prevented from having the opportunity to engage given the issues
raised in light of [7] of the Protocol and that fairness has to apply to
all parties.

10. Ms Willocks Briscoe maintained the position that the suitability
requirement finding was also in issue because the Presenting Officer had
been precluded from making submissions or cross examination of the
witnesses. She submitted that it was the duty of the Presenting Officer to
adhere to legal restraint or consideration and in this case it was
incumbent upon him to ensure the integrity of the Secretary of State to
engage with the Tribunal and that the Presenting Officer had been keen to
ensure that Secretary of State was not put in a compromising position to
avoid contempt of Family Court.

11. In his submissions, Mr Adebayo submitted that the main reason
underlying the Family Protocol was to protect the anonymity of the child
and that was well protected by the Tribunal, who clearly had the child's
best interests in mind. He further submitted, effectively conceding that
there was an error of law, that the Claimant now had the permission of the
Family Court to rely on the Order and that the decision could be re-made
based on this fact.

12. In reply, Ms Willocks Briscoe submitted that the best interests of the
child was always important but there was no evidence that a request to the
Family Court would have taken an inordinate amount of time and that delay
would not have changed anything in terms of the involvement of the father
with the actual child.



Findings in respect of the error of law

13. The First tier Tribunal Judge held as follows at [22]-[28]:

    "22. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Vaghela said that he was unable
    to take part in the proceedings without evidence from the family court
    granting permission to the disclosure of the order dated 1 February
    2017 [83-85]. He objected to the appeal proceeding.


    23. He argued that the appellant had not served "disclosable evidence."
    He said that he would be in contempt of court if he remained in the
    hearing room.


    24. He agreed that the presenting officer's unit had received the
    appellant's bundle on 23 April 2018, but stated that presenting
    officers are not aware of the contents of the bundle until the day
    before the hearing.


    25. Mr Vaghela asked to be released. I said that I was not prepared to
    release him because his assistance might be required during the court
    of the hearing, even if he did not participate through cross-
    examination.


    26. I made clear to Mr Vaghela that I intended to hear evidence and
    that I would consider having heard evidence what directions, if any,
    were necessary in connection with the matters that he had raised in
    respect of [83-85]. It may be that on hearing evidence, I would be able
    to determine the appeal without regard to the order that Mr Vaghela was
    concerned about.


    27. I also made a direction pursuant to procedure rule 27, which I have
    referred to above and the court clerk put a notice on the tribunal door
    notifying the public that the appeal was being held in camera. No
    member of the public came into the hearing room during the course of
    the hearing.


    28. Mr Vaghela again pressed me to excuse him from the hearing. I did
    not excuse him from the hearing but he left the hearing room, in any
    event."

14. At [47] the Judge found that it was difficult to see how there had been
any disclosure in public, contrary to the terms of the Child Arrangements
Order. The Judge was here clearly making reference to the terms of the
Order itself and not to the Family Protocol.

15.  I find that, whilst the Judge took steps to protect the anonymity of
the Claimant's child by hearing the appeal in camera and anonymising the
decision, there is a material error of law in the decision of the First
tier Tribunal Judge on the basis that it is clear from [7] of the Family
Protocol that "documents in family proceedings cannot be disclosed to third
parties including judges in the Tribunal without an order of the Family
Court Judge." Consequently, in the absence of an order from a Family Court
Judge, the Child Arrangements Order should have neither been disclosed nor
considered in the First tier Tribunal. A copy of the Family Protocol is
appended to this decision.

16. Consequently, the decision is flawed by reason of procedural
irregularity. However, I do not consider that the Presenting Officer's
conduct in withdrawing from the proceedings, without the consent of the
Judge, was appropriate. In Awuah and Others (Wasted Costs Orders - HOPOs -
Tribunal Powers) [2017] UKFTT 00555 (IAC) the Presidential panel held:

    "22.     The framework which we have outlined and expounded above
    simply cannot be applied to HOPOs. They are not officers of the court.
    They belong to none of the regulated professional cohorts. They do not
    enjoy the privileges and immunities of the advocate. They are not
    subject to any of the detailed codes regulating the professional and
    ethical conduct of advocates and others and, in consequence, they lie
    outwith the jurisdiction of the various regulatory bodies. Stated
    succinctly, HOPOs are unregulated.


    23.     That is not to say that HOPOs owe no duties to the tribunal. We
    consider that rule 2(4) of the 2014 Rules, a discrete element of the
    overriding objective and its UT analogue, framed in identical terms,
    clearly apply to HOPOs. Thus HOPOs are subject to the positive
    obligations of helping the Tribunal further the overriding objective
    and cooperating with the Tribunal generally. The generality of these
    duties encompasses a potentially broad series of specific requirements
    and obligations many of which will be recurrent in most cases. Others
    may be more case sensitive.


    24.     The proposition that HOPOs are answerable to the judge or panel
    of judges before which they appear is in our view unassailable. It
    arises from the basic judicial functions and duties, in tandem with
    rule 2(4) of the 2014 Rules."

17. I find that, having made his point to the Judge and bearing in mind
that the Secretary of State was already in breach of the provisions of the
Family Protocol having received and presumably read the copy of the Child
Arrangements Order appended to the notice of appeal, the Presenting
Officer's duty was to remain in the hearing room to assist the Tribunal. I
find there was no procedural unfairness in these circumstances because the
Presenting Officer chose to leave, against the wishes of the Judge and
without his permission and in so doing acted disrespectfully. I find that
the Presenting Officer chose not to take the opportunity to cross-examine
the Respondent and make submissions.

18. I should make clear that I have, in so finding, taken into
consideration the Presenting Officer's minute, which is consistent with
what took place as recorded by the First tier Tribunal Judge at [22]-[28]
of the decision and reasons. However, notably, there is nothing therein to
show that the Presenting Officer requested an adjournment.

19. I find that the appropriate course of action would have been to adjourn
the appeal and for a request to have been made through the Principal
Resident Judge for permission from the Family Court to disclose the Family
Arrangements Order in accordance with the provisions of the Family
Protocol.

20. Having been informed by Mr Adebayo that the Claimant had sought and
obtained permission from the Family Court to disclose the Child
Arrangements Order, I informed the parties that I intended to re-make the
decision. Having seen the email correspondence between the Claimant and the
Judge's clerk, which was not entirely clear, I put the matter back and
asked my clerk to liaise with Judge Prigg's clerk to clarify that
disclosure was permitted and to permit Ms Willocks Briscoe the opportunity
to prepare for cross-examination.

21. When the case came back on for hearing after the lunchtime adjournment,
the clerk to Judge Prigg at Taunton County Court had confirmed in an email
that the Order to disclose the Child Arrangements Order had been confirmed
by the Judge.

22. Ms Willocks Briscoe informed me that, having reviewed the papers and
the decision in ET & MT (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria
[2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC) and the Secretary of State's policy: "Family
Migration: Family Life & Private Life - 10 year routes" published on
22.2.18, there were no strong reasons to justify refusal.


Decision

23. In light of the unchallenged evidence, confirmed by the Child
Arrangements Order dated 1 February 2017, that the Claimant is in regular
contact with his daughter and is involved in her upbringing, I find that
family life is established.

24. I find that, had the Claimant received the request for further
information dated 7 March 2017, he would at that stage have provided the
Secretary of State with a copy of the Child Arrangements Order, given that
the absence of evidence of contact was the only substantive matter in
dispute. I find that the Claimant's conduct does not fall properly for
consideration under S-LTR 1.7 as I accept that he did not receive the
request for further information.

25. In these circumstances, I find that the requirements of the Rules are
met. Ms Willocks Briscoe helpfully conceded, in light of the recent
jurisprudence and the extant Home Office policy, that there are no strong
reasons to justify removal of the Claimant, which would breach his
established family life with his British daughter. Thus the appeal falls to
be allowed.


Notice of decision

26. I find a material error of law in the decision of the First tier
Tribunal Judge. I substitute a decision upholding his decision to allow the
appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies to both parties. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman                19 October 2018
