


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06587/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd February 2020                  |On 5th February 2020                 |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                          Raja Muhammad Nadeem Raza
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:        Mr Biggs, Counsel instructed by Vision Solicitors
Ltd
For the Respondent     :  Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the 15th December 1985.
     He appeals with permission the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judges Kelly and Moxon) to dismiss his human rights appeal.








 2. This appeal  primarily  concerns  the  Appellant's  assertion  that  he
    qualifies for indefinite leave to remain under paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules on the grounds that he has  now  accrued  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence.   If he so qualifies, then it would follow
    that the appeal would be allowed on human rights grounds,  since  there
    would be no public interest in refusing to grant leave.


 3. The matter in issue before the First-tier Tribunal was not whether  the
    Appellant had lived in this country for the requisite amount  of  time:
    it is accepted that he has lived here since November 2008 when  he  was
    given leave to enter as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant.   The
    question was  whether  he  had  accrued  ten  years  lawful  continuous
    residence; that is to say whether there were any gaps in the leave held
    by the Appellant during that time.

 4. The Secretary of State had refused to grant indefinite leave to  remain
    under paragraph 276B on the grounds that there was  a  period,  between
    the 9th November 2010 and the 7th March 2011, when  the  Appellant  was
    without leave.   It was this 'gap' in residence which was the focus  of
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The Appellant's witness statement of the 12th July 2019  sets  out  his
    case as it was put to the First-tier Tribunal. He explains that he  was
    a student at the time when he had applied for his Tier  4  visa  to  be
    renewed. It was refused and he engaged the services of someone whom  he
    believed to be a solicitor. That  lady  attended  his  appeal  hearing,
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ince,  and  the  appeal  was  allowed.
    Judge Ince's decision is dated the 2nd July 2010.  The  Appellant  then
    waited for the Secretary of State to issue him with  further  leave  to
    remain, as might be expected after a successful appeal.  The  Appellant
    states that he then heard nothing.  Weeks came and went. The  Appellant
    went to see his representative sometime in August 2010,  only  to  find
    that the firm had been closed down. He managed to track his 'solicitor'
    down, to another firm, and she told him that she had not heard from the
    Home Office.  For reasons which are unclear, the Appellant got  fed  up
    waiting and decided to make another  application,  lodged  in  February
    2011.   This  application  was  successful,  and  the   Appellant   was
    subsequently granted leave.


 6. The Secretary of State contested this  case.  The  Home  Office  record
    shows that on the 9th August 2010 the Home Office actioned the decision
    of Judge Ince and granted the Appellant further leave to remain,  valid
    until the 9th November 2010.   The record indicates that the  grant  of
    further leave was sent by recorded delivery to 'reps address Commercial
    House'. The records further show that the  Appellant's  representatives
    then chased the Home Office for a decision; they sent in passports  and
    asked them to be endorsed.  The Home Office, apparently accepting  that
    the original letter had not reached the Appellant, recorded  that  they
    sent a further copy of the grant, alongside the endorsed passports,  to
    the Appellant's new representative on the 26th October  2010.   It  was
    therefore the Respondent's position that the Appellant knew  full  well
    that he had been granted further leave, that he let  that  leave  lapse
    and that there was therefore a gap between the 9th  November  2010  and
    the 7th March 2011 when the next visa was issued.

 7.  The  factual  dispute  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal   therefore
    crystallised into this: had there been good service of the  2010  grant
    of further leave?   The legal relevance of that question is not clearly
    articulated in the First-tier Tribunal decision but before me Mr  Biggs
    explained the Appellant's argument as follows.   The  effect  of  Judge
    Ince's decision of the 2nd July 2010 was that the decision  on  whether
    to vary the Appellant's leave so as to extend it remained outstanding -
    the application in effect reverted back to the  Home  Office.  Until  a
    decision on that outstanding  application  was  reached,  and  formally
    served, the Appellant's leave was statutorily  extended  by  virtue  of
    section 3C(2)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.   This  means  that  when
    the Appellant made his further application in February 2011 this was in
    effect a variation of the outstanding application: s3C(5) applied.   It
    being accepted that the Appellant held  continuous  lawful  leave  from
    that day on, his case on 276B rests.

 8. How then did the First-tier Tribunal deal with that issue  of  fact  at
    the heart of the appeal? At paragraph 8  it  directs  itself  that  the
    burden of proof is on the Appellant. At paragraph 15 it specifies: "the
    Appellant has failed to show upon the balance of probabilities that  he
    was unaware of his leave having expired in November 2010".  By  way  of
    explanation as to why the Appellant had failed to discharge that burden
    the Tribunal makes reference to, and draws adverse inference from,  his
    prima facie discrepant claim that he has "no ties" to Pakistan with the
    fact that he in fact has a wife living there in a family home.

 9. I allow this appeal for one reason. That is that in so directing itself
    the Tribunal failed to apply the correct  burden  of  proof.   In  Syed
    (curtailment of leave - notice) [2013] UKUT  00144  IAC)  the  Tribunal
    held that the burden lies not on applicant to prove a negative ie prove
    that he did not receive notice, but rather it is on  the  Secretary  of
    State to prove the positive case, ie that he did:

         "the Secretary of State has to be able to prove that notice of such
         a decision was communicated to the person concerned, in  order  for
         it to be effective. Communication will be effective if  made  to  a
         person authorised to receive it on that person's behalf: see Hosier
         v Goodall [1962] 1 All E.R. 30; but the Secretary of  State  cannot
         rely upon deemed postal service".


10. It follows that any assessment made by the Tribunal of the totality  of
    the evidence was based on a misapprehension of where  the  burden  lay,
    and I cannot be satisfied that the decision would have  been  the  same
    but for that error of law.


11. Mr Biggs sought to persuade me that  having  reached  that  decision  I
    could simply allow the appeal without further ado.  I do not agree. The
    factual dispute, and the legal consequences that may from it, are now a
    matter that  is  most  appropriately  reconsidered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. It is not simply a matter of looking at the Home Office  GCID
    case-notes.  As Mr Biggs  himself  stressed,  it  requires  a  holistic
    assessment of the evidence. The Appellant's  own  evidence  about,  for
    instance, why he decided to make a further application  (or  variation)
    in  February  2011  will  also  be  relevant,  given  the  Respondent's
    assertion that there was good service.

12. I therefore remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for remaking de
    novo.





    Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside for error of
    law.


14. The decision in the appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal

15. There is no order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                  3rd February 2020
