
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06211/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2018                  |On 05 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                  ASRAF [U]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma of Counsel instructed by My Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clemes promulgated on 23 July 2018 in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal,
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 23  February  2018  refusing
    leave to remain in the UK, was dismissed on human rights grounds.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 2 February 1986.

3.   The early part of  the  Appellant's  immigration  history  has  been  a
    matter of dispute: e.g. see paragraph 2 of the Decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. He has variously claimed  to  have  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2001 or  2003,  but  this  is  seemingly  inconsistent  with
    apparent claims for asylum in Austria in 2005 and France in 2006.

4.   Be that as it may, the first record that  the  Respondent  acknowledges
    in respect of the Appellant's presence in the UK is an application  for
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules made in March  2008.  The
    application was refused on 9  January  2009.  The  Appellant  was  next
    encountered on  25  April  2014  working  illegally  in  a  restaurant.
    Following his arrest he made an application  for  asylum  on  25  April
    2014. His application was refused on 27 May  2014.  The  Appellant  was
    again encountered working illegally on 8 November 2014; he was detained
    but released the following day. Notwithstanding that he had no basis to
    remain in the United Kingdom he did not  leave,  and  made  no  further
    application to regularise his status until 16  November  2016  when  he
    made an application for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.

5.   The application of 16 November 2016 was based on his relationship  with
    Ms [SW] (d.o.b. [~] 1987), a British citizen. Ms [W] and the  Appellant
    underwent a nikkah marriage ceremony on 19 April 2015. It was stated in
    the application form that  this  was  the  date  from  which  they  had
    cohabited. At this date Ms [W] was  still  in  a  civil  marriage  with
    another man, her  divorce  not  being  granted  until  5  October  2015
    (Respondent's bundle A19). It was stated in the application  form  that
    Ms  [W]  was  expecting  the  couple's   child   (A30).   This   latter
    circumstance, and the fact that any  child  born  would  be  a  British
    citizen at birth, was given particular emphasis in  a  covering  letter
    dated 16 November 2016 from the Appellant's then  representatives  (B1-
    B4).

6.   The application was refused for reasons  set  out  in  a  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 23 February 2018.

7.   In  the  first  instance  the  Respondent  gave  consideration  to  the
    application under the so-called 'partner route' pursuant to Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules. It was considered that the Appellant did  not
    meet  the  'suitability'  requirements  "because  you  have   attempted
    deception in the information given in  your  application  claiming  you
    entered the UK as a child  and  have  been  present  since  2001".  The
    Respondent rejected this assertion - which was  not  supported  by  any
    evidence - on the basis that available information indicated claims for
    asylum had been made in Europe in 2005 and 2006.  The  application  was
    also refused with reference to the 'eligibility' requirements:  because
    the Appellant did not satisfy the definition of partner under GEN.1.2 -
    he was not legally married to Ms [W] and they had not  been  cohabiting
    for at least 2 years prior to the date of application; and  because  he
    was present in the UK in breach of immigration law.

8.   Even though the  Respondent  considered  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    satisfy  either  the  'suitability   or   'eligibility'   requirements,
    nonetheless consideration was given to paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM.
    It was considered that EX.1.(a) did not apply because the Appellant had
    not produced any evidence that he had a  child  in  the  UK.  It  would
    appear that the Respondent's decision-maker had  seen  no  evidence  to
    confirm the birth  of  the  child  indicated  to  be  expected  in  the
    application;  further,  it  is  be  noted  that  in  the   'exceptional
    circumstances' paragraphs of the RFRL it is stated that if a child  has
    been born there was in any event no evidence  provided  to  demonstrate
    the Appellant had a genuine parental relationship with  the  child.  (I
    pause to note that in support of the appeal the Appellant  included  in
    his appeal bundle a copy of a letter dated 31 October  2017  which  was
    said to be a covering letter sent to the Respondent enclosing a copy of
    the child's birth certificate and British passport, together with proof
    of posting, and a letter from a caseworker for his MP  indicating  that
    the Respondent had  confirmed  on  10  January  2018  receipt  of  such
    evidence.)

9.   The Respondent considered EX.1.(b) did not apply  because  it  was  not
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with his  partner;  however  no  clear  reasons  for  this
    conclusion are evident.

10.  The Appellant's application was also  refused  in  respect  of  private
    life with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules.  Further,  the
    Respondent  did  not  consider  that   there   were   any   exceptional
    circumstances to justify the grant of leave to remain outside the Rules

11.  The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

12.  Before the First-tier Tribunal,  amongst  other  things,  evidence  was
    produced to show that Ms [W] was delivered of a son, 'M', on 2 February
    2017, and that the Appellant and Ms [W] had undergone a civil  marriage
    ceremony on 3 July 2018 (just under 2 weeks prior to the hearing).

13.  The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out  in  the  Decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Clemes.

14.  The Judge found that the Appellant did not  satisfy  the  'suitability'
    requirements for substantially the same  reasons  relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent (Decision at paragraph 19). In respect of paragraph EX.1 the
    Judge reached the following conclusions:

         "I am satisfied that it is not unreasonable to expect [M] to  leave
         the UK with his parents and also - based on Ms [W]' own evidence  -
         that there would not be insurmountable obstacles  to  their  family
         life continuing outside the UK." (paragraph 22)

15.  The Judge  essentially  agreed  with  the  Respondent's  evaluation  in
    respect of paragraph 276ADE(1) (paragraph 24). The Judge  also  gave  a
    freestanding  consideration  to  Article  8  outside  the  Rules,   but
    concluded against Appellant (paragraphs 27-36).

16.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup on 7 September 2018.

17.  The Grounds of appeal set out three bases of challenge - which  it  may
    be seen overlap with each other to a considerable degree:

         (i)  Ground I - the balancing exercise as to reasonableness of  the
         Appellant's partner and child leaving the UK for  the  purposes  of
         EX.1, and the balancing exercise on  proportionality  "are  wrong".
         Little meaningful is  further  said  by  way  of  amplification  or
         articulation of this ground of challenge in  the  written  Grounds,
         and it appears to amount to no more than an assertion that  because
         of the status of the Appellant's wife and child as British citizens
         "it is expected from the Respondent to grant him leave to remain".

         (ii) Ground II - the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  identify  the
         best interests of the child. It is submitted that "at no  point  in
         the determination did  the  judge  identify  where  the  children's
         [sic.] best interests lay". Written submissions in the Grounds  are
         developed to the effect  that  the  child's  best  interests  would
         involve remaining in the UK particularly given the  nature  of  his
         citizenship,  and  that  otherwise  in  general  terms  it  is  not
         reasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave.

         (iii)    Ground III - the Tribunal failed to accord any  weight  to
         the child's British  citizenship.  This  ground  expressly  repeats
         paragraphs from the other grounds, and has no additional paragraphs
         of its own.

18.  The grant of permission to appeal, so far as  it  is  material,  is  in
    these terms:

         "It is submitted that the Judge erred  in  the  balancing  exercise
         between the reasonableness of expecting the appellant's partner and
         children [sic.] to leave the UK  and  the  proportionality  of  the
         decision. It is also submitted that the Tribunal failed to identify
         the best interests of the appellant's British citizen child.

         The first ground is a disagreement with the  Judge's  findings  and
         conclusions. Cogent reasons are provided in the  decision  to  show
         that the appellant could not meet the suitability  requirements  of
         Appendix FM. It follows that  EX.1  does  not  apply.  Reading  the
         decision as a whole it is clear that the Judge has  considered  the
         best interests of the child, including at [21] of the decision.

         However, it is arguable that, contrary to the Judge's findings,  it
         is not reasonable to expect a British citizen child  to  leave  the
         UK, particularly given the respondent's  current  policy  (February
         2018)."

19.  Perhaps in light of the observations in  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal, but in any event, before me Mr Sharma expressly indicated  that
    he did not seek to place any reliance upon Ground II.  He  acknowledged
    that  'best  interests'  had  been  addressed,  noting  in   particular
    paragraph 34 of the Decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  Accordingly,
    the focus was upon Grounds I and III.

20.  In my judgement Ground III adds nothing of substance to Ground  I.  Not
    only does it do no more than  repeat  the  earlier  paragraphs  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal, in its drafting it is essentially a disagreement  as
    to 'weight', and as such - absent a submission of perversity - does not
    constitute a pleading of an error of law.

21.  In substance Mr Sharma's argument amounted to  a  submission  that  the
    Judge had failed to have regard to either SF & others  (Guidance,  post
    2014 Act)  Albania  [2017]  UKUT  00120  (IAC),  and  the  Respondent's
    guidance in respect of cases where removal might impact upon a  British
    citizen child.

22.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  first  difficulty  that  this  submission
    encounters is that it is not apparent that either the case  of  SF  and
    others, or any relevant published guidance was brought to the attention
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

23.  Be that as it may, I note SF &  others  is  a  reported  case  for  the
    following principle, as summarised in the headnote:

         "Even in the absence of a "not in accordance with the  law"  ground
         of appeal, the Tribunal ought to  take  the  Secretary  of  State's
         guidance into account if it points clearly to a particular  outcome
         in the instant case. Only in that way can consistency  be  obtained
         between those cases that do, and those  cases  that  do  not,  come
         before the Tribunal."

24.  Further to this, the Grounds of Appeal cite various passages  from  the
    Respondent's guidance intended to reflect the decision of the  European
    Court of Justice in Zambrano to the effect that a decision-maker should
    not take a decision in relation to a parent of a British citizen  which
    would have the effect of forcing the British citizen to leave the EU.

25.  I note that the instant  case  would  not  involve  the  forcing  of  a
    British citizen child to leave the EU - or the  U.K.  This  is  because
    there is an option of the child  remaining  with  his  British  citizen
    mother. (cf. The concluding sentence at paragraph 34 - "The  respondent
    says that there is a choice (which is correct in real  terms)  for  the
    mother to make".)

26.  More particularly, and in any event it  is  trite  law  that  having  a
    British citizen child is not  a  trump  card  in  immigration  law.  It
    follows from this trite observation that the British citizen status  of
    an applicant or appellant's child is not in itself determinative of the
    issue of reasonableness. Indeed this is consistent with the wording  of
    both EX.1 and section 117B(6), wherein the relevant status of the child
    (either a  British  citizen  or  somebody  who  has  lived  in  the  UK
    continuously for at least 7  years)  is  only  the  precondition  to  a
    consideration of the question of reasonableness; necessarily  therefore
    British citizenship is not an answer to the question of reasonableness.

27.  In the instant case the Judge made a finding to the effect  that  there
    was nothing beyond the citizenship status of the child that established
    it would not be reasonable for him to  leave  in  the  company  of  his
    parents:

         "I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  nothing  about  this   family's
         circumstances which establish that it is not reasonable for him  to
         leave, other than  the  fact  that  he  can  hold  a  UK  passport"
         (paragraph 34)

         (See similarly at paragraph 35 - "The  factors  for  the  appellant
         are... all in the citizenship of Ms [W] and [M]".)

28.  In my judgement it is manifest  that  in  exploring  these  issues  and
    reaching his  decision  the  Judge  had  regard  to  the  'real  world'
    situation (cf. KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53).  The  possibility  of  the
    child having to leave the UK arose by reason of the Appellant having no
    basis to be here, against a background of what was   described  by  the
    Respondent's  Presenting  Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  -
    appropriately in my judgement - as a "very  poor"  immigration  history
    (paragraph 14), and so accepted by the Judge (paragraph 29)). The Judge
    made well-reasoned and sustainable findings - which ultimately have not
    been impugned  before  me  -  that  there  were  not  very  significant
    obstacles to integration into Bangladesh for the  Appellant  (paragraph
    24), and that there would not be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life continuing outside the UK (paragraph 22).

29.  In this latter regard  this  was  a  case  that  was  somewhat  unusual
    compared to many cases that  come  before  the  Tribunal  in  that  the
    British citizen partner  acknowledged  that  she  could  accompany  the
    Appellant to Bangladesh: see paragraphs 12 and 22.  The  issue  of  the
    reasonableness of the child leaving the UK to go to Bangladesh with his
    parents needed to be considered in that context - and was by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

30.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge has in substance posed and  answered  the
    relevant question identified by  Lewison  LJ  in  the  latter  part  of
    paragraph 58 of EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874,  (and  cited  with  approval  in  KO
    (Nigeria)):

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world. If one parent has no right  to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

31.  The Judge found in substance that it was reasonable to expect  both  Ms
    [W] and M to follow the Appellant to Bangladesh. In my  judgement  that
    was an evaluation open to the Judge on the available  evidence,  and  I
    can identify no material error in the approach taken  to  the  evidence
    and the applicable law.

32.  In particular, it was plain that the Judge was fully cognisant  of  M's
    status as a British citizen - indeed the Judge observed that ultimately
    it was the only factor of any substance.  Plainly  the  Judge  did  not
    overlook this circumstance. The Judge was not bound to treat  it  as  a
    'trump card', and did not err in failing so to do, or otherwise.

33.  In those circumstances I find that the Judge was entitled  to  conclude
    that section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act was not engaged.

34.  The Judge thereafter went on to consider proportionality under  Article
    8 taking into account all of the circumstances of the case  (paragraphs
    35 and 36) and reached a conclusion open to him on the evidence.

35.  For  the  avoidance  of  any  doubt  I  note  that  in  the  course  of
    submissions Mr Sharma suggested that the Judge was in error in  stating
    that Ms [W]  was  "fully  conversant  with  the  culture,  society  and
    religion in Bangladesh", seemingly on the basis that she had previously
    been married to a man from Pakistan (paragraph 22). It is of course  to
    be acknowledged that Pakistan and Bangladesh are no longer part of  the
    same country, and have not been so since Bangladesh's  independence  in
    1971. Nonetheless, they are not wholly dissimilar.  More  particularly,
    and in any event, the Judge's observations in this regard were pursuant
    to, and merely confirmatory of, Ms [W] own evidence to the effect  that
    she considered  she  would  be  able  to  accompany  the  Appellant  to
    Bangladesh. The Judge was entitled to conclude that Ms [W] had  offered
    an honest and informed opinion in this context. Accordingly  any  error
    in this regard is not remotely material because it does not  materially
    impact upon Ms [W]'s own evidence on the point.

36.  Mr Sharma also sought to criticise the Judge for stating  "there  is  a
    paucity of evidence about [M's] 'wider' family in  the  UK"  (paragraph
    34). In this context my attention  was  directed  to  passages  in  the
    witness statements of the Appellant (witness statement at paragraph 10,
    Appellant's bundle page 13), and Ms [W] (witness statement at paragraph
    6, Appellant's bundle page 16). Those passages are in  essentially  the
    same terms: "My wife has family in the UK. I therefore feel that I have
    strong family ties in the UK."; "I have family in the UK.  I  therefore
    feel that I have strong family ties in the UK.".

37.  I note that in making the reference at paragraph 34 to  a  "paucity  of
    evidence" the Judge stated that this was "As I have set out above".  In
    context this was to recall his observation at paragraph 21 -  "I  heard
    no detail at all about wider  family  involvement  other  than  oblique
    references to "family in the UK" with little to expand on who and where
    they were. The person who might have been expected to supply that  sort
    of account was Ms [W] but she did not." I can identify no error in this
    context or otherwise.

Notice of Decision

38.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    stands accordingly.

39.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

40.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


Signed:  Date: 3 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

