
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06328/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House Via Skype for Business  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2021                           |On 22 March 2021              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                Fehmida Begum
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, instructed by Rahman & Company
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, together with her husband Muhammad Zahoor Butt  appealed
    against a decision of the Secretary of State of 4 March  2019  refusing
    their applications for entry clearance  to  join  their  son  as  adult
    dependent relatives in the United Kingdom.

2.    Sadly,  after  the  hearing  before  the  judge  Mr  Butt   died   and
    consequently the appeal is  pursued  by  the  appellant  (as  I  should
    hereafter refer to Mrs Begum) alone.

3.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 1  January  1953.   The
    essence of her case, as set out by the judge  at  paragraph  4  of  her
    decision, was that she and  her  husband  were  unable  even  with  the
    practical and financial help of the  sponsor  to  obtain  the  required
    level of care in Pakistan because it is not available and/or  there  is
    no person reasonably able to provide that  care  there  or  it  is  not
    affordable.  Hence it was specifically argued that the requirements  of
    paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 of HC 395 were met.

4.   The judge set out the relevant provisions  of  Appendix  FM,  including
    paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 and  also  relevant  case  law,  including  Ribeli
    [2018] EWCA Civ 611.

5.   An issue before the judge was whether  the  appellants  (as  they  were
    before her) were the sponsor's parents.  She found that they were,  and
    there is no challenge to that finding.  As a consequence she found that
    the requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.1 were met.  She also found that
    the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.4  were  met  in  that   the
    appellants required long-term care due to illness and age.   There  was
    evidence that the appellant had experienced a recent car  accident  and
    also had mental health issues including schizophrenia.

6.   In her findings the judge noted that  the  appellants  said  that  they
    were able to access medical care but their day-to-day care was provided
    for by their sister-in-law who was due to move to  Spain  to  join  her
    husband and children.   The  appellant  was  not  mobile  and  required
    assistance with personal hygiene and her depression was due to the lack
    of family in Pakistan.  Her son's evidence before the  judge  was  that
    his mother's illness began when her sister moved to the United Kingdom,
    as one of his sister's twins had lived with his mother since birth.

7.   Reliance was placed on a  letter  by  Mudassar  Iqbal  confirming  that
    there were no care homes  in  the  appellants'  local  or  neighbouring
    areas.  As a consequence he said the appellants would have to move to a
    large city to access a care home and this would not be reasonable  from
    their perspective.  They relied on Mr Iqbal's statement where  he  said
    they would be easily coerced and abused in a care home.  Also as  there
    were no checks on care they would be open to abuse in  their  own  home
    with a personal carer.  He said that family closeness  was  crucial  to
    the appellants' recovery and therefore the only appropriate  people  to
    meet the daily needs of the couple were their family.

8.   The judge found that Mr Iqbal, who listed his qualifications as  school
    health and nutrition supervisor, was not able to comment on issues such
    as the impact on the appellants if they  were  required  to  move  from
    their  village  to  obtain  care  or  how  any  such  condition   might
    deteriorate without the physical presence of their family members.  She
    placed little to no weight on his  conclusions.   The  letter  did  not
    comply with paragraph 10 of the Practice Direction.

9.   She noted evidence of the appellants' sons that they  had  made  checks
    on the internet and through a network of friends  and/or  local  health
    officials in relation to care facilities in  Pakistan.   They  had  not
    been able to produce evidence of searches.  One son  said  he  did  not
    have them with him and the other son said his phone had been reset  and
    so the information might be on there but was not available at the  date
    of the hearing.  They stated their  mother  was  having  to  travel  to
    Jhelum from her village for her medical condition and  to  see  doctors
    and even that was 45 minutes to an hour away.   The  respondent  argued
    that inquiries should have been made further afield than  Jhelum.   The
    judge found that minimal inquiries had been  made  by  the  appellants'
    sons in relation to care facilities.  She noted that they were both  of
    the view that only they were able to provide care  for  the  appellants
    and she found that had they made the inquiries they  stated  they  did,
    they would have been able to provide evidence of those searches  today.



10.  The judge also considered a report of Uzma Moeen, an  academic  in  law
    and former senior lecturer in Pakistani law.  She said  in  her  report
    that she was not a medical  practitioner  but  a  country  expert  with
    direct knowledge and practical experience of living in  Pakistan.   She
    said she was able to comment factually on the matter as an  experienced
    academic and lawyer and due to her professional career as  head  of  an
    educational establishment in Lahore, her court  practice  and  personal
    experience.  The judge noted that reports she had provided to the  Home
    Office and  courts  were  reports  in  relation  to  risk  of  harm  or
    persecution and family/religious values in Pakistan and the  judge  was
    not aware of which particular personal experiences made Ms  Moeen  able
    to comment on the availability of care facilities for the appellants.

11.  She noted that Ms Moeen commented on the issue of lone elderly  couples
    and stated at paragraph 12 of her report  that  not  much  was  written
    about paid care facilities in Pakistan.  She spoke of the appellants as
    having no supportive familial network in  Pakistan.   The  judge  noted
    that she had been told by the appellants and their children  that  they
    were being looked after by Mrs Kausar her sister-in-law who was yet  to
    leave to Spain to join her spouse and that the appellant had a  sister,
    albeit one who looks after her own family in the same village where the
    appellants lived.  Her report spoke of the social stigma of care homes.
     Ms Moeen agreed, at  paragraph  17  of  her  report,  that  some  care
    facilities were available  in  Islamabad  and  Karachi.   She  came  to
    conclusions in the report about  their  suitability  and  the  training
    deficiency of private care providers in dealing with special healthcare
    issues, based on material from 2010.

12.  Ms Moeen acknowledged that there were a few tertiary care hospitals  in
    big cities for couples such as the appellants.  She spoke of  homes  in
    Karachi, Rawalpindi, Islamabad and Lahore.  She said that: "you do  not
    need much of an imagination to foresee the  misery  of  those  left  on
    their own in such institutions", and the judge noted that that was  not
    based on any actual knowledge or evidence but on inference alone.   She
    found that she could  not  rely  on  this  conclusion  as  it  was  not
    supported by the witness's CV or anything she had identified within her
    personal knowledge.  She  found  that  the  report  fell  foul  of  the
    requirements of paragraph 10.4 and 10.5 of the 2018 Practice Direction.
     She found that the conclusions and manner of writing the  report  were
    presented as if Ms Moeen was advocating on behalf of the appellants and
    was unclear at times about how the matters she concluded on were within
    her area of expertise.  The judge went on to note that at paragraphs 19
    to 20 Ms Moeen came to conclusions about the adequacy of  care  without
    any reference to how she was in possession of this knowledge to qualify
    these conclusions.  Ms Moeen had said that the cost  of  care  for  the
    appellants could be met by their sons.  There was  nothing  in  her  CV
    which indicated that Ms Moeen had a specialist knowledge of  care  home
    facilities, private care resources or a consideration of whether  there
    were facilities that, notwithstanding a lack  of  Regulation,  provided
    adequate care for the appellants' needs.  She had stated that she was a
    country expert, but the judge found that there was nothing to  indicate
    that she had any personal knowledge of care home or care  provision  to
    allow her to put herself forward as a country expert in  these  matters
    that were expanded on in the report.

13.  Ms Moeen had gone on in her report to assess the criminality  to  which
    the appellants might be subject.  The judge noted that she had not been
    told of any incidents that had occurred  or  had  been  feared  by  the
    appellants since their children began living abroad.  At  paragraph  34
    Ms Moeen spoke of the appellants as if they were already in the  United
    Kingdom which was not the case.  At paragraph 35 she said that  without
    their children they could not perform daily  matters,  yet  their  last
    child left for the United Kingdom in 2015.   Ms Moeen also mentioned  a
    Global Age Watch Index Report of October 2013 which  stated  that  just
    because the elderly resided with their parents it  did  not  mean  that
    their needs were met and that the state did  not  provide  an  adequate
    infrastructure for care of elderly relatives.  The judge noted the date
    of the report and that this was a case where  Ms  Moeen  had  expressly
    stated the sponsor would be able to pay for care in Pakistan.

14.  The judge went on to note that Ms Moeen mentioned state hospitals  that
    would be able to care for the appellants' mental health needs and  that
    the appellant might  not  be  able  to  access  medical  treatment,  in
    reliance on articles from 2004, 2006 and 2014.  The  judge  found  that
    she had researched source material that was not recent to come  to  her
    conclusions and with little objective consideration  of  matters  which
    might detract from her opinions as required by the Practice  Direction.
    In light of the judge's findings she concluded that  she  was  able  to
    place little weight on the conclusions about  the  inadequacy  of  care
    facilities for people such as the appellants in her report.

15.  The judge then went on to consider a report of Dr Halari which she  was
    asked to rely on to find that the appellant would not  have  her  needs
    met by a care home or carer in Pakistan.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    contents  of  the  report  referred  on  a  number  of  occasions   the
    conversations with  both  of  the  appellants'  sons.   She  noted  the
    information given by the appellants' sons to Dr  Halari  and  the  fact
    that the respondent took issue  with  the  report  and  the  amount  of
    contributions that the appellants' sons had had to its conclusions.

16.  In evidence before the judge, one of the  appellants'  sons  said  that
    their mother did 50% of the talking  in  her  40  minutes  to  an  hour
    appointment and the other son said his mother spoke to the  doctor  for
    five to ten minutes, he spoke for ten to fifteen minutes,  his  brother
    spoke for five to ten minutes and their mother also spoke for  five  to
    ten minutes.

17.  The judge concluded that Dr Halari had not commented on matters  within
    her own expertise when commenting on the ability of  the  appellant  to
    remain in a care home in Pakistan.  There was nothing in her  CV  which
    indicated she had any expert knowledge of the facilities  available  in
    Pakistan where care could be provided for  the  appellants'  day-to-day
    needs.  She noted the considerable time, as she put it, that Dr  Halari
    spent speaking to the appellants' sons as  evidenced  by  them  and  as
    recorded in her report.  She noted the  views  expressed  by  the  sons
    about the provision of care in Pakistan but did not see how  Dr  Halari
    had come to her own conclusions in relation to  those  matters.   As  a
    consequence she rejected Dr Halari's conclusions about the  ability  of
    the appellant to live in a care home or to be cared  for  in  Pakistan.
    She accepted Dr Halari's diagnosis that  the  appellant  was  suffering
    from moderate depression.  She noted also that  the  sister-in-law  who
    was currently looking after the appellants was yet to  leave  Pakistan,
    despite having made her application in February 2019.

18.  The judge went on to conclude, at paragraph 38 of  her  decision,  that
    in light of her findings above she found that the  appellants  had  not
    demonstrated  that  they  met  the  requirements  of  E-ECDR.2.5.   She
    accepted that they  suffered  from  the  medical  conditions  they  had
    described, but found that it had not been  demonstrated  that  adequate
    care could  not  be  provided  in  Pakistan,  with  the  practical  and
    financial support of the sponsor and their family.  She noted that  the
    sponsor was able to fund any day-to-day care that they  required.   She
    said that in line with Ribeli no reliable evidence had been provided by
    the appellants to demonstrate that there were inadequate carers or care
    homes in the vicinity of their home or in  Pakistan  which  would  meet
    their day-to-day needs, in light of her findings.  No evidence had been
    provided to her about the research undertaken by the sponsors who  said
    they researched in the locality  for  facilities  within  a  reasonable
    distance.

19.  At paragraph 39 the judge went on to observe  that  Ms  Moeen's  report
    showed that medical facilities for  both  physical  and  mental  health
    difficulties for the appellant's case for her moderate depression, were
    available in larger cities in Pakistan.  The appellants were  presently
    and for the foreseeable future being cared for by Mrs  Kausar  with  no
    evidence before the Tribunal in relation to when she was due  to  leave
    for Spain.  The appellant also had her sister in the same  village  and
    her family in the United Kingdom were able to visit and support her  as
    they had done.  She noted paragraph 70 of Ribeli and the choice made by
    the appellants' family to leave Pakistan, knowing that  the  appellants
    had medical difficulties.

20.  The judge went on to state, at paragraph 40 of her  decision,  that  in
    relation  to  both  appellants  she  did  not  find  that   exceptional
    circumstances existed leading to unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for
    them if their application was refused.  She found that the sponsor  had
    not  made  any  inquiries  into  private  healthcare  availability   or
    suitability which he was  able  to  evidence  before  her  today.   The
    primary evidence that she was able to rely on in terms of the existence
    of medical care was  in  Ms  Moeen's  report  although  the  judge  had
    rejected her assessment of the unsuitability  of  the  care  available.
    She noted that indeed Ms Moeen had accepted that the sponsor  was  able
    to pay for care for his parents in Pakistan.

21.  The judge then went  on  to  consider  proportionality  and  Article  8
    outside the Rules, and concluded that there would not be  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences for the appellants in her refusal of their claim.

22.  The appellants sought and were granted  permission  to  appeal  against
    the judge's decision, first  that  in  paragraph  40  she  had  applied
    additional requirements for the adult dependants and relative Rules  by
    conflating them with Article 8 outside the Rules; secondly she was  not
    entitled to reject parts of the evidence for reasons  set  out  in  the
    grounds.  The respondent put in a skeleton argument as a consequence of
    directions made on 28 October 2020.

23.  In his submissions Mr Briddock adopted and developed  the  points  made
    in the grounds of appeal.  As regards ground 1, the judge at  paragraph
    40 in imposing an exceptional circumstances  element  to  paragraph  E-
    ECDR.2.5 erred in that there  was  no  such  requirement  and  she  had
    conflated the test outside the Rules with the  requirement  within  the
    Rules.

24.  As regards ground 2, with regard to the evidence of  Mr  Iqbal,  though
    he had presented his letter as "expert opinion" it was  clear  that  he
    was actually a witness of fact.  He was a health  professional  in  the
    appellants' local area and personally knew and had  responsibility  for
    the appellant.  It was correct that the letter did not comply with  the
    Practice  Direction  but  the  judge   had   nevertheless   erroneously
    discounted  Mr  Iqbal's  direct  knowledge  of  the   appellants,   the
    availability of care in  their  local  area  and  the  care  system  in
    Pakistan generally.

25.  As regards the evidence of Ms  Moeen,  the  judge  had  considered  the
    report selectively.  Also she had erred in concluding that the  opinion
    was based on materials from 2003, 2006 and 2015, as  the  footnotes  to
    relevant passages included reports from 2011, 2015 and 2017.  Also  the
    judge had given no reasons for her finding  that  the  conclusions  and
    manner of writing of the report were  presented  as  if  Ms  Moeen  was
    advocating on behalf of the appellants.

26.  As regards the report of Dr Halari, the judge had  erred  in  referring
    back to paragraph 19 of her judgment, in that that was a brief sentence
    that they met the requirements of E-ECDR.2.1 and  it  was  unclear  how
    this related to Dr Halari's report.  In addition  the  judge  had  mis-
    recorded the evidence, in that it was true that one of the  appellants'
    sons had said their mother did 50% of the talking, but also  the  other
    son had said the doctor did "tests" on the appellant and was unable  to
    say how long these tests took.  Dr  Halari's  expertise  had  not  been
    challenged by the  respondent  at  the  hearing.   The  judge  was  not
    entitled to discount her report on the basis  of  how  long  the  first
    appellant and her sons talked at the interview with her.   Even  if  Dr
    Halari had strayed outside her expertise in what  she  said  about  the
    ability of the appellant to remain in a care home in Pakistan,  it  was
    an error of law to discount the entirety of her report  on  that  basis
    and the basis of how long the  appellant  and  her  sons  spoke  to  Dr
    Halari.

27.  Further the judge was not entitled to  discount  the  evidence  of  the
    appellants' sons for the reasons given.  In essence she had  discounted
    their evidence as they did not produce  documentary  evidence  for  the
    searches they had performed to find a carer  or  care  home  for  their
    parents.  They had however provided the evidence set  out  of  a  local
    health advisor, a country expert and their own evidence  of  what  they
    had done to find a carer for their mother.  They had not  claimed  that
    they could not find a carer but rather that the system in Pakistan  did
    not provide for criminal record checks  or  qualifications.   This  was
    supported by other evidence.  The judge was not  entitled  to  discount
    that evidence simply because the internet searches were  not  provided.
    The judge was not entitled to  reject  the  evidence  for  the  reasons
    given.

28.  In the respondent's skeleton argument, which was adopted by Mr  Walker,
    it was argued that the judge had done no more at paragraph 40 than  sum
    up her case and had already found at paragraph 39 that the requirements
    of the Rules were not met.

29.  As regards ground 2, this was no more  than  disagreement.   The  judge
    was entitled to treat Mr Iqbal's letters as an expert opinion  as  that
    was how he described them.  In the alternative he could not properly be
    described as a  health  professional.   He  was  a  school  health  and
    nutritional supervisor and the judge was therefore entitled to find  he
    was not in a position to provide an objective and reasoned  opinion  on
    the availability of care for the elderly in his local area.

30.  As regards Ms Moeen's report, the judge  was  entitled  to  reject  it,
    having noted clear flaws in the report,  including  the  fact  that  it
    appeared to be based on the fact that the appellants were in the United
    Kingdom and being returned  to  a  country  where  they  had  not  been
    receiving treatment and had no family, which was clearly not the  case.
    The judge was entitled to reject a report where it  appeared  to  stray
    into advocacy, as the judge noted it clearly did in its use  of  overly
    emotive  terminology.   Nor  was  the  availability   of   medical   or
    residential care in Pakistan something within the expert's claimed area
    of expertise in her CV.  It was open to the judge at  paragraph  36  of
    her  decision  to  find  that  Dr  Halari  had  no  expertise  in   the
    availability of care facilities  in  Pakistan,  not  that  she  had  no
    expertise to diagnose medical  conditions,  which  in  fact  the  judge
    accepted.  It was also open to  the  judge  to  reject  oral  testimony
    unsupported by any objective supporting  evidence  that  the  UK  based
    sponsors had undertaken their own research as  to  care  facilities  in
    Pakistan.

31.  Mr Walker adopted the skeleton.  He did not have the reports  in  front
    of him but he commented that the judge seemed to be overly critical  of
    Mr Iqbal's report when it was quite clear that he was a witness and not
    an expert and also with regard to Ms Moeen's report it was a hard  line
    to take in respect of a witness who was characterised as an expert.

32.  Mr Briddock had no further points to make.

33.  I reserved my decision.


Discussion

Ground 1

34.  I do not consider that the judge can properly be said to have erred  in
    law with respect to the issue raised in ground 1.  As was  pointed  out
    in the respondent's skeleton argument,  she  had  already  reached  her
    conclusion on whether the appellants had met  the  requirements  of  E-
    ECDR.2.5 in the first sentence of paragraph 38, expressly  basing  this
    in light of her above findings.  There is no indication  that  at  that
    point of her decision she was applying a further test to the  existence
    of exceptional circumstances, and clearly it was a mistake to do so  at
    paragraph 40.  But in my view  she  had  by  then  already  come  to  a
    reasoned conclusion on the  issues  and  as  a  consequence  I  do  not
    consider that she can be said to have materially erred in law  in  what
    she said in paragraph 40 of her decision.

Ground 2

35.  With regard to the report of Mr Iqbal, as he presented  his  letter  as
    being a "expert opinion", it was fully open to the  judge  to  conclude
    that that was how  his  evidence  was  put  forward,  rather  than  the
    contention made on the appellants' behalf that he was  clearly  only  a
    witness of fact.  He listed his qualifications as a school  health  and
    nutrition supervisor, and as such it was open to the judge to find that
    he could not comment on issues such as the impact on the appellants  if
    they were required to move from their village to  obtain  care  or  how
    their conditions might deteriorate without  the  physical  presence  of
    their family members.  She rightly observed that the letter of Mr Iqbal
    did not comply with the requirements of paragraph 10  of  the  Practice
    Direction.  The judge placed little to no weight  on  his  conclusions.
    The fact that, as is argued in the grounds of appeal,  Mr  Iqbal  is  a
    health professional in the appellants' local area and personally  knows
    and has responsibility for  them,  did  not  preclude  the  judge  from
    finding as she did.  The fact that he is in the broadest sense a health
    professional did not preclude  her  from  concluding  that,  given  the
    nature of his qualifications as set out by him,  he  was  not  able  to
    comment on the matters she referred to in her decision at paragraph 24,
    ie  the impact of (sic) the appellants if they were  required  to  move
    from their village to obtain  care   or  how  any  such  condition  may
    deteriorate without the physical presence of their family members.

36.  I also consider that it was open to the judge to be  concerned  at  the
    absence of evidence of searches  made  by  the  appellants'  sons  with
    regard to care facilities in Pakistan.  It is  of  course  true  as  Mr
    Briddock pointed out that the evidence that the judge had before him in
    the form of the reports was evidence obtained by them, but the evidence
    that they said existed in this regard they did not have with them,  and
    it was open to the judge to find that as she  said,  minimal  inquiries
    were made by them in relation to care facilities and that if  they  had
    made the inquiries they stated they would have  been  able  to  provide
    evidence of those searches at the hearing.

37.  With regard to the report of Ms Moeen, again I consider it was open  to
    the judge to conclude that as she is an academic and a  lawyer  it  was
    not within her expertise to comment on such matters as the availability
    of care facilities for people such as the appellants.  The judge  noted
    that the reports she had previously provided relate to risk of harm  or
    persecution and family/religious values in Pakistan  and  she  had  not
    shown what particular personal experiences she had had which  made  her
    able to comment on the availability of care facilities.  She  also,  as
    the judge noted, erred in that she spoke of the appellants as  if  they
    were  already  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  the  assessment  of  the
    criminality the appellants might be subject to had no foundation in the
    evidence that had been provided in that no incidents had been  referred
    to or had been feared by the appellants since their children  began  to
    live abroad.  It was also relevant to  note  that  she  had  said  that
    without their children the appellants could not perform  daily  matters
    and yet their last child left for the United Kingdom in 2015.   It  was
    relevant also to note  that  she  agreed  that  there  were  some  care
    facilities available in Islamabad and Karachi  and  that  the  sponsors
    were able to pay for the appellants' care.  I also consider it was open
    to the judge to regard parts of the evidence of Ms Moeen as essentially
    advocacy.  Though the matter was not expressly tied in by the judge,  I
    consider that her  conclusion  in  that  regard  at  paragraph  28  was
    justified with regard to what was quoted at paragraph 28 where Ms Moeen
    stated "you do not need much of an imagination to foresee the misery of
    those left on their own in such institutions"  in the  absence  of  any
    knowledge or evidence and on the basis of inference alone.

38.  It was also open to the judge in my view with regard to the  report  of
    Dr Halari to conclude that there was nothing in  her  CV  which  showed
    that she had any  expert  knowledge  of  the  facilities  available  in
    Pakistan where care could be provided for  the  appellants'  day-to-day
    needs.  The judge accepted the evidence  given  by  Dr  Halari  in  the
    context of her specific  qualifications  as  being  a  doctor  and  her
    diagnoses were accepted.  It was relevant to bear in mind the extent of
    the contribution  in  the  meeting  with  Dr  Halari  provided  by  the
    appellants' sons.

39.  As a consequence, and bearing in mind also  the  fact  the  judge  took
    into account that Mrs Kausar was still in Pakistan  and  looking  after
    the appellants, the conclusions set out at paragraphs 38 and 39 of  the
    decision were open to the judge, and also the conclusions at paragraphs
    40-42 .  Of course there has been a change  of  circumstances  in  that
    sadly the appellant is now on her own,  but  I  have  to  consider  the
    judge's decision in the context of the evidence and  the  circumstances
    before her.  It may well be that the relevant  circumstances  have  now
    changed to the extent that as a consequence at  some  point  a  further
    application may become appropriate.  But as matters  stand  I  consider
    that the judge has not been shown to have erred in law.

40.  This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 17 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
