
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/06869/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                  |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                  |Promulgated                         |
|On 28 April 2017                  |             On 3 May 2017          |
|                                  |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                             BUKOLA ADIJAT LAWAL
                        (ANONYMITYDIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:        Ms K Stein (counsel) instructed by Hamilton Burns
WS
For the Respondent:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. No anonymity direction was made previously in respect of this  Appellant.
Having considered all the circumstances and evidence I do  not  consider  it
necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Blair promulgated on 24 October  2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.




Background


3. The Appellant was born on 26 June 1983 and is a national of  Nigeria.  On
11 September 2015 the respondent refused  the  appellant's  application  for
leave to remain in the UK on article 8 ECHR grounds.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Blair ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 22 March 2017 Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Chalkley gave permission to appeal stating

      There may be some merit in the suggestion that  the  First-tier  Judge
      erred in failing to recognise that at the date of hearing  the  oldest
      child was aged seven at the date of hearing, but I hope that I do  not
      raise the appellant hopes to high, because on  closer  examination  by
      the Upper Tribunal this may be found  not  to  be  material.  I  grant
      permission on ground one  only;  ground  2  is  nothing  more  than  a
      disagreement with the decision.

The Hearing

6. (a) For the appellant, Ms Stein moved the grounds of appeal. She told  me
that between [22] and [24] the Judge considers the law and then carries  out
a balancing exercise from [48] onwards. She drew my attention [61]  to  [63]
and told me that it is there that the Judge makes a material error  of  law.
Ms Stein reminded me of the terms of  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. She told me that between [61]  &  [63]  the
Judge finds that, by the  date  of  the  hearing,  one  of  the  appellant's
children has lived in the UK for more than seven years.  She  told  me  that
that child is therefore a qualifying child and the appellant  benefits  from
the provisions of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

(b) Ms Stein referred me to R (on  the  application  of  MA  (Pakistan)  and
Others) v Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  and  Another
[2016] EWCA Civ 705. She told me that the Judge had applied the  wrong  test
in law before reaching his conclusion, and has placed undue emphasis on  the
public interest in removal in carrying out his balancing exercise. She  told
me that the Judge should, but did not, ask whether or not it  is  reasonable
for a qualifying child to leave the UK.

(c) Ms Stein told me that if the two-part test set out  in  section  117B(6)
of the 2002 Act had been applied the outcome of this appeal could have  been
different. She told me that the decision is unsafe because it is tainted  by
material error of law. She urged me to set the decision aside.

7. For the respondent, Mr Govan told me that the decision does  not  contain
any errors, material or otherwise. He took me to the grounds of  appeal  and
explained  that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  either
appendix FM or paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  rules.  He  told  me  that  the
appellant could not benefit from EX.1 because the Judge finds that she  does
not  meet  the  suitability  requirements  and  because,  at  the  date   of
application, the appellant's oldest child had been in the UK for  less  than
seven years.

(b) Mr Govan relied on the case of Dube  (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  00090
(IAC). He told me that although the Judge does not cite section  117B(6)  in
the decision, between [61] and  [76]  of  the  decision  he  carries  out  a
careful analysis of all the factors contained  within  section  117B(6)  and
carries out a detailed consideration of the best interests of the children

(c) Mr Govan urged me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

8. The grounds of appeal relying on paragraph EX.1 of appendix  FM  as  well
as section 117B6 of the  2002  Act.  The  focus  in  this  case  is  on  the
appellant's oldest child who was born in the UK and has only ever  lived  in
the UK. Her seventh birthday fell after the date of application  but  before
the date of appeal hearing.

9. Paragraph EX1 sets out the criteria to be applied  in  assessing  whether
to grant leave to a family member on the basis of their family life  with  a
child in the UK. The  criteria  reflect  the  duty  in  section  55  of  the
Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to have regard to the need  to
safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are in the  UK.  Paragraph
EX.1 says

      EX.1 This paragraph applies if
      (a)  (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
      relationship with a child who-
      (aa) is under the age of 18 years;
      (bb) is in the UK;
      (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK continuously  for  at
      least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of application; and
      (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK;

10. Because the appellant's daughter's seventh birthday fell after the  date
of application, paragraph EX.1 cannot apply. In any event,  there  is  merit
in Mr Govan's submission that because the Judge  finds  that  the  appellant
does not meet the suitability requirements of appendix FM, and  because  the
Immigration Rules are progressive, paragraph EX.1 cannot be  considered.  Ms
Stein is correct to focus her submissions on section  117B(6)  of  the  2002
Act.

11. By virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means  a  person  who  is
under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British citizen, or (b) has  lived  in
the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years  or  more.   If  a
child is a qualifying child for the purposes of section  117B  of  the  2002
Act as amended, the issue will generally be whether  it  is  not  reasonable
for that child to return to the country of origin under  scrutiny.  Although
R(on the application  of  Osanwemwenze)  v  SSHD  2014  EWHC  1563  was  not
specifically concerned with section 117B it has some relevance in  terms  of
the reasonableness of a child leaving the UK. In that case,  the  Claimant's
14-year-old stepson from Nigeria had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  more
than 7 years and had leave to remain in his own  right.  It  was  held  that
this was an important  but  not  an  overriding  consideration  and  it  was
reasonable  to  expect  the  Claimant's  family  including  the  stepson  to
relocate to Nigeria. The parents had experienced life there  into  adulthood
and would be able to provide for the children and help them to reintegrate.

12.  Section  117B(6)  is  in  two  parts  which  are  conjunctive.  Section
117B(6)(a) weighs in favour of the Appellant  because  it  is  not  disputed
that  she  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  paternal  relationship  with  a
qualifying child. It is Section 117B(6)(b) which is  determinative  of  this
case. Is it reasonable to expect the appellant's oldest  daughter  to  leave
the UK?

13. Between [22] and [32] the Judge takes correct  guidance  in  law  before
moving on to make his findings of fact. At [31] the  Judge  reminds  himself
that he must consider the public interest considerations in  section  117A-D
of the 2002 Act. Between [61] & [63] the Judge clearly sets out that one  of
the appellant's children has lived in the UK for more than seven  years.  He
does not then say that the child is a qualifying child, but he  makes  clear
reference to section 117 of the 2002 Act in its  entirety  and  makes  clear
and deliberate finding that one of the appellant's  children  has  lived  in
the UK for more than seven years.

14. Between [64]  and  [76]  the  Judge  carries  out  a  careful  analysis,
balancing the evidence in relation  to  all  of  the  appellant's  children,
including the qualifying child. There is no criticism of the  Judge's  fact-
finding. All that is suggested is that the Judge has failed to  ask  himself
whether it is reasonable for the qualifying child to leave the UK.

15. In Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) it was held  that  it  is
not an error of law to fail to refer to ss.117A-117D considerations  if  the
Judge has applied the test he or she was supposed to apply according to  its
terms; what matters is substance, not form.

16. Between [64]  and  [76]  the  Judge  considers  the  language  that  the
appellant's  children  speak;  the  availability   of   education   to   the
appellant's children in Nigeria; the support available  to  the  appellant's
children  from  their  parents  if  removed  from  the  UK;  the  degree  of
disruption to the appellant's children if they are removed from the UK,  and
the impact of losing primary school friends  and  having  to  establish  new
friendships in another country.  His  conclusion  is  that  the  appellant's
children, including the qualifying child, have  the  benefit  of  youth  and
resilience and are both adaptable and young  enough  to  remain  focused  on
their parents. The Judge finds that education and support are  available  to
the appellant's children in Nigeria.

17. In carrying out that assessment  the  Judge  has  manifestly  considered
whether it is reasonable for the qualifying child to be  required  to  leave
the UK. He reaches the conclusion that it is  reasonable,  after  separating
the interests of the child from the conduct and immigration history  of  her
parents.

18. In Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803 it was held that given the statement  in
section 117C(6) that the  public  interest  "required"  deportation  in  the
absence of very compelling circumstances, over and above those described  in
Exceptions 1 and 2, it was not open to the court or tribunal  to  hold  that
deportation was not required  in  such  circumstances.  The  same  reasoning
applied to section 117B(6) which stipulated when removal was not required.

19. The evidence placed before the  First-tier  tribunal  is  found  in  the
witness  statements  of  the  appellant  and  her  husband.  Those   witness
statements focus almost exclusively on the circumstances of this  family  in
the UK. The statements say very little  about  what  awaits  the  qualifying
child on return to Nigeria. What is contained in the  witness  statement  is
reflected in the Judge's findings of fact concerning  the  children  of  the
appellant. What is said in the  appellant's  witness  statement  amounts  to
little more than declaring that her children are settled in the UK and  that
removal would cause a temporary period of upheaval.

20.  The  appellant's  partner's  witness  statement  sets   out   his   own
immigration  history,  the  development  of  his   relationship   with   the
appellant, and that he is  the  father  of  the  appellant's  children.  The
appellant's partner's witness statement does not address whether or  not  it
is reasonable for the qualifying child to leave the UK.

21. The evidence led before the first-tier was not  evidence  from  which  a
conclusion can be drawn that it is not reasonable for the  qualifying  child
to leave the UK. The Judge can only make  findings  of  fact  based  on  the
evidence placed before him. It is to the Judges credit that he  carried  out
such a detailed analysis  of  the  impact  of  removal  on  the  appellant's
children, including the qualifying child, between [60] and [76].

22. In R (on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v  Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  it  was
held (notwithstanding reservations) that when  considering  whether  it  was
reasonable to remove a child from the UK under  rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
Immigration Rules and section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002, a court or tribunal should not simply focus  on  the  child
but  should  have  regard  to  the  wider  public  interest  considerations,
including the conduct and immigration history of the parents.  It  was  also
confirmed however that if section 117B(6) applies  then  "there  can  be  no
doubt that section 117B(6) must be read as  a  self-contained  provision  in
the  sense  that  Parliament  has  stipulated  that  where  the   conditions
specified in the sub-section are satisfied, the  public  interest  will  not
justify removal."

23.   In Zoumbas v SSHD UKSC it was held  that there was  no  "irrationality
in the conclusion that it was in the children's best interests  to  go  with
their parents to the  Republic  of  Congo.  No  doubt  it  would  have  been
possible to have stated that, other things being equal, it was in  the  best
interests of the children that they and their parents stayed in  the  United
Kingdom so  that  they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as  health  care  and
education which the decision-maker recognised might be of a higher  standard
than would be available in the Congo. But other things were not equal.  They
were not British citizens. They had no right to future education and  health
care in this country. They were part of  a  close-knit  family  with  highly
educated parents and were of an age when their emotional  needs  could  only
be fully met within the immediate  family  unit.  Such  integration  as  had
occurred into United Kingdom society would have been  predominantly  in  the
context  of  that  family  unit.  Most  significantly,  the   decision-maker
concluded that they could be removed to the Republic of Congo  in  the  care
of their parents without serious detriment to their well-being".

24. The Judge manifestly takes account of section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.
There is no error in the Judge's interpretation of section  117B(6)  of  the
2002 Act. It is clear from a fair reading of the decision that the Judge  is
mindful of the entire terms of section 117B of the 2002  Act  when  carrying
out the proportionality balancing exercise required in this case.

25.  In AA v Upper Tribunal (Asylum and Immigration Chamber) [2013] CSIH  88
it was held that a Claimant child's British  nationality  was  not  a  trump
card. It was necessary to take account  of  the  whole  circumstances  which
included the availability to the child of family life with  parents  in  one
of their countries of  origin,  and  the  extent  to  which  the  Claimant's
immigration history involved dishonesty. In AF v SSHD 2013 CSIH  88  it  was
re-iterated that nationality is  not  a  trump  card  and  the  tribunal  is
required to take into account the full circumstances.

26. The Judge takes account of the impact that removal of the  appellant  is
likely to have on this family. He clearly identifies the crucial aspects  of
the established family  and  private  life  enjoyed  by  the  appellant  and
carries out a well-reasoned proportionality balancing exercise  informed  by
s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act  and  by  s.55  of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009.  The Judge  clearly  applies  the  correct  test,  and
answers the reasonableness question set out in s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

27. The Judge draws those findings of fact to a conclusion by  applying  the
correct test in law. The Judge has regard to part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. That  is  the  correct  test  in  law.  The
decision contains sufficient findings of  fact  to  support  the  conclusion
that the Judge comes to.  The  correct  test  in  law  has  manifestly  been
applied.

28.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

29. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision when read as a whole, sets  out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.





CONCLUSION

30. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

31. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date 1 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



