
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/06025/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On January 22, 2019                  |On February 12, 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                 Phyllis [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  entry clearance officer - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Sponsor, Mr Osunde
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of the United States  of  America  and  she
    applied for entry clearance as  a  spouse  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  respondent  refused  her  application  in  a
    decision dated May 9, 2018 on  the  basis  he  was  not  satisfied  the
    appellant and sponsor were in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.
    The respondent also concluded the sponsor was not employed  as  claimed
    and the appellant could  therefore  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 2. Grounds of appeal were lodged by the appellant under Section  82(1)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on February 27, 2018.

 3. Her appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Samimi  on
    September 26, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on October 5, 2018 her
    appeal was refused.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought on October 25, 2018 and  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Doyle granted permission to appeal on November  12,
    2018 on the basis it was arguable the Judge erred by not undertaking  a
    freestanding Article 8 assessment.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 5. Mr Bates, on behalf of the respondent,  accepted  that  the  Judge  had
    dealt with Article 8 briefly.  The  only  reference  to  an  Article  8
    assessment was contained in paragraph 8 in which the Judge had  stated,
    "I find that the appellant's continued separation from the  sponsor  in
    the United Kingdom does constitute a violation of Article  8  of  ECHR,
    however there are no  exceptional  circumstances  in  this  case".   He
    accepted the Judge gave no reasons and the Judge had not considered any
    of the medical issues that had been  raised  in  the  papers.   In  the
    circumstances he accepted there was a material error in law.

    FINDINGS

 6. Having considered the grounds of appeal, the grant of permission and Mr
    Bates's submissions I am satisfied there was  an  error  in  law.   The
    Judge  gave  no  reasons  for  concluding  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances in the case.  This was a marriage  of  some  eight  years
    standing and there were existing medical issues.  It was incumbent upon
    the Judge to  consider  those  factors  and  if  ultimately  the  Judge
    concluded there were no compelling circumstances to  allow  the  appeal
    under Article 8 then such a finding  could  have  been  made.   In  the
    absence of any reasons I find there is a material error in law.

 7. In view of the fact there are no findings made on this issue I feel the
    only option is to remit this matter back to the First-tier Tribunal and
    I remit the matter under Section 12(1) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 to be listed before a Judge other  than  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Samimi.

Notice of Decision

There is an error in law.  I set aside the original  decision  and  I  remit
the matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  Section  12  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date     08/02/2019
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
