
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06829/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2017                            |On 8 January 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  master GC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Makol, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   At the centre of concern  in  this  appeal  is  the  situation  of  the
    appellant who is a citizen of Ghana aged 7.  In a decision  sent  on  5
    July 2016 First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Sullivan  had  dismissed  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent  dated  1  February  2016
    refusing to grant him entry clearance  as  a  dependent  child  of  the
    sponsor, his mother.  However, in a  decision  dated  13  October  2017
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge (DUTJ) Chapman set aside  Judge  Sullivan's
    decision for legal error.   DUTJ  Chapman  found  that  the  judge  has
    wrongly approached assessment of the accommodation requirement  of  the
    Rules (by looking at the date  of  application  and  decision  and  not
    asking if such accommodation would be available  on  arrival)  and  had
    wrongly approached the issue of sole responsibility.

2.   The case comes before me in order for the decision on appeal to be  re-
    made.  I received further evidence from the appellant in  the  form  of
    printouts of a number of Whats App messages between the sponsor and the
    appellant's school teacher being dated between 20 May 2016 and February
    2017.

3.   I heard concise submissions from the representatives.   Mr  Makol  said
    that the evidence showed that the sponsor had direct contact  with  one
    of  the  appellant's  teachers  and  that  this  fact   explained   the
    respondent's concern  about  different  phone  numbers.   The  evidence
    clearly established that  the  sponsor  had  sole  responsibility.   As
    regards accommodation, the sponsor  had  recently  (in  December  2016)
    moved accommodation again to a 3-bedroomed house.  Mr Pal  pointed  out
    that the majority of the sponsor's evidence relating to her exercise of
    parental functions in relation to the appellant was post-decision.

My Decision

4.   Whilst the decision of the FtT Judge has been set  aside  for  material
    error, there is no challenge to a  number  of  findings  of  fact  made
    therein.  These include: that  the  sponsor  has  sufficient  funds  to
    support the appellant; that the sponsor has taken an active interest in
    the appellant's education; that she had visited her son in Ghana  on  a
    yearly basis and also maintains contact with  him  by  telephone;  that
    there is family  life  between  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  (see
    paragraph 12 of DUTJ Chapman's decision).  At paragraph 14 DUTJ Chapman
    held that "... there were no issues about the sponsor's income and  her
    ability to support the appellant including  the  payment  of  rent  for
    suitable accommodation for both of them".

5.   In light of these preserved positive findings,  DUTJ  Chapman  directed
    that the further hearing be confined to two issues:  accommodation  and
    sole responsibility.

Accommodation

6.   At the date of application the accommodation in contemplation  for  the
    appellant was an address in Raleigh Road.  However the sponsor did  not
    provide evidence to show that was available or suitable  accommodation.
    By the time of the hearing before the FtT Judge the sponsor had  moved.
    It was the  sponsor's  evidence  that  although  there  was  a  tenancy
    agreement dated 2 October 2015 for the Raleigh  Road  address  she  had
    never moved in.  the sponsor sought to rely on accommodation in another
    part of Wembley.  She produced a tenancy agreement  dated  31  December
    2016.   However  she  did  not  produce  a  letter  from  her  landlord
    permitting the sponsor to live in this different accommodation with the
    appellant and there was no report as to the occupancy  or  adequacy  of
    accommodation there.  The FtT noted  that  there  was  no  evidence  of
    current payment of rent into any recent bank account.  The FtT  Judge's
    apparent reliance on correct payment of rent was properly found by DUTJ
    Chapman to wrongly focus on the situation at the date of hearing rather
    the date of arrival of the appellant.   However,  it  remains  that  to
    satisfy this requirement an appellant must  show  not  just  that  such
    accommodation is available but that it is suitable.  The appellant  has
    failed to provide evidence showing that.  It is  possible  that  in  so
    failing the sponsor has been poorly served by  those  representing  her
    who may have been able to obtain satisfactory evidence; but she has not
    done so and the burden of establishing suitable accommodation rests  on
    her.   The  appellant's  appeal  fails  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297 of the Rules.

Sole Responsibility

7.   I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  appellant  has  shown  he  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e).  The  sponsor  stated  in  the  EC
    application that a previous application had been  refused  because  the
    ECO was not  satisfied  the  father  was  no  longer  involved  in  the
    appellant's life.  It was stated that  although  the  father  had  been
    involved in the appellant's life before the sponsor came to the UK  (in
    2011), "the father is with his wife in Obvasi", an area some 200  miles
    away from where the appellant had gone to live with his aunt.   In  the
    refusal decision, among the reasons for rejecting  sole  responsibility
    were that "you have not provided any evidence  of  the  whereabouts  of
    your father or that he consents to your travel and  settlement  in  the
    UK".  Even if not strictly correct to say the appellant had provide  no
    evidence of the father's whereabouts, it was correct  that  no  address
    had been given and no documentary evidence had been received  from  the
    father giving his consent to his son leaving Ghana to go live with  his
    mother.  This absence of evidence was not remedied before the FtT Judge
    nor before DUTJ Chapman.  In my assessment the appellant is  unable  to
    establish that his mother has sole responsibility  in  the  absence  of
    such  evidence  in  satisfactory  form.   For  this  reason  alone  the
    appellant cannot meet paragraph 297 of the Rules.

8.   For the above  reasons  the  decision  I  re-make  is  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal.

9.   I would go on to observe, however, that I would not  exclude  that  the
    appellant might be able  to  succeed  if  his  sponsor  makes  a  fresh
    application providing he produces (1)  satisfactory  evidence  to  show
    that the appellant's father no longer plays any role in  his  life  and
    that he gives his consent to the appellant going abroad  to  live  with
    his mother; and (2) satisfactory  evidence  that  the  appellant's  new
    carer (Ms Ofei) who apparently also lives  in  the  same  area  as  the
    appellant's father is not sharing responsibility for bringing  up[  the
    appellant.  The evidence indicates that the appellant began living with
    Ms Ofei, a friend of the sponsor, in  March  2016.   Ms  Ofei  is  also
    identified in a number of the WhatsApp message printouts.  For the  FtT
    Judge the fact that if there is a problem at  school, the school  staff
    contact Ms Ofei was "indicative of Ms Ofei sharing  responsibility  for
    the  appellant".   That,  as  DUTJ  Chapman  recognised,  betrayed   an
    erroneous approach to the issue of sole responsibility, one failing  to
    consider the range of relevant factors identified in  TD  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049; nevertheless the FtT Judge properly noted a dearth  of  evidence
    about the new arrangement - "no witness statement from Ms Ofei, nothing
    to show the circumstances in which the appellant  is  currently  living
    and no evidence to confirm that the appellant ...  cannot  continue  to
    live with her safely or  that  he  cannot  continue  with  his  current
    education.  All the sponsor said was that Ms Ofei is  a  pensioner  and
    that she promised to return the appellant after one year".  Despite the
    observed lacuna in the evidence, the sponsor has not  produced  further
    evidence for the purposes of  the  hearing  before  me.   Had  it  been
    material to my decision I would have gone on to find that this lack  of
    evidence about the circumstances of the new caring  arrangement  was  a
    further reason to find that sole responsibility  on  the  part  of  the
    sponsor had not been established.  But if the sponsor chooses to make a
    fresh application to the ECO she will have an  opportunity  to  provide
    further and better evidence about the precise terms of the  arrangement
    with Ms Ofei and what it discloses as regards whether she (the sponsor)
    exercises control and  direction  over  major  decision  regarding  the
    appellant's life.

10.  To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT Judge has already been set aside  for  material
         error of law.


    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                               Date: 5 January 2018

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
