
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06482/2015
                                                               HU/06486/2015
                                                               HU/06487/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 June 2017                               |On 11 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                    1) SK
                                    2) KS
                                    3) HS
                           (Anonymity orders made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants
herein are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall
directly or indirectly identify the appellants.  Failure to comply with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms V Dirie, instructed by G Singh Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     (Delivered orally on 29 June 2017)

Introduction

 1. The appellants are citizens of India.  The first and  third  appellants
    are husband and wife, and parents to the second appellant (born in  the
    United Kingdom in February 2016).  On 24 July 2015, the first appellant
    made an application for leave to remain (a human  rights  claim)  which
    was refused on 9 September 2015.  The  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    letter specifies that it relates to all three appellants.

Decision and Discussion on Error of Law

 2. The central, albeit not the only, issue before the First-tier  Tribunal
    was the legal and factual consequences of  second  appellant's  medical
    problems, which were summarised  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  -  with
    reference to evidence from Dr Sanghavi - in the following terms:

         "[20] [the  second  appellant]  is  suffering  from  an  apparently
         incurable condition which is described as parenchymal  haemorrhagic
         infarct in the peri natal period  which  has  led  to  [the  second
         appellant] having  increasing  frequent  seizures  [such  that]  he
         requires full-time supervision ... ongoing support."

 3. The primary contention of the appellants,  both  to  the  Secretary  of
    State and before the First-tier Tribunal, was that requiring the second
    appellant to return to India would lead to a  breach  of  Article  3  -
    ostensibly as a consequence of the medical condition he  suffers  from.
    The appellant's submissions before the First-tier Tribunal included the
    discrete assertion that the undertaking of the journey to  India  would
    of itself carry sufficient risk to the second appellant so as lead to a
    breach of Article 3. The assumption in  this  submission  is  that  the
    family would be removed by air.

 4. As referred to above, the appellants produced evidence  in  form  of  a
    report dated 13 October 2016 authored by a Dr  Sanghavi,  a  consultant
    paediatrician. It is not in dispute that such  evidence  did  not  make
    reference to particular  risks  which  would  eventuate  on,  or  as  a
    consequence of, the journey to India.

 5. At the outset of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  Mr  O'Dair
    of Counsel, who appeared for the appellants below, made an  application
    for an adjournment in  order  for  the  appellants  to  obtain  further
    medical evidence (i.e. medical evidence in addition to that dated  just
    over a month before the hearing) to deal specifically with the  medical
    consequences of the second appellant's journey to India.

 6. That application was refused in the following terms,

         "[7] In refusing the application I  considered  the  provisions  of
         Rule 2 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier)  (Immigration  and
         Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 entitled the 'overriding  objective  and
         parties' obligation  to  cooperate  with  the  Tribunal."   I  also
         considered the presidential guidance issued  on  17  October  2014.
         Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes Rule 2(e)  "avoiding
         delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper  consideration  of  the
         issues."  I concluded, in the circumstances, that I should  proceed
         with the appeal and that it was in the interests of justice  to  do
         so.  There  had  been  a  very  recent  report  from  a  consultant
         paediatrician which dealt with the impact on the  second  appellant
         of his medical condition.  "The application was made at a very late
         stage and was speculative by its nature."

 7. The first ground deployed before me is to the effect  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in refusing the adjournment. I must  consider  this
    issue under the auspices of the overarching question of, whether  there
    was any deprivation of the appellants' right to  a  fair  hearing?  Any
    temptation to review the conduct and the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal through the lens of reasonableness or  rationality  is  to  be
    resisted.  This was made clear by the Court of Appeal in SH Afghanistan
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 [at 13] in which the court said:

         "First, when considering whether the  Immigration  Judge  ought  to
         have granted an adjournment, the test was not  irrationality.   The
         test was not whether his decision was properly open to him  or  was
         Wednesbury unreasonable or perverse.  The test and  the  sole  test
         was whether it was unfair."

    Fairness needs to be considered in the context of the proceedings as  a
    whole.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal properly directed itself to Rule 2 of the  2014
    Rules and considered the interests of justice. This though is far  from
    determinative of whether the proceedings were tainted by unfairness.

 9. However, looking at  all  of  the  circumstances  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were  presented  with  including,  but  not  limited  to,  the
    appellants case as put to the First-tier Tribunal, the  case  that  was
    made for the need to obtain of further evidence, the fact that  one  of
    the appellants is a child, that the appellants were legally represented
    for a lengthy period prior to the hearing as well as the  existence  of
    the recent medical evidence, in my conclusion it cannot  be  said  that
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal was procedurally unfair.

10. This conclusion is re-enforced by the absence  of  evidence  before  me
    going to the consequences of the second appellant returning to India by
    plane and the circumstances which might eventuate  upon  such  journey.
    The appellants  complain  about  the  lack  of  opportunity  to  obtain
    evidence in this regard, the lack  of  which  was,  it  appears,  first
    highlighted by Mr O'Dair at the time of the hearing before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. They have now had seven months since  the  date  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision to fill that gap, or at the  very  least
    to provide evidence to the effect  that  it  is  a  gap  that  requires
    filling. I observe that they have been legally represented  throughout.
     It was not suggested by Ms Dirie that  the  possibility  of  obtaining
    such evidence in the past seven months is a course of action that their
    experienced  legal  representatives  would  not  have  been  alive  to,
    particularly given the terms of  the  grounds  they  sought  to  pursue
    before the Upper Tribunal.

11. In all the circumstances, I concluded that the proceedings  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal were not unfair, but even had I concluded that  the
    First-tier Tribunal ought  to  have  adjourned  so  as  to  enable  the
    proposed further evidence to be obtained, I would not now set aside the
    First-tier's decision on such basis, given the length of time that  has
    passed since its decision and the still  current  absence  of  relevant
    medical or other evidence relating to  potential  consequences  of  the
    second appellant travelling by air to India.  I  further  observe  that
    there has been no application to adjourn  the  proceedings  before  the
    Upper Tribunal in order to obtain such evidence.

12. That is not to say that the appellant cannot now obtain such  evidence,
    but the relevance of doing so for the purposes of a hearing before  the
    Tribunal has now passed.  If such evidence is obtained  the  appellants
    could, depending on its contents, make a  further  application  to  the
    Secretary of State for leave based upon it. It would, at least at first
    instance, be a matter for the Secretary of State how  she  treats  such
    evidence. The Secretary of State does not necessarily have  to  address
    such evidence by granting leave but could, for example, provide medical
    assistance to the appellants  during  their  journey.  These  would  be
    matters for the Secretary of State to consider.

13. The second ground raised by the appellants is  closely  linked  to  the
    circumstances said to underpin the first ground.

14. Ms Dirie  focuses  on  paragraph  24  of  the  First-tier's  Tribunal's
    decision and, in particular, the following passage therein:

         "There  is  simply  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  there  is  any
         heightened risk of treatment  envisaged  under  Article  3  in  the
         return journey, and the evidence points firmly to his mother  being
         able to deal adequately with seizures which have  been  a  constant
         feature of his short life."

15. The grounds point to the evidence given by the first  appellant  during
    her oral testimony, which is set out in paragraph 12 of the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision:

         "There are routine appointments every  month  but  if  seizures  do
         occur they have been advised to take their son to hospital."

16. It is submitted that in light of the aforementioned evidence the First-
    tier Tribunal's reasoning and conclusions, found in paragraph 24 of its
    decision, are irrational.  With respect,  I  disagree.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal considered the evidence as a whole. It  was  not  required  to
    conclude that there would  be  an  Article  3  breach  for  the  second
    appellant to fly to India on the basis of what the  appellant's  mother
    said in her oral evidence.

17. I start by observing once again that  there  was  no  medical  evidence
    before the Fist-tier Tribunal, nor is there before me,  which  supports
    the contention that the circumstances of the second appellants' journey
    to India  would  breach  Article  3  ECHR.  Furthermore,  there  is  no
    indication as to what would happen if the second appellant is not taken
    to  hospital,  what  happens  if  he  is  taken  to  hospital  in  such
    circumstances, how many times he has been taken to  hospital,  and  why
    the advice, identified by the first  appellant  in  her  evidence,  was
    given.  There is also no indication  as  to  the  consequences  of  any
    seizure the second  appellant  may  have  had  already.  All  of  these
    features of the evidence are  matters  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were, I'm sure, aware of. It was  not  required  to  give  reasons  for
    reasons. I find that the conclusions of the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    perfectly rational, indeed inevitable on  the  evidence  presented.  In
    short, this ground argues that the appeal should have been  allowed  on
    the basis of one sentence in the  oral  evidence  given  by  the  first
    appellant  in  the  absence  of  any  medical  evidence  supporting  or
    explaining it. This is not the sort  of  evidence  envisaged  as  being
    sufficient by the House of Lords in N v SSHD [2005]  UKHL  31,  or  the
    Court of Appeal in GS [2015] EWCA Civ 40.

18. I reiterate again, however, if  the  appellants'  claims  are  ever  to
    succeed then detailed medical evidence supporting their  case  must  be
    obtained. There was no such evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    nor is it before me.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.  This appeal is dismissed.


Signed:
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
