
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06561/2017
                                                               HU/06563/2017
                                                               HU/06564/2017
                                                               HU/06566/2017
                                                               HU/06567/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 January 2019                   |On 15 February 2019                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                    G M O
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because  the  case  involves  child  welfare  issues.  I  find  that  it  is
appropriate to make an order. Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  appellants  are  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family. This direction applies both  to  the  appellants  and  to  the
respondent.



Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S. Akinbolu, instructed by DF Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The first appellant and his  wife  and  three  children  appealed  the
    respondent's decision dated 17 May 2017 to refuse a human rights claim.



2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge James ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 12 June 2018, concluding  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for the children to leave the UK and proportionate  for  the
    family to return to Nigeria.

3.     The  appellants  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
    following grounds:

    (i)    It is accepted that in the absence of a Home  Office  Presenting
         Officer the judge had a  "reasonable  inquisitorial  function"  but
         argued that, in dismissing the appeal, the  judge  unfairly  relied
         upon issues that were not raised by the respondent and did not give
         the appellants a fair opportunity  to  respond  to  the  points  in
         submissions if they were going to  be  taken.  In  particular,  the
         judge found that the second appellant  worked  illegally  providing
         child care for a relative in return  for  payment  without  putting
         counsel on notice that this might be  a  matter  that  could  weigh
         against the appellants in the balancing exercise.


    (ii)   The First-tier Tribunal failed to attach "significant weight" to
         the fact that that the oldest child was a  'qualifying  child'  who
         had resided in the UK for a continuous period of  seven  years:  MA
         (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] 1 WLR 5093 referred.


    (iii)  The First-tier Tribunal made an error of fact  relating  to  the
         period of overstaying, which  was  capable  of  making  a  material
         difference to the weight to be given to the appellants' immigration
         history. The judge failed to consider what weight should be  placed
         on the respondent's delay and made unsustainable findings  relating
         to  the  funds  that  were  said  to  be  available  in  a  Tier  1
         (Entrepreneur) application made in 2013.

Decision and reasons

4.    This is a  borderline  decision  because  the  judge's  findings  were
      comprehensive, but after having considered the grounds of  appeal  and
      the submissions made by both parties I conclude  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal cannot stand and must be set aside.

5.    The ground relating to procedural fairness  was  not  supported  by  a
      witness statement from counsel who represented the appellants  at  the
      First-tier Tribunal hearing or a copy  of  his  note  of  proceedings.
      However, the same counsel who attended the hearing drafted the grounds
      of appeal. It is clear from the comprehensive decision written by  the
      judge that matters relating to the second  appellant  providing  child
      care for her brother in law and  his  family  were  aired  during  the
      course of  the  evidence  at  the  hearing.  However,  if  a  negative
      inference were to be drawn from the evidence, and it was not a  matter
      raised in the decision letter, fairness required the judge to give the
      appellants' representative a fair opportunity to make  submissions  on
      the point in the absence of a Home Office Presenting Officer: see  MNM
      (Surendran guidelines for Adjudicators) Kenya * [2000]  UKIAT  00005.
      Although  the  allegation  has  not  been  properly  evidenced  it  is
      reasonable to assume  that,  according  to  his  professional  duties,
      counsel would not seek to mislead the court in the grounds of  appeal.
      The allegation has not been made out with any certainty but does  cast
      doubt on whether some points that were taken  against  the  appellants
      were  highlighted  to  counsel  so  that  he  could  address  them  in
      submissions.

6.    The judge considered the position of the children  at  [24-29].  Apart
      from mentioning the two younger children at [24] the findings focussed
      solely on the position of the eldest child. The judge referred to  the
      correct test under section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002") i.e.  whether  it  was  'reasonable'  to
      expect a child who had been continuously resident  in  the  UK  for  a
      period of seven years to leave the UK [25]. The findings that she made
      relating to the practicalities of return and whether his parents could
      support him in the transition to Nigeria were open to her to make.

7.    However, in my assessment, what is lacking from the  decision  is  any
      clear findings as to where the best interests of the children  lay  or
      any evaluative assessment of the weight that should be placed  on  the
      ties established by the oldest  child.  The  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA
      (Pakistan) noted that the respondent's  policy  guidance  stated  that
      "significant weight" should be placed on the  fact  that  a  child  is
      likely to have established ties to the  UK  over  a  period  of  seven
      years. The failure of the judge to make clear findings relating to the
      interests of all  three  children  and  failure  to  indicate  whether
      significant weight was properly given to the oldest child's length  of
      residence amounts to an error of law.

8.    The other matters  raised  in  the  grounds  are  incidental  but  are
      relevant to whether the decision can stand. In assessing  what  weight
      to place on the immigration history of the  parents  the  judge  found
      that they had been overstayers since 25 February 2013,  when  in  fact
      their lawful leave was extended by operation  of  section  3C  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971 pending an appeal against a  decision  to  refuse
      leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.  The  appellants'
      appeal rights were deemed exhausted on 27  May  2014  at  which  point
      leave extended under section 3C came to an end.  At  that  point,  the
      appellants remained without leave, but the parents acted  promptly  to
      make a fresh application for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds
      on 26 June 2014 (i.e. within a month  although  not  within  28  days)
      which then led to the chain of events leading to the decision that  is
      the subject of this appeal. During the period of overstaying they were
      pursuing a human rights claim. It  seems  unlikely  that  this  point,
      taken alone, would be sufficient to set aside  the  decision,  but  an
      accurate assessment of the appellants' immigration history  is  needed
      in  order  to  place  appropriate  weight  on  the   public   interest
      considerations.

9.    Although none of the grounds, taken  alone,  might  be  sufficient  to
      show a material error of law that  would  justify  setting  aside  the
      decision, I conclude that,  cumulatively,  they  render  the  decision
      unsustainable given the anxious scrutiny required in  cases  involving
      important human rights issues and the best interests of children.

10.   The usual course of action would be for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  set
      aside and remake the decision given that there is a  detailed  account
      of the evidence given by the appellants and  their  witnesses  at  the
      First-tier Tribunal hearing and that much of their immigration history
      and the family circumstances are not in dispute. Exceptionally, I find
      that it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      for a fresh hearing in  light  of  the  question  marks  raised  about
      procedural fairness and  the  absence  of  a  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer on the last occasion. The respondent will want to ensure  that
      he is represented on the next occasion to avoid similar problems.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a point
of law

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 12 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
