
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06071/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 October 2017                     |On 14 November 2017                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                              Ibrahim Khaukhar
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Basharat of Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Griffith promulgated on 24 January 2017.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 5  November  1986.   The
    point raised before the Upper Tribunal is a narrow point and in all  of
    the circumstances I do not propose to rehearse in any detail or at  any
    length the background  to  the  appeal.   The  Appellant's  immigration
    history and the nature of his application are all a matter of record on
    file.  More particularly, all such matters are rehearsed in  sufficient
    detail in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


3.   Indeed, in  an  admirably  clear  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Griffith sets out in detail the background to the appeal (paragraphs 1-
    10).  The Judge then sets out in detail the  evidence  at  the  hearing
    (from paragraph 12 et seq.), and records the submissions of each of the
    parties' representatives (paragraphs 28-37).  Thereafter the Judge sets
    out her reasoning and findings (paragraph 38 et seq.).


4.    The  Judge,  although  dealing  with  a  human  rights  appeal,   gave
    consideration to the Appellant's circumstances guided by  reference  to
    the Immigration Rules, before proceeding to a consideration of  Article
    8.  The Judge does not reach the freestanding Article  8  consideration
    until paragraph 47 of the Decision.


5.   No complaint is raised before the Upper Tribunal in respect of  any  of
    the Judge's analysis of the  facts,  her  findings  of  facts,  or  her
    application of those facts to the Immigration Rules.


6.   The Judge determines - and, as I say, does so unchallenged -  that  the
    Appellant did not satisfy any of the requirements  of  the  Rules.   At
    paragraph 47 the Judge in substance deals in brief terms with the first
    four Razgar questions and finds in the Appellant's favour in respect of
    the first two, and that there is essentially no issue in respect of the
    third and fourth.  No challenge is brought to that analysis.


7.   At paragraph 48 the Judge gives consideration to  the  public  interest
    considerations pursuant to section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.  Again, no challenge is  brought  to  the  Judge's
    evaluation of these matters.


8.   At paragraph 49 the Judge refers to the  nature  of  a  proportionality
    assessment involving weighing up the  circumstances  of  an  individual
    against the public interest, and cites a passage from SS (Congo) &  Ors
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  That passage is in the following terms:

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim for grant  of  leave
         to remain outside the new Rules in Appendix FM."




9.   The Judge then concludes  her  analysis  of  the  Appellant's  case  by
    reference to Article 8 at paragraph 50 of her Decision in these  terms:
    "I have set out above the Appellant's circumstances and  my  assessment
    of them based on the evidence before me."  -  I interject  that,  as  I
    have said, no criticism of any  of  that  foregoing  analysis  is  made
    before me - "For those reasons I  am  unable  to  find  any  compelling
    circumstances disclosed in the Appellant's case that are sufficient  to
    outweigh the public interest.  Accordingly, I do not find the  decision
    of the Respondent to be disproportionate."   The  appeal  is  thereupon
    dismissed.


10.  Challenge is raised against the Judge's approach in paragraph 50.   The
    challenge is perhaps most conveniently encapsulated and  summarised  in
    the grant of permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pickup
    on 7 August 2017 in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that at [50] of the decision, after  following  the
         Razgar  stepped  approach,  the  Judge  has  conflated   compelling
         circumstances for considering Article 8 outside the Rules with  the
         test of proportionality.  It is not clear that the correct test and
         standard has been applied."


11.  The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 29 August  2017.  The
    Tribunal's attention is directed to the following passage at  paragraph
    57 of the case of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11:

         "The critical issue will generally be whether, giving due weight to
         the strength of the public interest in the removal of the person in
         the case before it, the Article 8 claim is sufficiently  strong  to
         outweigh it.  In general, in cases concerned with precarious family
         life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the
         public interest in immigration control."


12.  In my judgment the  Judge's  approach  at  paragraph  50  -  where  she
    expressly balanced the personal  circumstances  of  the  Appellant  and
    concluded that there  was  nothing  in  those  circumstances  that  was
    sufficiently compelling to outweigh the public interest -  mirrors,  or
    echoes, the approach identified as appropriate by the Supreme Court  in
    Agyarko.




13.  In short: the Judge clearly and obviously, pursuant to an  analysis  of
    the facts of the particular case  that  is  not  otherwise  challenged,
    concluded that the Appellant did not have a very strong  or  compelling
    claim such as to outweigh the public interest in  immigration  control.
    In those  circumstances  I  consider  that  the  Judge's  approach  was
    entirely in accordance with the guidelines set out in Agyarko.




14.  I find no error of law and accordingly the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge stands.


Notice of Decision

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no errors of law  and
stands.


16.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


17.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 13 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

