
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/06367/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28th July 2017                         | On 08th August 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                              Mr MAHESH GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S D Lloyd promulgated on 3rd April  2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in New Delhi to refuse to grant  entry  clearance  to
    the Appellant to settle  as  the  dependent  son  of  a  former  Gurkha
    soldier.

 2. Permission to appeal had been  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Scott-Baker on 17th June 2017, who found that it was arguable that  the
    judge made no findings under Annex K, a policy introduced in respect of
    Gurkhas on 5th January 2015, which  had  not  been  considered  in  the
    previous decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon.

 3. The judgment of Judge Lloyd clearly took account of the  decision  made
    by Judge Nixon and found that in effect nothing had changed  since  the
    previous decision at paragraph 26 and relied upon the previous decision
    of Judge Nixon following Devaseelan for refusing the Appellant's appeal
    on human rights grounds.  However, Judge Lloyd in  fact  noted  in  the
    chronology that the Appellant had actually  made  a  fresh  application
    following the refusal from Judge Nixon on the basis  of  a  new  policy
    that had been brought in by the Respondent at Annex K.  The decision of
    the Secretary of State dated 24th  August  2015  was  based  upon  that
    policy under Annex K and then whether or not there were any exceptional
    circumstances going beyond that policy under which the appeal should be
    considered and allowed under Article 8.  It was that decision which was
    appealed to First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd.

 4.  As has been quite properly conceded by Mr  Tarlow  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary  of  State  this  morning,  Judge  Lloyd   regrettably   when
    considering the appeal did not consider the provisions of the new Annex
    K when considering the appeal and Mr  Tarlow  quite  properly  concedes
    that that has to be a material error of law in the circumstances,  when
    the original decision was based upon findings under Annex K  which  the
    Appellant had sought to challenge at the appeal hearing.  The  original
    judgment from Judge Nixon was not based upon Annex K, and therefore  to
    that extent the decision of Judge Nixon not relevant.  Mr Tarlow  quite
    properly concedes that the judge should have considered the claim under
    Annex K but has failed to do so and that is a material  error  of  law.
    Although the judge was clearly considering the claim on the  Article  8
    basis,  given  the  fact  that  question  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    requirements of the policy under Annex K were met is  a  very  relevant
    consideration in considering the proportionality issue under Article  8
    the failure to consider  Annex  K  does  infect  the  entirety  of  the
    decision and does  therefore,  as  Mr  Tarlow  concedes,  amount  to  a
    material error of law.

 5. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd is  set  aside  in  its
    entirety and the case remitted, as agreed between the parties  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing before  any  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge S D Lloyd.

 6. I note that the Sponsor and witnesses in the UK are  all  now  said  to
    live in the London area and Mr Jesurum on behalf of the  Appellant  has
    therefore asked that the rehearing be at  Taylor  House  or  any  other
    convenient local London Tribunal rather than the appeal being  remitted
    back to Birmingham.  That seems entirely appropriate.  I  therefore  do
    set aside the judgment of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd and remit the
    case back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  before  any  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge,  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lloyd,
    preferably to be reheard at an oral hearing at Taylor House.


Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S D Lloyd does contain a  material
error of law and is set aside;
I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing  before  any
First-tier Tribunal Judge, other than First-tier Tribunal Judge S  D  Lloyd,
to be reheard at an oral hearing at Taylor House.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 6th August 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty



