
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06305/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 April 2018                             | On 2 May 2018                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                KJ (Zimbabwe)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                     EntRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Rendle, Counsel instructed via Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a minor, appeals against the decision of an Entry
    Clearance Officer to refuse her entry clearance to join her parents  in
    the UK for the purposes of settlement.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2. On 25 January 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane gave his reasons for
    granting permission to appeal:

         "The grounds disclose an arguable error of law but  for  which  the
         outcome of the appeal might have been different.  Where  the  Judge
         referred at paragraph 43 of his decision to those  requirements  of
         the Immigration Rules which concern the  establishment  of  serious
         and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  made  the
         exclusion of the appellant undesirable, the Judge did not arrive at
         a finding where the appellant satisfied  the  requirements  of  the
         Rules.  At the hearing the appellant's mother  gave  evidence.   In
         his decision the Judge did not suggest a reason  for  doubting  the
         gravamen of her  evidence,  namely  that  the  consequence  of  the
         refusal to grant entry clearance was that the  appellant  would  be
         living on her own.  It was incumbent upon the Judge to arrive at  a
         finding whether the appellant satisfied  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules. In the light of the  evidence  and  the  Judge's
         tacit acceptance of the evidence  the  Judge  might  arguably  have
         found that the applicable Immigration Rules were satisfied and such
         a finding might materially have borne on the outcome of the  appeal
         insofar as it concerned Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, whose date of  birth  is  [  ]
    2002.  On 29 November 2015 she applied for entry clearance to settle in
    the  UK  with  her  parents,  who  are  Zimbabwean  citizens  who   had
    discretionary leave to remain in the UK until 15 December 2017.

 4. The application was refused on 21 January 2016.  She  did  not  qualify
    for entry clearance under the Rules, as her parents  were  not  present
    and settled here.  The letter from the Home Office which  was  sent  to
    her mother clearly stated that her leave  did  not  entitle  her  minor
    children to join her  in  the  UK  "unless  there  are  any  compelling
    compassionate circumstances".  Her parents had left Zimbabwe  in  2004,
    and they had left her in the custody of her grandmother  when  she  was
    only 2 years old.  So, she had been residing with her  grandmother  for
    the past 12 years.  It was stated that her grandmother  was  no  longer
    able to take care of her as  she  was  blind.   However,  she  had  not
    provided any medical evidence to substantiate her grandmother's medical
    condition, and the Entry Clearance Officer was unable to determine  how
    long her grandmother had suffered from her current condition.  She  had
    submitted  a  letter  from  the  Deputy  Head  of  her  primary  school
    confirming that she was a pupil in Grade 7.  She was therefore  engaged
    in schooling in  Zimbabwe,  and  she  had  not  demonstrated  that  she
    personally had any health concerns or issues that would warrant issuing
    her with entry clearance outside the Rules.   As  she  already  had  an
    established life in Zimbabwe,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied  that  she  demonstrated  any  compassionate  or   compelling
    circumstances.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-Tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant's appeal came before Judge MA Hall,  sitting  at  Sheldon
    Court, Birmingham, on 26 June 2017.      Mr Rendle appeared  on  behalf
    of the appellant,  but  there  was  no  representation  for  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

 6. The Judge received oral evidence from the appellant's mother, "GC", who
    adopted as her evidence in chief her witness statement signed by her on
    18 June 2017.  At paragraph 4 of her witness statement, she  said  that
    her mother was now  80  years  old  and  was  in  failing  health.   In
    particular, she had lost her sight in both eyes.   She  was  no  longer
    capable of looking after 'K', who was now 15 (and was 14 at the date of
    the ECO's decision), and K was not capable of looking after her mother.
     They were looking for a suitable care home for her mother,  where  she
    would receive the specialist care that she required.

 7. At paragraph 6, she said that  she  had  no  other  family  members  in
    Zimbabwe apart from her mother.  K  would  therefore  have  no  one  in
    Zimbabwe to whom she could turn for support.

 8. At paragraph 7, she said that she had received a copy of  her  mother's
    handwritten medical notes  via  DHL  from  Zimbabwe.   These  had  been
    photocopied and sent by a church member, DC, whom she knew in Zimbabwe.
     These records detailed her mother's deteriorating health from 2007  to
    2017.

 9. In his subsequent decision, the Judge summarised GC's oral evidence  at
    paragraphs  [21]-[33].  She  confirmed  that  she  had   been   granted
    discretionary leave in June 2015 but this  expired  in  December  2017.
    The leave had been granted because she, her husband and her daughter in
    the UK, suffered with HIV.  She confirmed that  in  2004  she  and  her
    husband had made an asylum claim, which was refused and  their  appeals
    were subsequently dismissed.  Thereafter, the claim for leave to remain
    on medical grounds was made.  She believed that her claim for leave  to
    remain was made in 2014.  She confirmed that she had not been  back  to
    Zimbabwe since 2004.  She explained that her  mother  (the  appellant's
    grandmother) had been without sight since 2014.

10. The Judge also received oral  evidence  from  the  appellant's  father,
    "IJ", who adopted a brief witness statement confirming that  he  agreed
    with his wife's witness statement.

11. The Judge set out his findings and conclusions at paragraph  [38]-[59].
    The appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules  in  relation  to
    entry clearance as a child.  He found  it  relevant  to  consider  what
    would need to be proved by a child seeking entry clearance to the UK in
    relation to the Immigration Rules.  If the child had a  settled  parent
    or parents, and was seeking indefinite  leave  to  enter  the  UK,  the
    requirements in paragraph  297  would  need  to  be  satisfied.   These
    included whether there were serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations which made the exclusion of the child  undesirable,  and
    whether suitable arrangements for the child's care had been  made;  and
    the child must be adequately maintained and accommodated.

12. The Judge found that the appellant and her parents had  not  physically
    met since 2004.  He accepted the oral evidence  given  that  there  had
    been some telephone contact, and he accepted that  the  DVD  which  had
    been produced at Court, but whose contents he had not seen, contained a
    video chat between the appellant and her mother in 2008.

13. The fact that the application could not succeed under  the  Immigration
    Rules did not mean that it must fail.  He considered  the  guidance  in
    Mundeba [2013] UKUT 020 (IAC).  There  had  to  be  an  inquiry  as  to
    whether there was any evidence of the child being neglected or  abused,
    or whether the child had unmet needs not catered for, and whether there
    were  stable  arrangements  for  the  child's  physical   care.    This
    assessment involved consideration as  to  whether  the  combination  of
    circumstances  was  sufficiently  serious  and  compelling  to  require
    admission.

14.  The  Judge  found  that  the  appellant's  parents   had   not   taken
    responsibility for her upbringing since 2004.  There  was  insufficient
    evidence to prove this.  The evidence did not indicate that her parents
    had taken the important decisions in relation to the appellant's  life.
    The responsibility of the appellant's upbringing had been  carried  out
    by her grandmother.  He did not  find  that  there  were  any  relevant
    medical issues regarding the appellant to be considered: "There  is  no
    evidence  of  neglect  or  of  the  Appellant  living  in  unacceptable
    conditions.  The Appellant lives with her  grandmother  in  a  property
    owned by her grandmother.  The Appellant attends school."

15. There was no  witness  statement  from  the  appellant  expressing  her
    wishes.  In her letter dated 22 November 2015, the  appellant  did  not
    actually state that she wished to come to the UK.  She  explained  that
    she had not seen her parents for the past 12 years and felt lonely when
    her friends talked about their parents.  The Judge found,  on  balance,
    that the appellant's best interests would be served by her living  with
    her parents, despite her having been  brought  up  by  her  grandmother
    since 2004.  However, while the best interests of the appellant were  a
    primary consideration, it was not the only consideration, and could  be
    outweighed by countervailing factors: "I accept  that  the  Appellant's
    grandmother has lost her sight.  This has been  the  case  since  2014,
    according to GC's oral evidence.  I  do  not  find  the  Appellant  has
    proved that there are compelling or compassionate circumstances in this
    case.  As previously stated, there is no evidence to indicate that  she
    has unmet needs or is being neglected.  The evidence indicates that she
    lives in adequate accommodation, and has access to school  and  medical
    facilities, although thankfully the medical facilities are not required
    at present.  The Appellant's parents wish  her  to  join  them  in  the
    United Kingdom, and I accept that this is her wish.  However, I do  not
    find that this amounts to compelling or compassionate circumstances."

16. The Judge  went  on  to  consider  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   He  held  that  the  evidence  given
    regarding financial maintenance and accommodation was not satisfactory.
     Both parents had given oral evidence to the effect that they  were  in
    employment and lived in a rented property, but no documentary  evidence
    had been provided to prove the level of income and outgoings  that  the
    family in the UK had.

17. The Judge concluded  that,  while  family  life  had  been  established
    between the appellant and her parents, considerable weight  had  to  be
    attached to the fact that the application for entry clearance could not
    succeed under the Rules, and  he  was  not  satisfied  that  sufficient
    evidence had been submitted to prove that  there  were  any  compelling
    circumstances which justified  granting  entry  clearance  outside  the
    Rules, and insufficient evidence had been  provided  to  show  adequate
    maintenance and accommodation in the UK.

18. At paragraph 59, the Judge said that it was open to  the  appellant  to
    make a further application for entry clearance, if it was believed that
    there was evidence  to  prove  compelling  circumstances  and  adequate
    maintenance and accommodation in the UK.   The  Judge  found  that  the
    importance of maintaining effective immigration control outweighed  the
    best interests of the appellant in joining her parents in the UK.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

19. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Rendle developed the case advanced in the  grounds  of  appeal.
    The appellant's family faced an impossible dilemma.  If the grandmother
    was to move into suitable accommodation, then the  appellant  would  be
    left  alone  in  circumstances  that  could  clearly  be  described  as
    compelling and compassionate, and would thereby trigger  the  grant  of
    entry clearance.   However,  her  having  to  move  away,  leaving  the
    appellant alone and without  support,  would  be  "unthinkable".   This
    dilemma was not contemplated by the Judge in his  decision,  and  as  a
    consequence the Judge had erred in his conclusion that the  refusal  of
    entry clearance was proportionate.

20. I put to Mr Rendle that the scenario envisaged in the grounds of appeal
    was one which lay in  the  future,  not  in  the  present.   Mr  Rendle
    submitted that it was "a glaringly obvious future  scenario"  that  the
    Judge ought to have addressed, having regard  to  paragraph  4  of  the
    witness statement of GC.

21. Mr Tarlow submitted that no  error  was  made  out.   In  essence,  the
    appellant was expressing disagreement with findings of the  Judge  that
    were reasonably open to him on the evidence.

22. In reply, Mr  Rendle  submitted  that  the  Judge's  reasons  were  not
    adequate, as they failed to address "the impossible dilemma" identified
    by GC in her evidence, about which no adverse credibility findings  had
    been made by the Judge.

Discussion

23. In South Bucks District Counsel -v- Porter (No 2) [2004] UKHL 33,  Lord
    Brown said at [26]:

         "The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration."

24. As was acknowledged by Mr Rendle in the course of his oral submissions,
    the issue which is raised in the grounds of appeal  is  a  very  narrow
    one, albeit of pivotal importance.  The Judge's reasoning is extensive,
    and it is not suggested that any of the other reasons which he gave for
    dismissing the appellant's appeal are flawed.

25. The premise which underlies the error of  law  challenge  is  that  the
    Judge did not make any adverse credibility findings, and accordingly he
    is to be taken as having tacitly accepted GC's evidence that her mother
    was no longer capable of looking after  the  appellant,  and  that  the
    appellant was not capable of looking after her grandmother.

26. However, the premise does not stand up to  scrutiny.   It  is  apparent
    from,  for  example,  the  Judge's  discussion  of  the   evidence   on
    maintenance and accommodation  in  the  UK,  that  the  Judge  was  not
    prepared to accept the oral evidence given by the parents  about  their
    level of income and their professed ability to be  able  to  adequately
    maintain and accommodate the appellant, as well  as  the  two  children
    they already had in the UK, without recourse to public funds.

27. I accept that the Judge did not overtly cast doubt on the  evidence  of
    the appellant's mother that neither her daughter  nor  her  grandmother
    were  capable  of  looking  after  each  other.   However,  since   the
    grandmother had been  blind  since  2014,  and  he  was  assessing  the
    appellant's human rights claim in mid-2017 when  she  was  considerably
    more mature than  she  had  been  in  2014  -  and  when  she  and  her
    grandmother must have been providing each other with companionship  and
    support for the past two to three years  as  they  were  the  only  two
    people in the household - it was open to  the  Judge  to  find,  having
    regard  to  the  surrounding  evidence,  that  the  appellant  was  not
    suffering from  neglect  or  unmet  needs  or  living  in  unacceptable
    conditions.  In  making  these  sustainable  findings,  the  Judge  was
    obliquely rejecting the evidence of the appellant's mother  insofar  as
    it suggested the contrary.

28. While it was a clear preference  of  the  parents  that  the  appellant
    should join them in the UK, and that the grandmother  should  go  to  a
    care home, it did not follow that the maintenance  of  the  status  quo
    would inevitably lead to the appellant's abandonment at a future  date.
    An obvious alternative option was for the parents to pay for a carer to
    help look after the grandmother in the house which she  owned,  thereby
    ensuring a continuity of grandparental love, support and  companionship
    for the appellant.  In short, although the appellant's mother presented
    in her oral  evidence  what  Mr  Rendle  describes  as  "an  impossible
    dilemma", the Judge was not bound to treat the  family  as  in  reality
    facing such a dilemma.

29. Moreover, the error of law challenge can be said to contain  the  seeds
    of  its  own  destruction,  in  that  it  is  "unthinkable"  that   the
    appellant's parents would so organise matters that  the  appellant  was
    left alone.  Since such an outcome is unthinkable, it is by  definition
    not a glaringly obvious future scenario which the Judge ought  to  have
    addressed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.

This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20 April 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
