
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06445/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a hearing|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 December 2019                         |On 23 January 2020              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            MARIE KERINA LAFOUCEUR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 8 January 2020, when giving permission to appeal, I  also  gave  the
    following directions:-

         "1.      It is my preliminary view that the  decision  did  involve
             the making of  an  error  of  law  capable  of  affecting  the
             outcome, and that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             should be set aside,  the appropriate course of  action  being
             to remit the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
             determination on all issues.

         2. Unless within ten working days of the issue of these  directions
             there is any written  objection  to  this  course  of  action,
             supported by cogent argument, the Upper Tribunal will  proceed
             to determine the appeal without an oral hearing and will remit
             it to the First-tier Tribunal.

         3. In the absence of a timely response  by  a  party,  it  will  be
             presumed that it has no objection  to  the  course  of  action
             proposed."

 2. There has been no objection to the proposed course of action by  either
    party.

 3. In the  circumstances,  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  grant  of
    permission, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    did involve the making of an error of law and I set it aside.  I  remit
    the decision to the First-tier Tribunal.



Summary of conclusions

      1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
         of an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
         on all grounds. For the avoidance of doubt none of the findings  it
         made are preserved.


Signed      Date:  21 January 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

