
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06074/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 February 2019                   |On 04 March 2019                     |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         The Hon Mr Justice Waksman
                 (sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                ROBERT WEEKES
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Lowis, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


 0. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State from a decision of the
    First Tier Tribunal (Judge Rayner) dated 11 October 2018. By that
    decision he allowed the appeal of the Respondent to this appeal, Mr
    Robert Weekes, against the decision of the Secretary of State to deport
    him to Barbados. The Judge found that the deportation decision was a
    disproportionate response to his offending behaviour.

 0. The basic facts are not in dispute and we take them from the FTT
    judgment.

 0. On 3 December 1982 Mr Weekes applied for an entry certificate to the
    United Kingdom, which was granted. He entered and resided in the United
    Kingdom from 25 December 1982 to 15 January 1983. He applied for an
    entry certificate on 7 July 1983 and entered the United Kingdom on 15
    August 1983. From 1982 until 1989-1991 when he was in prison in
    Barbados for a drugs related offence, he remained in the United
    Kingdom, without immigration status. He returned to the United Kingdom
    on 23 September 1992 and was granted leave to remain until 20 January
    1993.

 0. He then married Ms [SF], a British citizen in 1993 or 1994. On 12
    February 1993 Mr Weekes applied for leave to remain as the spouse of a
    settled person, which was granted until 12 February 1994. On 27 January
    1994 Mr Weekes applied for indefinite leave to remain, which was
    granted on 14 April 1994. Mr Weekes and Ms [F] divorced either in 1997
    or 1999. On 20 June 2006, the respondent served a notice of intention
    to deport on Mr Weekes. He appealed and on 10 October 2016, the Asylum
    and Immigration Tribunal allowed his appeal. Mr Weekes visited Barbados
    from 26 August to 7 October 2013; from 1 April 2014 to 6 May 2014; and
    from 2 to 17 September 2016.

 0. On 1 December 2016 the respondent served a second notice of a decision
    to deport on Mr Weekes. On 28 December 2016 Mr Weekes served
    representations on the respondent as to why he should not be deported.
    Those representations were refused on 18 April 2017. He appealed
    against the refusal in a notice dated 28 April 2017.

 0. The background to both decisions to deport is Mr Weekes' offending. His
    PNC record is recited in full at paragraphs 9 - 76 of the refusal
    letter of 18 April 2017. They are not contested. The PNC print out
    shows that (excluding the conviction in Barbados in 1989 for drugs
    offences), he has been convicted on 69 separate occasions for a total
    of 116 offences. The first offence was dealt with on 28 December 2003,
    and the final conviction was on 8 April 2015. They comprise 10 offences
    against the person, 1 against property, three of fraud, 69 of theft,
    five of public disorder, 12 relating to the police or courts, one drug
    offence, three offensive weapons, 11 miscellaneous and one non-
    recordable. The courts have imposed a number of penalties, including
    imprisonment on a number of occasions. The longest period of
    imprisonment was 12 months, imposed on 11 October 2005 for an offence
    of affray.

 0. This is on any view an appalling offending history. We should add that
    71 of these offences were committed after he had successfully appealed
    the first deportation decision. There have been no offences since the
    second decision being the one under consideration.

 0. The Secretary of State of course applied the relevant immigration rules
    being 398-399A in connection with its decision. The relevant statutory
    provisions for the purpose of the tribunal proceedings are s 117B-s
    117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002
    Act"). They provide as follows:

         "Section 117B. Article 8: public interest considerations applicable
         in all cases.


          1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
             public interest ...


          4) Little weight should be given to -


               a) A private life, or


               b) A relationship formed with a partner


             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


          5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
             precarious ...


         117C. Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
         foreign criminals.


          1) The deportation of criminals is in the public interest.


          2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
             the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
             criminal.


          3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


          4) Exception 1 applies where


             a.   C has lawfully been resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life.


             b.   C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             c.    There  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


          5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         117D. Interpretation


          1) ... 'qualifying partner' means  a  partner  who  -  (a)  is  a
             British citizen ...


          2) In this part, 'foreign criminal' means a person -


               a) who is not a British citizen,


               b) who has  been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and


               c) who -


                   i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                      least 12 months,


                   i) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                      serious harm, or


                  ii) is a persistent offender..."


The judgment of the F-tT


 0. Before the F-tT, the Secretary of State said that the foreign criminal
    provisions applied here because Mr Weekes was a "persistent offender".
    This was conceded by Counsel acting for him and the Judge agreed. In
    fact, he could also be treated as a foreign criminal because, on 11
    October 2005, he received two 12 month concurrent sentences of
    imprisonment at Croydon Crown Court for assault occasioning actual
    bodily harm and affray. This therefore brought him within
    s117D(2)(c)(i) as well as s117D(2)(c)(iii).

 0. The Judge considered whether Exception 1 applied. He did so by
    reference to paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules but that makes no
    difference here. Mr Weekes failed at the first hurdle here because he
    had resided lawfully in the UK for 26 years but was 58 at the time of
    the decision and so had spent less than half his life lawfully here.
    Although not strictly necessary for his decision, the Judge went on to
    consider the other requirements. He found that Mr Weekes was "socially
    and culturally integrated" here. He also found that there would be
    "very significant obstacles" to his reintegration in Barbados. See
    paragraphs 68-70 of the decision. So were it not for an insufficient
    period of lawful residents here, Mr Weekes would have made out
    Exception 1. That would then have been a bar to deportation.

 0. The Judge also considered the application of Exception 2, by reference
    to paragraph 399 (b) of the Immigration Rules. He accepted that Mr
    Weekes had a "genuine and subsisting relationship" with a Ms [B]. She
    had met him first in 2010 as a neighbour, kept in touch with him when
    she moved away but then started the relationship with him in September
    2015. For the purposes of this Exception, the Judge considered that Ms
    [B] was a "partner" of Mr Weekes and she is a British citizen. However,
    although he did not underestimate the difficulties which Ms [B] would
    face if she joined Mr Weekes in Barbados he did not consider that it
    would be "unduly harsh" for her to live there. Nor would it be unduly
    harsh for her to remain in the UK without him. In particular, as to the
    latter, and as set out at paragraph 64 of the judgment, while Mr Weekes
    was undoubtedly integrated into Ms [B]'s family she had no particular
    health or emotional issues requiring his presence or attention. Her
    depression and anxiety long predated her relationship with Mr Weekes
    and her high blood pressure and pre-diabetes required no significant
    input and she had a large family who both supported her and for whom
    she provided support. While his departure would be "difficult" for her,
    that would be the extent of it.

 0. Accordingly, Mr Weekes could only avoid deportation if he could
    establish that the public interest in his deportation is "outweighed by
    other factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
    above those described in paragraph 399 or 399A as stated in paragraph
    398(c) of the Immigration Rules". See paragraph 398.

 0. So far as Mr Weekes' offending behaviour is concerned although the
    Judge pointed to various gaps in his offending history he accepted that
    up to 8 April 2015 "there could hardly have been a better example ...
    of someone who could be described as a "persistent offender who shows a
    particular regard for the law". But by the time of the refusal letter
    of 28 March 2017 there had been no offences for nearly 2 years. The
    Judge accepted that Mr Weekes had changed his lifestyle and was
    expressing genuine remorse. That said, his initial approach to the
    Community Order imposed upon him in April 2015 was not promising. The
    supervisor noted that he had no intention of stopping problematic
    alcohol use which he did not see as an issue. However, by November 2015
    it was noted that Mr Weekes had said that he had not drunk for 5 months
    and felt more healthy, that he had met a lady and as she did not drink
    this helped and he seemed determined to remain abstinent. In 2016 he
    obtained employment as a transport agent and produced a number of
    positive testimonials from 2017 to 2018. The Judge also noted that he
    had started his rehabilitation at least 18 months before the issue of
    the second decision to deport so it was not as if any changes came only
    after he learned of such a decision and in an attempt to present a good
    picture for deportation purposes.

 0. The key parts of the judgment are as follows:

         "79. On the positive side of the balance, I repeat and stress the
         fact that Mr Weekes has turned his life around to such an extent
         that I accept that there is no prospect of recidivism. Mr Weekes'
         resolve to remain abstinent from alcohol and drugs and stop
         offending has survived the shock of the deportation proceedings and
         I am satisfied is genuine.


         80.  I give significant weight to the length of time that Mr Weekes
         has lived in the United Kingdom, which has been more or less
         continuous since 1982. That is a total of 36 years, at least 24 of
         which has been lawful and settled. All his ties are in the United
         Kingdom and he has none in Barbados. He would have no support in
         Barbados, and he is at a stage of his life where he would find it
         hard to re-establish himself there. For the reasons given above, I
         do find that Mr Weekes is culturally and socially integrated into
         the United Kingdom, and that there would be 'very significant
         obstacles' to his reintegration into Barbados. Although that does
         not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules or of the
         2002 Act because Mr Weekes has not spent half his life in the
         United Kingdom lawfully, the length of time he has lived here is
         significant and relevant.


         81.  Similarly, the family life ties of Mr Weekes with Ms [B] do
         not satisfy the provisions of either the Immigration Rules or of
         section 117 of the 2002 Act. Given Ms [B]'s family ties in the
         United-Kingdom, I do not consider it likely that she would
         accompany Mr Weekes to Barbados. Mr Weekes' deportation would
         therefore fracture that relationship, and remove from Ms [B]'s
         family a valuable support. That would also be devastating for Mr
         Weekes, and may be too much for him to cope with without recourse
         to alcohol, drugs and offending behaviour."


         82.  I consider finally whether, in the terms of Hesham Ali,
         "giving due weight to the strength of the public interest in
         deportation in the case before them, the factors brought into
         account on the other side lead to the conclusion that deportation
         would be disproportionate." As noted above, I find that the 'due
         weight' to be afforded to the strength of the public interest in
         the deportation of Mr Weekes is significant, but tempered and
         mitigated by a number of factors. Mr Weekes does not satisfy any of
         the exceptions to deportation. There are however factors, in his
         situation that are insufficient within the Rules or statute to
         satisfy the exemption, but are nonetheless significant. These
         include the length of time that he, has lived both lawfully and
         precariously in the United Kingdom, which is well in excess of half
         his life; that he is culturally and socially integrated into the
         United Kingdom; that there would be, because of his age and lack of
         support, very significant obstacles to his integration into
         Barbados; and his relationship with Ms [B]. What however amounts to
         "compelling circumstances over and above those described in
         paragraphs 399 and 399A" for Mr Weekes is his rehabilitation and
         reformation, established before the notice of deportation. That has
         now been firmly established and has effectively removed one of the
         reasons for deportation, namely the discouragement of recidivism.
         Therefore, balancing the tempered need for deportation in Mr
         Weekes' case with significant personal family and private life
         factors, and his total self-regulated rehabilitation, I find that
         Mr Weekes' deportation is a disproportionate response to his
         offending behaviour, and allow this appeal."


 0. Therefore, while the Judge saw the need for deportation being
    "tempered" by family and private life factors, the key driver for the
    finding of very compelling circumstances was the fact of his
    rehabilitation. We should add that the last sentence of paragraph 81
    did not appear to be supported by any particular evidence and indeed Ms
    Lowis, who represented Mr Weekes before us as well as at the FTT,
    disavowed any reliance upon it. That is all very well but the Judge
    appears to have thought it important even though, on one view, it
    suggests that Mr Weekes' rehabilitation may not be as secure as the
    judge had suggested in other parts of his judgment because the
    implication is that if he cannot continue his relationship with Ms [B]
    (or perhaps another partner in the future) he might well relapse.

The law


 0. It is trite law that the very compelling circumstances threshold is a
    high one. It connotes a "very strong claim indeed" see Laws LJ in SS
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ. 1192. In assessing whether this
    threshold is met, the countervailing considerations to the great weight
    which should normally attach to the public interest in deportation of
    foreign offenders must be very compelling in order to outweigh them.
    See paragraph 38 of the judgment of Lord Reed in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC
    60. But the factors to consider can include the deportees conduct since
    the offence was committed as well as factors relating to private or
    family life see paragraph 26 of that judgment.

 0. It is also clear that even where Exceptions 1 or 2 have not been a made
    out for some reason, the facts relating to them can form part of the
    "very compelling circumstances" considerations. Thus, in NA (Pakistan)
    v Home Secretary [2016] EWCA Civ. 662, Jackson LJ stated at paragraph
    29 of his judgment that:

           "... A foreign criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters
           [falling within Exceptions 1 and 2] but he would need to be able
           to point to features of his case of a kind mentioned in
           Exceptions 1 and 2 ... Or features falling outside the
           circumstances described in those exceptions ... Which made his
           claim based on article 8 especially strong."


 0. And at paragraph 32 in respect of a "medium" offender (i.e. one who has
    received a sentence of imprisonment between 12 months and 4 years):

           "... If all he could advance in support of his article 8 claim
           was a "near miss" case in which he fell short of bringing
           himself within either Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not
           be possible to say that he had shown that there were "very
           compelling circumstances over and above those described in
           Exceptions 1 and 2", he would need to have a far stronger case
           than that by reference to the interests protected by article 8
           to bring himself within that fallback protection. But again, in
           principle, there may be cases where such an offender can say
           that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions 1
           and 2 have such great force for article 8 purposes that they do
           constitute such very compelling circumstances whether taken by
           themselves or in conjunction with other factors relevant to
           article 8 but not falling within the factors described in
           Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision-maker, B at the Secretary of
           State or a tribunal, must look at all the matters relied upon
           collectively, in order to determine whether they are
           sufficiently compelling to outweigh the high public interest in
           deportation."


 0. A recent formulation of the interrelationship between the "very
    compelling circumstances" exercise and factors relating to Exceptions 1
    and 2 is to be found in SSHD v Garzon [2018] EWCA Civ 1225 at paragraph
    26 of the judgment of Macfarlane LJ (with whom Sales LJ agreed), when
    upholding a finding of very compelling circumstances:

           "... The purpose of an Article 8 evaluation which is conducted
           after a foreign criminal has failed to bring his case within
           s117C or the express provisions in the rules, is to look at the
           same factors again, together with other relevant factors not
           specifically covered within the terms of the statute or the
           rules, within the context of Article 8 albeit with due regard to
           the public policy in favour of deportation of foreign criminals
           and expressly taking account of the "very compelling
           circumstances" threshold ..."


 0. Finally, on substantive law we turned to the significance of the
    rehabilitation of the deportee when assessing very compelling
    circumstances. The authorities were reviewed in some detail in SSHD v
    Olarrewaju [2018] EWCA Civ 557. At paragraph 17 of the judgment of
    Newey LJ (with whom Simon LJ agreed) he referred to the dicta of Moore-
    Bick LJ in Taylor v Home Secretary [2015] EWCA Civ 845 who said that:

          "I would certainly not wish to diminish the importance of
          rehabilitation in itself, but the cases in which it can make a
          significant contribution to establishing the compelling reasons
          sufficient to outweigh the public interest in deportation are
          likely to be rare.... Rehabilitation is relevant primarily to the
          reduction in the risk of re-offending. It is less relevant to the
          other factors which contribute to the public interest in
          deportation."


 0. At paragraph 18 he referred to the observations of Wilson LJ in the
    earlier case of OH (Serbia) v Home Secretary [2008] EWCA Civ 694 at
    paragraph 15 when he stated that:

         "(a) The risk of reoffending is one facet of  the  public  interest
         but, in the case of very serious crimes,  not  the  most  important
         facet.


      b) Another important facet is the need to deter foreign nationals from
         committing serious crimes  by  leading  them  to  understand  that,
         whatever the other circumstances, one consequence of them may  well
         be deportation.


      c) A further important facet is the role of a deportation order as  an
         expression of society's revulsion at serious crimes and in building
         public confidence in the treatment of  foreign  citizens  who  have
         committed serious crimes.


      d) Primary responsibility for the public interest, whose view of it is
         likely to be wider and better informed than  that  of  a  tribunal,
         resides in the respondent and accordingly  a  tribunal  hearing  an
         appeal against a decision to deport should not  only  consider  for
         itself all the facets of the public interest but should weigh, as a
         linked but independent feature, the approach to them adopted by the
         respondent in the context of the facts of the  case.  Speaking  for
         myself, I would not however describe the tribunal's  duty  in  this
         regard as being higher than 'to weigh' this feature."


 0. At paragraph 26 of his judgment Newey LJ summarised the law here as
    meaning that "the significance of rehabilitation is limited by the fact
    that the risk of reoffending is only one facet of the public interest."

 0. As to the approach to be taken when considering the decision of the FTT
    in relation to the balancing exercise, the judgment shows that the
    balancing exercise has really not been conducted at all, then that is
    likely to be fatal to the decision. For example, see OH (Serbia)
    referred to above. On the other hand, where the FTT has engaged in a
    very clear and comprehensive assessment of all the factors paying
    particular attention to the great weight to be attached to the public
    interest in deportation, where the complaint is simply one of a wrong
    allocation of weight to all the factors, this will not usually lead to
    a successful challenge unless the decision itself was insupportable on
    the evidence or otherwise perverse. See paragraph 30 of the decision of
    McFarlane LJ in SSHD v Garzon [2018] EWCA 1225, where he accepted that
    another specialist tribunal might have reached the contrary conclusion.
    Hence the necessary conclusion by the Court of Appeal in Olarewaju that
    since the only reasonable conclusion was that there were no very
    compelling circumstances, the finding of the FTT that there were was a
    decision not reasonably open to it.

Analysis


 0. We accept that this is not one of those cases where the FTT clearly
    failed to take into account the relevant factors or give, as a starting
    point, great weight to the public interest in deportation.

 0. However, we consider that this is a case which goes beyond a mere
    disagreement with the apportionment of weight undertaken by the Judge.
    Rather, we consider it to be one of those cases where his decision was
    not one which was reasonably open to him. While he was entitled to take
    into account as part of the mix the private and family life factors
    which went to the (unsuccessful) claims under Exceptions 1 and 2, their
    significance must be limited. In the case of Exception 2, by reference
    to Ms [B], the claim failed on all counts, albeit that the Judge
    thought that it would be problematic for Ms [B] here after Mr Weekes
    was deported. In respect of Exception 1, it would be fair to say that
    Mr Weekes "just missed" in the sense that had he been here lawfully for
    another 3 or 4 years, he would have met the first requirement and the
    Judge held that he would have met the other requirements if engaged.
    But that still requires showing very compelling circumstances in
    addition. It is impossible in our view to see how Mr Weekes'
    rehabilitation can be sufficient given the limited weight which it will
    usually attract. That is especially so here where(a) the offending
    history was appalling and only ended in 2015 (b) it remains the case
    that Mr Weekes continued to offend even after his original deportation
    appeal had succeeded and (c) the last part of paragraph 81 of the
    judgment was obviously an important finding in the eyes of the FTT and
    yet (i) it appears to be no more than speculation or (ii) or if soundly
    based, suggests that in truth, Mr Weekes' rehabilitation is precarious.
    We reject the submission made by Ms Lowis that despite the number of
    offences, the offending as a whole can generally be described as
    "nuisance" only. Indeed, the history of the offending as a whole leads
    us to describe it as "serious". The only conclusion we can reach is
    that the FTT in the circumstances gave far too much weight to the
    rehabilitation than could possibly be justified.

 0. Accordingly, while giving due deference to the balancing exercise
    conducted by the FTT as we must, its decision falls clearly outside the
    bounds of decisions reasonably open to it. Accordingly, the appeal by
    the Sec of State succeeds. We set aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 0. Given the nature of the challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    there is no need for a further hearing. All the points favourable to
    the Appellant have been identified and, in our judgement for the
    reasons given above, cannot amount to "very compelling circumstances
    over and above those described in paragraph 399 or 399A". Further there
    is nothing before us that has not been considered above that could lead
    to the appeal being allowed.

 0. It follows that we substitute a decision dismissing Mr Weekes' appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision.

    Notice of Decision

 0. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. We set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and substitute a decision dismissing Mr
    Weekes' appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed[pic]                          |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Mr Justice Waksman                   |                                     |
|Sitting as a Judge of the Upper      |                                     |
|Tribunal                             |Dated 28 February 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

