
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06538/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2019                              |On 27 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                 HABIB AHMED
                       (anonymity direction NOt MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. W. Khan, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal, promulgated on 31 January 2018, in which he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    allow further leave to remain on human rights grounds.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The grounds are based on the alleged misunderstanding by the judge
         in failing to note that the English language certificate  had  been
         submitted in March 2015 valid to October 2016.  At  [29]  and  [30]
         there were arguably incomplete findings as to the English  language
         certificate and as this is central to the issue arguably  the  lack
         of findings amount to an arguable error of law."

 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.

Error of Law

 4. The Judge states at [29] and [30]:

         "That then leaves the question as to whether the appellant can meet
         the other eligibility requirement, which is  the  English  language
         test at level A1 on the Common  European  Framework  of  Reference,
         which has to be obtained from an  approved  provider  specified  in
         Appendix  O.   The  appellant  claims  he  did  submit   an   IELTS
         certificate  with  his  September  2014   application   which   the
         respondent does not dispute but that was an application for further
         leave to remain as a student and not a  spouse  in  which  case  it
         cannot be taken into account.  He has to provide a test certificate
         with the spouse application unless that test certificate  has  been
         submitted previously in a successful spouse application  which  was
         successful.  In other words, if the certificate had been  submitted
         in a successful entry clearance application within  2  years,  then
         the respondent would not need to see it again.  But that  does  not
         apply in this case because this is the  first  time  in  which  the
         appellant has made a spouse application. [29]


         The appellant  would  be  required  to  pass  the  English-language
         examination as set out in paragraph E-LTRP 4.1 if he  was  applying
         for leave to remain under the 5 year route but according to page 10
         of the Appendix FM 1.2 English Language Requirement of April  2017,
         if the appellant is applying under the 10-year  route,  he  is  not
         obliged to meet the English language requirement and  therefore  he
         does not have to provide evidence of his English-language ability."
         [30]

 5. I find that the Judge has made  a  mistake  of  fact  relating  to  the
    English language test certificate.  It is dated October 2014,  and  was
    submitted with the application made in March 2015.  At [29]  he  states
    that  the  IELTS  certificate  was  submitted  with  a  September  2014
    application.  Given that it is dated October 2014, it cannot have  been
    provided with an application made in September 2014.  I find  that  the
    Judge has made a mistake at the outset  of  his  consideration  of  the
    English language test certificate as he  has  misunderstood  when  this
    certificate was provided.


 6. Further, the Judge has failed in these paragraphs to make a finding  as
    to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant   meets   the   English   language
    requirements.  The issue is left hanging, following the mistake of fact
    made in relation to the IELTS certificate.  There are no more  findings
    in [29], the Judge merely sets out the law.  The same is  the  case  at
    [30].

 7. The Judge has misunderstood the evidence, and I find that this  mistake
    of fact has led to the erroneous finding that  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided the correct evidence.  I accept that the reasons  for  refusal
    letter confused the issue  with  reference  to  "previously  successful
    spouse applications".  The Appellant made a student application,  which
    was varied in March 2015 to a spouse application.  The certificate  was
    provided with this spouse application.  No  response  was  received  to
    this application, so he made a fresh spouse application in  June  2016.
    The  Appellant  never  claimed  to  have  made  a   successful   spouse
    application, but neither had the test certificate provided been used in
    a previous student application.

 8. I find the Judge has erred in failing properly to consider the evidence
    before him.  He made a mistake of fact regarding when  the  certificate
    was provided, and then failed to make a clear finding as to whether  or
    not the Appellant had provided evidence which met the  English-language
    requirements.  I find that this is an error of  law,  and  that  it  is
    material, given that this was the only issue which remained outstanding
    under  the  five  year  partner  route.   The  Respondent  refused  the
    application on grounds of suitability, but this  was  resolved  in  the
    Appellant's favour.  The Respondent also  refused  the  application  on
    eligibility grounds due to the Appellant's status, but  this  was  also
    resolved in the Appellant's favour.  Therefore  the  only  issue  which
    remained outstanding under the five year partner route was the issue of
    the English language test.  I therefore find that the mistake of  fact,
    and the failure properly to consider the evidence, is a material  error
    of law.

 9. I set the decision aside to be remade.

Remaking

10. The Judge found that the Appellant met all of the other requirements of
    the immigration rules under the five year partner route.  There was  no
    cross-appeal by the Respondent in relation to these findings.


11. The reasons for refusal letter states as follows  in  relation  to  the
    English language requirement:

    "You have submitted an IELTS test report dated 11  October  2014  which
    you state was submitted in your previous FLR(FP)  application,  however
    this was not submitted and accepted in a previously  successful  spouse
    application and is not an English language test certificate in speaking
    and listening from  an  English-language  test  provider  specified  in
    Appendix O.  Therefore you have not submitted any evidence required  to
    show that you meet the English requirements."

12. At the hearing Mr. Mills accepted that IELTS was  an  English  language
    test provider specified in Appendix O, both now and in May  2017,  when
    the Respondent's decision was made.  The reasons for refusal letter  is
    therefore wrong when it states that IELTS was not an approved provider.
     Mr. Mills also accepted that at the date of the application the  IELTS
    test certificate dated 11 October 2014 was valid.  By the date  of  the
    Respondent's decision the  certificate  was  no  longer  in  date,  and
    therefore  was  no  longer  valid,  but  the  rules  require  that  the
    certificate be valid as at the  time  of  application,  and  Mr.  Mills
    accepted that  the  IELTS  test  certificate  dated  October  2014  was
    therefore valid when the application was made in June 2016.


13. I find that the Respondent accepted that  the  Appellant  submitted  an
    IELTS test report dated 11 October 2014.  This much is clear  from  the
    first sentence of the paragraph.  The fact that it  was  not  submitted
    and accepted in a previous successful spouse application is irrelevant.
     The Respondent accepted that the Appellant had submitted an IELTS test
    certificate.  The Respondent had the  certificate  in  his  possession.
    Had it been previously submitted in a successful spouse application, he
    would not need to have seen  it.   However,  the  Appellant  had  never
    claimed that he had made a previous successful spouse  application,  so
    he submitted the certificate as required.

14. The second reason given for refusing the application on this ground  is
    that is not an English-language test certificate from a  test  provider
    specified in Appendix O.  However, as I have set out above,  Mr.  Mills
    accepted that IELTS was an approved provider.

15. I therefore find that the Appellant provided a valid  English  language
    test certificate from an approved provider with his  application.   The
    reasons given  by  the  Respondent  for  refusing  the  application  in
    relation to the English language requirements  are  without  merit.   I
    find that the Appellant met the English-language  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.  I therefore find that the Appellant has shown  that
    at the time of the application he met the requirements of  Appendix  FM
    of the immigration rules.

Article 8


16. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 in  accordance
    with the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The Respondent  was  satisfied
    that the Appellant met the relationship requirements of the immigration
    rules, and that he and his  wife  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  I find that the Appellant and his  wife  have  a  family
    life sufficient to engage the operation of Article 8.  I find that  the
    decision would interfere with  this  family  life.   I  find  that  the
    Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since October 2009, almost  10
    years, and has built up a private life during this time  sufficient  to
    engage the operation of Article 8.  I  find  that  the  decision  would
    interfere with his private life.


17. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
    immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.

18. In carrying out the  proportionality  assessment,  I  have  taken  into
    account all of my findings above.  In assessing the public  interest  I
    have taken into account section 19 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Section 117B(1)  provides  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public interest.  I have found
    above that the Appellant meets the requirements of Appendix FM  of  the
    immigration rules.  I therefore find that there will be  no  compromise
    to the maintenance of effective immigration  control  by  allowing  his
    appeal.

19. I have  found  above  that  the  Appellant  met  the  English  language
    requirements (section 117B(2)).  The application was not  refused  with
    reference to the financial requirements, and I find that the  Appellant
    will be financially independent (section 117B(3)).

20. Sections 117B(4) and 117B(5) are  not  applicable  to  the  Appellant's
    family life.   It  was  found  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant had "not overstayed his leave by any period  not  covered  by
    the immigration rules".  He did not form a relationship when he was  in
    the United Kingdom without leave.  Section 117B(6) is not relevant.

21. Giving particular weight to the  fact  that  the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the immigration rules, I find that  the  balance  comes
    down in favour of the Appellant.  I find that the Appellant has  shown,
    on the balance of probabilities, that the decision is a breach  of  his
    rights, and those of his wife, to  a  family  and  private  life  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

22. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.

23. I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on  human  rights
    grounds.  The Appellant meets the requirements of Appendix FM.


Signed                                  Date 21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award.  The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
the Respondent had not discharged the  burden  of  proof  showing  that  the
Appellant had used deception, nor had he provided evidence to show that  the
decision of 11 February 2015 was ever  served  on  the  Appellant.   I  have
found that the Respondent should not have refused  the  application  on  the
basis  that  the  Appellant  had  not  provided  a  valid  English  language
certificate.  In the circumstances I make a fee award  for  the  entire  fee
paid.


Signed                                  Date 21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
