
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/06029/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 October 2017                        | On 18 October 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal

                                     and

                              Mr Khumraj Thapa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant/Secretary of State:       Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:                 Mr L Youssefian, Richmond
Chambers LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Amin promulgated on 23 January 2017  in  which  she
    allowed the Claimant's appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR. For the purposes of clarity, I will refer to  Mr
    Thapa as the 'claimant', given that he was  the  Appellant  before  the
    First Tier Tribunal, but the Secretary of State  has  appealed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant in this case is a national of Nepal who  was  born  on  18
    September 1983.  In her decision Judge Amin noted how the Claimant  was
    a child of an ex-Gurkha and correctly considered the position regarding
    the Gurkha policy and the historic wrong in respect of the children  of
    former Gurkhas and in her findings Judge  Amin  found  that  there  was
    emotional and financial dependence by the  Claimant  upon  his  parents
    that went beyond the  normal  emotional  ties  of  a  family  and  that
    therefore Article 8.1 of the ECHR was engaged.  She  further  found  at
    paragraph 27 of her judgment that the Claimant's father  had  confirmed
    that he would have settled in the UK had he been permitted to do so and
    they did not intend to live apart and the mother has confirmed that the
    sons are very close.

 3. The judge went on to find at paragraph 32 that she was  satisfied  that
    the Claimant is an adult dependent child of a Gurkha veteran and  found
    on balance that he was emotionally and  financially  dependent  on  the
    sponsor as  supported  by  the  oral  and  documentary  evidence.   She
    accepted the sponsor's evidence that he would have settled in the UK if
    he had been allowed to after  his  discharge  from  the  British  Army,
    therefore the Claimant would have been with him but  for  the  historic
    injustice, which, she said, the respondent did not dispute.

 4. At paragraph 33 Judge Amin went on to state:

         "The respondent  has  not  given  any  reasons  why  admitting  the
         appellant would be against the public  interest  or  how  it  would
         undermine order in the United Kingdom  given  that  the  Claimant's
         siblings, who were over the age of 18 years, were granted entry  in
         2013.  There is nothing to suggest that the  appellant  has  a  bad
         immigration history or has a criminal record in Nepal  that  weighs
         in favour of the public interest",

    and at paragraph 35: "I find having  considered  the  evidence  in  the
    round and on balance that the historic injustice in this  case  carries
    significant weight on the side of the appellant and  outweighs  matters
    relied upon by the  respondent."   She  therefore  found  that  it  was
    disproportionate to the legitimate public ends sought to be achieved.

 5. The Secretary of State has now sought to appeal against that  decision.
    Within the grounds of appeal it is  argued  that  the  finding  of  the
    Tribunal that the Claimant was emotionally  and  financially  dependent
    upon his parents was not supported by the evidence before the Tribunal.
     It is argued that the Claimant is 33 years old and is in  good  health
    and educated to a high standard and has lived by himself in both  China
    and Finland.  It is argued that the Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to  have
    limited regard to those features and accepted the claimed assertion  of
    dependence.  Mr Tufan  today  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    effectively argues that the judge's findings in that regard  amount  to
    irrationality.

 6. It is further argued within the grounds of appeal that  in  effect  the
    judge had failed to apply the Kugathas test  of  emotional  dependency,
    which, it is said in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  requires  elements  of
    dependency beyond the normal emotional ties, and it is argued that  the
    Claimant has not shown such ties.

 7. In the fourth paragraph of the grounds of appeal it is  further  argued
    in the alternative that the judge's Article 8 assessment was flawed  on
    the basis that he had made no findings pursuant to Section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It  is  argued  that  the
    judge had not made any findings on whether the Claimant has the ability
    or means to integrate within the UK and it is argued that the Article 8
    assessment is incomplete.

 8. Permission to appeal has  been  granted  in  this  case  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Farrelly on 27 July 2017, when  he  found  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge did not give adequate  reasons  for  concluding
    the Claimant was dependent upon his parents and so  erred  in  law  and
    also found that it was arguable that inadequate consideration had  been
    given to the factors in Section 117B.

 9. I am most grateful to both legal representatives for their  submissions
    today.  Full record of  those  submissions  are  contained  within  the
    Record of Proceedings and I will therefore not  repeat  them  in  their
    entirety here but in summary Mr Tufan on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State challenges the findings of emotional and financial dependency and
    relies upon the grounds of appeal. He seeks to argue that the  Claimant
    has been living independently away from his parents in both  China  and
    Finland and he seeks to argue that there are no elements of  dependency
    meeting the Kugathas test in this case.

10. He also argues that the judge erred in considering whether or not there
    was financial dependency and in that regard he refers me to  the  Court
    of Appeal case of AAO v Entry Clearance Officer [2011] EWCA Civ 840 and
    paragraph 35 of that judgment, being the judgment of Lord Justice  Rix,
    who at the end of paragraph  35  stated:  "That  is  not  to  say  that
    reliance on the further element of financial dependency  will  bring  a
    breach of Article 8: no case in which it has in the present context has
    been discovered."

11. Mr Tufan went on effectively to argue that although  the  Tribunal  can
    take financial dependency into consideration, he argued that in  effect
    it was a neutral factor and  it  was  not  actually  wrong  to  mention
    financial dependency, but said that  that  in  and  of  itself  in  the
    absence of emotional dependency would be insufficient.  In  respect  of
    the Section 117B point he argues that  that  had  not  been  adequately
    dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal Judge but  he  conceded  that  in
    fact that was not material to the outcome if there is family life  here
    for the purpose of Article 8 (1) given the historic injustice arguments
    and the weight to be attached to that historic injustice.

12. Mr Youssefian in reply relies upon his Rule 24 notice, which I have now
    taken account of, and argues that in fact there  is  no  merit  in  the
    appeal brought by the Secretary of State and there was no  case  really
    to answer.  He says that financial dependency is a factor that  can  be
    taken into account in determining whether or not  there  are  the  ties
    going beyond the normal emotional ties between parents and adult  child
    such as to meet the Kugathas test and argues that in any event in  this
    case the judge found that there was the emotional dependency sufficient
    to meet the Kugathas test.  He argues  that  the  judge  made  findings
    which were open to the judge and that the judge found the witnesses  to
    be highly credible.

13. He has referred me to various paragraphs within  the  recent  Court  of
    Appeal decision in the case of Rai v Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320 and seeks on the basis of that  decision  to  argue
    that the Court of Appeal in that case did not consider  that  financial
    dependency was an irrelevant consideration and did not seek to say that
    the Upper Tribunal when considering financial dependency erred.

14. He further seeks to rely  upon  the  fact  that  within  the  Rai  case
    consideration was given to the  existing  jurisprudence  regarding  the
    requirements that had to be met in order to meet the Kugathas test.  In
    that regard he referred me in particular to paragraphs 17 and 18 of the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal relating to the original Kugathas  test
    where Lord Justice Sedley at paragraph 17  of  the  judgment  indicated
    that there would have to  be  support  which  was  real,  committed  or
    effective. Counsel then went on to refer me specifically  to  paragraph
    18 of the Upper Tribunal case of Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha
    policy) where the  Upper  Tribunal  accepted  that  Kugathas  had  been
    interpreted too restrictively in the past and ought to be read  in  the
    light of subsequent decisions of the domestic and Strasbourg courts and
    went on at paragraph 61 to state:

         "Recently, the European Court of Human Rights has reviewed the case
         law, in AA v United  Kingdom  [2012]  Imm  AR  1,  finding  that  a
         significant factor will be whether  or  not  the  adult  child  has
         founded a family of his own.  If he is still single and living with
         his parents, he is likely to enjoy family life with them."

15. First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin when  making  her  findings  within  her
    decision at paragraph 20 specifically found that the Claimant had

         "spent his entire life with the family until the family came to the
         UK and the family is his backbone.  The Claimant  continues  to  be
         wholly financially and emotionally dependent on his family.  I have
         seen the Viber messages and the  money  remittances  including  the
         bank account which has been put at his disposal in Nepal."

16. Judge Amin went on at paragraph 21:

         "The oral evidence I heard from  the  Claimant's  parents  and  his
         brothers confirms the strong family life that is in existence along
         with the dependency.  The Claimant has visited his family in the UK
         on one occasion and was granted a visitor visa and his family  have
         visited  him  in  Nepal.   They  keep  in  constant   and   regular
         communication via Viber."

17. The judge noted that four years  had  passed  since  Immigration  Judge
    White's decision to refuse the Claimant entry clearance and  there  had
    been a deterioration in the wellbeing of the Claimant and  this  was  a
    serious inhibition of his ability to live a full  and  fulfilling  life
    and went on then  to  consider  that  the  previous  decision  had  not
    actually considered the historic injustice principles.

18. Judge Amin reminded herself at paragraph 28 of the need  to  show  more
    than the usual emotional ties between adult children and their parents,
    referring to the case of Kugathas v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31, and at paragraph 29 went on to find that
    she was satisfied on balance that:

          "Whilst the Claimant is an adult  he  is  emotionally  and  wholly
         financially dependent on his parents, as supported by the oral  and
         documentary evidence of the visits by the sponsor and his wife  and
         the money that the  Claimant  has  access  to  in  Nepal  from  his
         father's pension."

    She accepted the evidence that the contact was by phone  and  that  the
    unchallenged evidence was that the Claimant lived with his parents  and
    siblings before they came to the UK and she found that the Claimant was
    still reliant on funds from his parents  to  survive  on  a  day-to-day
    basis and he had not formed an independent family unit and he  had  not
    severed the family unit and that the evidence  was  that  the  Claimant
    enjoyed a relationship  with  his  parents  which  goes  beyond  normal
    emotional ties of a family, and therefore Article 8(1) of the  ECHR  is
    engaged.

19. Although the Secretary of State argues that the Claimant had  lived  by
    himself in China and Finland the evidence, which was  accepted  by  the
    judge, having heard the witnesses, was to the effect that this Claimant
    was still in very regular contact with his family in the  UK  including
    his parents and that they kept in constant  and  regular  communication
    via Viber.  She also noted the visit to the UK and the  fact  that  his
    family visit him in Nepal.  The  fact  that  the  Claimant  might  have
    actually lived in other countries in terms of having lived in China and
    Finland does not in itself necessarily mean that there was a  break  in
    terms of there being a family unit or  necessarily  mean  there  was  a
    reduction in the level of any dependency.

20. The judge,  in  my  judgment,  has  actually  properly  considered  the
    evidence in the round  and  has  taken  account  of  and  accepted  the
    evidence of the witnesses regarding the level of  contact  between  the
    Claimant and his parents and his brothers and accepted that that did go
    beyond the normal emotional ties of a family, given the fact  that  the
    Claimant had not, on  her  findings,  actually  formed  an  independent
    family unit. I consider that was a finding open to her on the evidence.

21. The judge also properly did consider whether or not he was  financially
    dependent upon his parents.  In that regard the question of whether  or
    not someone is financially dependent upon their parents may be relevant
    to the extent of considering whether or not they have  actually  formed
    an independent life away from their parents and whether there are still
    the level of ties which go beyond  the  usual  emotional  ties  between
    adult children and their parents.

22. The case of AAO referred to by Mr Tufan at paragraph 35 does not appear
    to me to be indicating  that  financial  dependency  is  necessarily  a
    completely irrelevant factor.  It is just that financial dependency  in
    and of itself may not be sufficient to engage Article 8. Quite  clearly
    if there is not the  elements  of  emotional  dependency  going  beyond
    normal emotional ties that may well be the case but it  does  not  mean
    that financial considerations are necessarily  irrelevant  and  I  find
    that the judge quite properly took account of all the evidence in  this
    case made findings which were quite open to her on the evidence.  I  do
    not accept the submission by the Secretary of State that those findings
    are irrational.

23. I further do  bear  in  mind,  as  has  been  correctly  stated  by  Mr
    Youssefian on behalf of the claimant, that the Court of Appeal  in  the
    case of Rai v Entry Clearance Officer did not indicate that  the  Upper
    Tribunal erred in  considering  the  financial  dependency  element  in
    taking that as one of the factors  and,  as  he  correctly  states,  at
    paragraphs 36 and 37 the Court of Appeal  noted  the  arguments  by  Mr
    Jesurum in the Court of Appeal suggesting that  the  previous  Tribunal
    had been looking not only for a  sufficient  degree  of  financial  and
    emotional dependence to  constitute  family  life  but  also  for  some
    extraordinary or exceptional feature in the Claimant's dependence  upon
    his parents as a necessary determinant of the existence of  his  family
    life with them. The Court of Appeal in paragraph 37 accepted that those
    submissions had force when Mr Jesurum argued that in  that  regard  too
    high a test and too exacting a test had been undertaken in  the  UT  in
    that case.

24. In that regard therefore I do find that the judge made  findings  which
    were open to her on the evidence and that the judge has quite  properly
    considered whether or not Article 8 was  engaged  and  whether  or  not
    there was family life between this adult Claimant even though he was 33
    and had lived in other countries and his parents.

25. In respect of the alternative submission within the grounds  of  appeal
    that the judge has not made adequate findings on Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  quite  clearly   the
    requirement  is  for  judges  to  take  into  account   the   statutory
    considerations set out within Sections 117A to D  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  which  are  said  within  the  actual
    Sections themselves to be a statutory  consideration  that  the  judges
    have to take into account in  every  case  where  Article  8  is  being
    considered.  In that regard Judge Amin at paragraph 17 of the  decision
    has  stated:  "I  have  had  regard  to  Section  117A  and  B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended)."

26. It appears as if she has not actually gone on to individually  set  out
    everything which is said there within those paragraphs or  to  consider
    questions as to whether  or  not  the  Claimant  would  be  financially
    independent or the like but quite clearly from the judge's findings she
    has gone on to actually find that the Claimant was  wholly  financially
    dependent upon his parents and therefore was aware  of  the  fact  that
    there  was  financial  dependency  and  that  the  Claimant   was   not
    financially independent . Clearly has stated that she has taken account
    of Section 117A and B and the fact that it is in  the  public  interest
    that someone who is seeking  leave  to  enter  the  UK  is  financially
    independent.

27. She has quite clearly said that she has taken account of those  factors
    but in any event I therefore do find that the judge has  taken  account
    of the issues that she says she has, but even if I  am  wrong  and  the
    judge should have actually gone on to specifically  consider  each  and
    every one of the factors set out in Section 117A and  B,  as  Mr  Tufan
    quite properly concedes, even if that is an error in that regard, and I
    am not satisfied that it in fact that would be material to the outcome,
    given the historic injustice in this case.

28. In that view I am also bolstered by paragraphs 55 and 57 of  the  Court
    of Appeal decision in the case of Rai  wherein  the  Court  of  Appeal,
    again dealing with Section 117A and B, noted in that case that  Section
    117B including the maintenance of effective immigration  control  being
    in the public interest and it being in the public interest  that  those
    who  seek  entry  into  the  UK  speak  English  and  are   financially
    independent had not been  properly  dealt  with  but  in  view  of  the
    historic injustice could not have seen that  the  decision  would  have
    been any different in any event and therefore was immaterial.

29. I therefore find that the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Amin
    does not contain any  material  errors  of  law  and  the  decision  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Amin  does  not  contain  any
material errors of law and is maintained. The Secretary  of  State's  appeal
from that decision is dismissed.

I do not make any order in respect of anonymity, no such order  having  been
sought before me and no such order having been made by  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Amin when the case was in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Dated 6th October 2017

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty






