
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06639/2018
                                                               hu/06645/2018
                                                               hu/06650/2018
                                                               hu/06656/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2019                           |On 27 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     cc
                                     qw
                                     ddc
                                     kzc
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Timson, instructed by AGI Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision promulgated on 3 December 2018, I found that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law  and  I  set  aside  its  decision.   My
    reasons were as follows:

         "1.  I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent, and  to  the
         respondents as the appellants (as they appeared respectively before
         the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellants are  citizens  of  China.
         The first and second appellants are the parents of  the  third  and
         fourth appellants who were born respectively in 2010 and 2012.   In
         March 2013, the appellants were  served  with  deportation  orders.
         The first appellant had been convicted of an  offence  relating  to
         the possession and/or use of a false instrument on 25 June 2007 and
         had received a fifteen month custodial sentence on 2 July 2007.  He
         appealed on human rights (Article 8 ECHR) grounds to the First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge A J Parker) which, in a decision promulgated on  29
         June 2018 allowed the appeals.  The Secretary of State now appeals,
         with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   Both parties acknowledge that Judge  Parker  has  referred  to
         Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act in  his  decision,  notwithstanding
         the fact that the Section does not apply to a person who is  liable
         to deportation:

             '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom. [my emphasis] '

         3.   The parties acknowledge that the judge  should  have  confined
         his analysis to Section 117C (5) of the 2002 Act:

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         4.   It also appears to be common ground between the  parties  that
         the judge  has  variously  throughout  his  analysis  applied  both
         Section 117B(6) (and the  test  of  "reasonableness")  and  Section
         117C(5) (the test of "undue harshness").  The question  is  whether
         the judge's analysis is vitiated by this apparent confusion between
         the two provisions.

         5.   Mr Timson, who appeared for the appellants, submitted that  it
         was not.  He  submitted  that  the  judge's  reference  to  Section
         117B(6) in the earlier part of his decision was little more than  a
         "overview"  of  the  various  legal  provisions.   Mr  Timson   did
         acknowledge that there were particular findings to which the  judge
         had applied the test of reasonableness  (see,  in  particular,  the
         finding regarding a restrictive right to  employment  in  China  at
         [65] and whether it would be "unreasonable" for the children to  be
         returned to China after  "such  a  long  time  in  this  country").
         However, Mr Timson submitted that the judge had also  set  out  and
         applied the test of undue harshness.  These comprehensive  findings
         effectively saved the decision from legal error.

         6.   Mr Timson mounted a skilful defence of Judge Parker's decision
         but I do not agree with his submissions.  A careful reading of  the
         decision shows that the judge has (i) conflated the two tests,  and
         (ii) made findings in respect of particular facts to which  he  has
         only applied the test of  unreasonableness.   At  [48],  the  judge
         wrote, "the concept of reasonableness brings back into play all the
         more potentially relevant public interest considerations.  This  is
         the same range of considerations  that  fall  to  be  applied  when
         determining an application [under] Section 117B(6) as in any  other
         Article 8  determination"  and  the  judge  states  at  [57]  that,
         "however we are dealing with a  deportation  case  and  the  public
         interest is stronger".  It is not entirely clear what  this  means.
         The statutory framework should have been adopted by the judge;  the
         only test which he needed to apply given that the  first  appellant
         is a foreign criminal is that which appears  in  Section  117C.   I
         acknowledge that [61] arguably puts the judge's  analysis  back  on
         the right track but subsequently he lapses back into  the  language
         of reasonableness.  At [65], he writes that "there is evidence from
         the appellants that there was a  restrictive  right  to  employment
         which would restrict  their  ability  to  register  the  children's
         identity.  I find that it would not be reasonable for the appellant
         and their children to return".

         7.   At [66], the judge notes that the children "do speak a  little
         Mandarin" but that there would be a "significant culture  shock  to
         return to China".  Here, the judge does not refer to  the  language
         of either test so it is unclear whether  the  "significant  culture
         shock" would  amount  to  undue  harshness  or  would  only  be  an
         unreasonable difficulty with which the children would have to deal.
          At [68], the judge introduces what appears to be a new test, or at
         least a new form of expressing one of the  tests  which  the  judge
         conflates.  He finds that, "the appellants had their ID  cards  and
         household register documents  discontinued  whilst  in  the  United
         Kingdom and therefore if returned to China they would be unable  to
         access employment, housing, education of the children for at  least
         twelve months.  This would cause the family severe  destitution  as
         they would be homeless with no finances and the children would have
         no education".  I assume from the  context  that  the  judge  would
         consider such problems to have unduly harsh  consequences  for  the
         children but he does not say so in terms.  I  acknowledge  that  in
         his final paragraph [70] the judge refers only to Section 117C  but
         I find that by that stage of  the  analysis  it  is  unclear  which
         consequences a return to China the judge considers unduly harsh and
         those which he finds would be no more than  unreasonable.   In  the
         light of the confusion of the analysis, I find that the  only  safe
         course of  action  is  to  set  aside  this  decision.   The  facts
         concerning  this  family  do  not   appear   to   be   particularly
         controversial.  The judge only heard evidence from  the  first  and
         second appellants [6].  I find that the appeal may be  disposed  of
         in the Upper Tribunal which will  re-make  the  decision.   As  the
         judge's findings of fact and his application of the law  have  been
         conflated throughout, I set aside all findings of  fact  so  as  to
         avoid any doubt.

         Notice of Decision

         8.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 29 June 2018 is set aside.  None of the findings of  fact  shall
         stand.  The appeal will be retained in  the  Upper  Tribunal  which
         will re-make the decision following a resumed hearing at Manchester
         Civil Justice Centre on a date to be fixed  before  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Lane.

         9.   An anonymity direction is made."

 2. In the Article 8 appeal  the  standard  of  proof  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  I heard evidence from the first and  second  appellants
    who spoke in Mandarin with the assistance of an interpreter.

 3. The first appellant told me that he had his mother and younger  brother
    still living in China.  He does  not  contact  his  mother  very  often
    indeed only about once a year.  He has  no  contact  with  his  younger
    brother.  When asked why he did not contact his mother  in  China,  the
    appellant said that she had a "new family"  and  did  not  want  to  be
    "disturbed by me."  When  asked  about  his  ability  in  English,  the
    appellant said that he is able to understand English when spoken but is
    unable to speak it himself.  A  mixture  of  English  and  Mandarin  is
    spoken at home with the children.

 4. The second appellant also  gave  her  evidence  in  Mandarin  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter.  Her English appeared to be rather better
    than that of her husband.  She said that she was using  an  interpreter
    at court because it was "important."  She confirmed that  she  and  the
    first appellant had not married and they continued  to  have  a  family
    which was born out of wedlock.

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. As I pointed out in my error of law decision [3] the  test  is  one  of
    undue harshness.  I was assisted by Mr Timson who e-mailed  to  me  the
    most recent  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  (CPIN)  which  is
    relevant namely  that  of  December  2018  which  was  entitled  China:
    contravention of national population and family  planning  laws.   This
    note deals with children born abroad and out of wedlock at 5.9.1:

         'An Australian Refugee Review Tribunal  response,  dated  29  April
         2011, quoting the DFAT stated:

         '"In order to apply for the  child's  household  registration,  the
         parents would be required to provide the following documentation: a
         Chinese translation of the child's birth certificate; the  parents"
         household  registration;  ID  cards;  passports;   certificate   of
         marriage; and  a  receipt  issued  by  the  local  Family  Planning
         Committee to demonstrate that a family planning fee (also known  as
         a social compensation fee) has been paid. This list of requirements
         is  not  comprehensive;  the  local  authority  may  request   more
         information or identification on a case-by-case basis.

         '"Most provincial and municipal  governments  have  stated  that  a
         family planning fee would be  imposed  for  children  born  out  of
         wedlock. The State  Family  Planning  Commission  authorises  local
         governments to establish their own criteria  when  imposing  family
         planning fees in each jurisdiction."'

 7. Mr Timson submitted that it is unlikely that those  who  have  children
    born out of wedlock abroad would  fair  any  better  than  those  whose
    children are born in China.  The requirements in the first paragraph of
    5.9.1 refers only to a certificate of marriage;  if  they  were  to  be
    returned, it is likely, in  my  opinion,  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants will marry in order to mitigate any penalty which  they  may
    receive on return to China.  I consider  that  Mr  Timson  is  probably
    right in the light of what is said in the second  paragraph  of  5.9.1.
    That paragraph makes clear that the Chinese State  delegates  to  local
    authorities policy and implementation of family planning fees.  I  find
    that if the family were to return to China, and it is likely  that  the
    first and second appellant would marry for the  reasons  I  have  given
    above before leaving and that they would be subject to family  planning
    fees the level of which would depend upon what would be levied in their
    home area or any other part of China to which  they  chose  to  return.
    Because there is no national policy controlling the level of  fees,  it
    is not possible to say how much those local fees may  be.   However,  I
    also accept Mr McVeety's submission that  elsewhere  in  the  CPIN  and
    other background material it is made plain that the level of fines  and
    fees for contravention of the family planning policy is  likely  to  be
    proportionate to the level of income of the person upon whom  the  fine
    is imposed.  In the circumstances, I do not consider that an  excessive
    or punitive fine would therefore be imposed upon this  couple.   Whilst
    it is unlikely that, by marrying  before  leaving  the  UK,  they  will
    wholly escape the imposition of a fine or fee that fine or fee is  very
    unlikely to be so heavy as to put them into financial difficulties  let
    alone render them destitute.

 8. The registration of the children with or without the payment of a  fine
    or fee will enable the family and the children in particular to  access
    state benefits.  That is an important consideration in the appeal.

 9. The children of the first and second appellants are now 12 and 7  years
    old respectively.  Those  children  have  been  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than seven years and are  in  consequence  "qualifying
    children" for the purposes of Section 117 of the 2002 Act.  I accept Mr
    McVeety's submission that the "real world" consideration in  this  case
    is  that  neither  of  the  children's  parents  have  had   legitimate
    immigration status in  the  United  Kingdom  and,  notwithstanding  the
    length of residence of the family, the parents and the children  should
    be expected  to  return  to  their  country  of  nationality.   Further
    defining the issue, the Tribunal needs to consider whether it would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to leave with their children to  live  in
    China.  On the appellants' side of that equation, is the fact that  the
    family have lived here for a number of  years  and  the  children  each
    longer than seven years.  The children have a good knowledge of English
    and so does their mother although I accept that the  first  appellant's
    English is not good.  On the opposing side of the scales, there is  the
    first appellant's offending although I acknowledge  that  that  is  not
    particularly serious.  However, I accept Mr McVeety's submission  that,
    following KO (Nigeria), what may be characterised  as  relatively  mild
    offending does not add positively to an appellant's case any more  than
    a poor criminal  record  should  be  held  against  the  children  when
    assessing questions of best interests  or  undue  hardship.   Moreover,
    very little was made of any private life connections which  either  the
    first or second appellants  have  within  the  United  Kingdom.   I  am
    prepared  to  accept  the  evidence  given  by  the  first  and  second
    appellants regarding their lack of contact with their families in China
    but given that no member of this family has any health issues or  other
    special needs, I do not consider the lack of any family connections  in
    China proving to be an obstacle to their return provided  the  family's
    relationship with the Chinese State and local government is  such  that
    the family can access local services.  On that issue, I refer to what I
    have noted above from the CPIN.  I find that no penalty or fee will  be
    excessive rather it will be within the appellants' financial means and,
    once paid, the family will be able to access local services.

10. I find that this is a close family which loving parents care for  their
    children adequately.  On  the  evidence  before  me,  I  am  unable  to
    identify any particular features of the private lives  of  any  of  the
    appellants which would indicate that they should be allowed  to  remain
    in this country.  If they leave, they will do so together as  a  family
    and will, for the reasons I have given above, be able  to  resettle  in
    China and access necessary services.  Accordingly, the absence  of  any
    close family contacts in China is  not  of  particular  relevance.   Mr
    McVeety submitted, the  question  of  "undue  harshness"  sets  a  high
    threshold.  Some "harshness" is bound to result  from  the  removal  of
    this family from the United  Kingdom  to  China  but  I  am  unable  to
    identify any aspect of this case  and  of  the  circumstances  of  each
    individual appellant which would  render  that  harshness  "undue."   I
    find, therefore, that the appeal should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appellants' appeals against the decision of the Secretary of  State  are
dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 21 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 21 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

