
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
hu/06466/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 February 2018                         |On 20 March 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            mr Dhanrajsinh Parmar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Aryee, Solicitor of Visa and Migration Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of India, date  of  birth  19  December  1990,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision, dated 2 March 2016,
    to refuse leave to remain.   His  appeal  against  that  decision  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Maciel (the Judge) who in  a  decision
    promulgated on 8 November 2017 allowed the  appeal  with  reference  to
    Article 8 ECHR.  Permission to appeal that decision  was  given  on  21
    November 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew.

3.   The gravamen of the complaint by the Secretary  of  State  against  the
    Judge's decision is that the Judge failed to properly address the  fact
    that the Claimant had been involved with the use of deception in taking
    a TOEIC test in that he had used a proxy test taker and as a result had
    obtained a pass.  It is accepted on behalf of  the  Claimant  that  the
    Judge  took  into  account  those  matters  and  concluded   that   the
    certificate had been fraudulently obtained.  There was no cross  appeal
    against that decision.

4.    In considering the Article 8 issues the Judge referred simply  to  the
    fact that so far as the Claimant was concerned he was "... not at  risk
    of committing any further deception."  The Judge  said  that  she  "...
    considered the public interest in assuring the system  (of  Immigration
    controls) is not abused."  That is only part of the issue, particularly
    as to whether there is a real risk of repetition.  There  is  also  the
    relevant public interest element of deterring people from coming to the
    UK and committing offences in order to obtain status to remain here and
    there is also it is not a victimless crime, in the sense that  the  use
    of such deception is against the general public  interest  and  in  the
    public interest in discouraging criminality.  It is therefore a serious
    matter and although it is of some history the fact is  that  it  should
    not have occurred.

5.     Past criminality is a relevant part of the assessment  of  the  claim
    either in relation to the reasonableness of  return  in  terms  of  the
    impact on the children but it is also, but to  a  lesser  extent,  when
    that is resolved in the public interest, a part  of  a  proportionality
    exercise.  The position, as has been clarified in two decisions of  the
    Court of Appeal, MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ617  and  AM  Pakistan
    [2017] EWCA Civ 180.  Fortunately in  both  cases  Lord  Justice  Elias
    expressed his views on the relevance of past criminality, not least  in
    the light of the other cases of MM  (Uganda)[2016]  EWCA  Civ  450  and
    Zoumbas ([2013]1 WLR 3690.  The position is that Lord Justice Elias has
    indicated that in the light of EV (Philippines)  [2014EWCA  Civ874  and
    Zoumbas the criminality of an applicant is a relevant consideration  in
    assessing the reasonableness of removal on the impact on the qualifying
    children, in this case for which there are  three,  with  reference  to
    Section 117B(6) but  that  once  that  reasonableness  issue  has  been
    resolved in favour of the children then quite simply that is the end of
    the point, because if is  not reasonable  to  remove  the  children  it
    cannot be reasonable or proportionate to go further by reference to the
    balance of Article 8 considerations.

6.   It is clear that the Judge did not do the  required  exercise,  plainly
    considered  the  best  interests  of  the  children,  made  appropriate
    findings on the relationship between the Claimant and those children as
    well  as  making  clear  that  in  respect  of  two  of  the  children,
    respectively aged about 9 and 11, they have weekly contact  with  their
    biological father and that the  Judge  took  the  view  that  the  best
    interests of the children were to remain in the UK with their mother  a
    British national.  I find that the Judge did not carry out the required
    exercise, having regard to the relevant considerations and it  is  most
    unfortunate when the Judge properly dealt with the  claim  as  a  whole
    failed to follow the steps that have now been identified under the case
    law originally through MM and MA (Pakistan), which shows how the matter
    should  be  considered,  both  in  terms  of  finding   facts,   making
    conclusions on the best interests of the children, considering  whether
    the  Immigration  Rules  have  applicability  before  moving  into  the
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR and properly applying Section 117A  and
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended.

7.   I therefore conclude that the Original Tribunal made a  material  error
    of law and therefore the original  Tribunal's  decision  cannot  stand.
    The parties helpfully made brief representations as  to  how  the  case
    might be remade and I do so now because it seems to me the interests of
    the children, in terms of the impact upon the Claimant's partner and to
    some degree, suggests for the British  nationals,  clearly  and  almost
    unarguably, in favour of the Claimant remaining  in  the  UK  with  the
    family.
8.     I reach the view that the deception and misconduct  of  the  Claimant
    is a significant factor contrary to the public interest. Looking at all
    the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the  family  life   and   the
    relationships and the evidence contained within the bundle  before  the
    Judge, I find that for the two elder children, are qualifying  children
    under Section 117B(6) and 117D (1) NIAA 2002 as amended, this is a case
    where it is not reasonable to expect the latter two children, given the
    circumstances of their schooling and presence and friends  in  the  UK,
    to leave the UK or be separated from their  natural  father  with  whom
    they have contact. In those circumstances it is clear in the  light  of
    AM that if it is not reasonable for them to be removed then that  is  a
    full answer to the issue of proportionality. I  conclude,  taking  full
    account of the Claimant's criminality in assessing  the  reasonableness
    of expecting the children to leave, that expecting them to leave is not
    reasonable and therefore disproportionate to separate the Claimant from
    the children.  The following decision is substituted.

NOTICE OF DECISION
The immigration appeal is dismissed.  The appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds
is allowed.
No anonymity order was requested nor is one required.

Signed                                  Date 6 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
No fee award is appropriate because it appears no fee has been  paid.  If  a
fee has been paid the appeal has succeeded on basis of the Judge's  findings
of fact and so I conclude no fee award  is  appropriate.  The  Secretary  of
State decision was properly made on the material available.

Signed                                  Date 6 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
