
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/06132/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 February 2019                        |On 08 March 2019                |

                                   Before:

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|     |   THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT        |            |
|     |                                                         |Appellant   |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|     |              Mr H A                                     |            |
|     |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                                   |Respondent  |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person.
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik, of Counsel, instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department.

                                  ANONYMITY


We make an order under r.14(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
We make this order in order to protect the  identities  of  the  appellant's
minor children.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the re-making of the decision on the appeal of Mr H A who,  for
    convenience, we  will  refer  to  hereafter  as  the  "appellant".  The
    appellant is a national of Iraq  born  on  2  April  1980.  His  appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State (who  we  shall  hereafter
    refer to as the  "respondent")  of  26  February  2018  (hereafter  the
    "February 2018 Decision Letter")  to  refuse  his  human  rights  claim
    lodged on 23 January 2018 and therefore to maintain a deportation order
    signed against him on 31 May 2017 was allowed by Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Gurung-Thapa on human rights grounds in  a  determination
    promulgated on 1 October 2018 following a hearing on  13  August  2018.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in a decision dated 11 December 2018.

 2. At a hearing on 15 January 2019 before Lane  J  (President)  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coker, the Upper Tribunal  decided  that  Judge  Gurung-
    Thapa had materially erred in law in reaching her decision to allow the
    appellant's appeal on human  rights  grounds  (Article  8).  The  Upper
    Tribunal decided to set aside the judge's decision.

 3. This appeal was then re-listed for hearing on 13 February 2019  and  15
    February 2019 in a list comprising three other  appeals  (including  MS
    (Philippines)  (PA/09214/2017))  which  raised  issues  that   required
    consideration of the judgment of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)  and
    others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

 4. The appellant's family life claim is based in his relationship with his
    partner, Ms NT, a British citizen born on 22 October  1985,  and  their
    three children born, respectively, on 17 October 2011, 6 May 2014 and 8
    November 2016. The appellant also has a step-daughter (born on 21 April
    2004) who is his partner's child. The step-daughter does not live  with
    the appellant and his partner. She lives with his partner's mother  who
    lives nearby. The step-daughter visits the appellant  and  his  partner
    and also stays with them at  weekends.  The  appellant's  private  life
    claim is based on private life developed since  he  first  entered  the
    United Kingdom on  7  July  2000  and  difficulties  he  says  he  will
    experience on reintegration in Iraq.

 5. The respondent made the deportation  order  following  the  appellant's
    conviction on 15 March 2010 at Chelmsford Crown Court of  two  offences
    of assisting unlawful immigration and possessing an improperly obtained
    identity card and one offence of failing to surrender to custody at the
    appointed time, for which he received a total sentence  of  16  months'
    imprisonment.  According  to  the  judge's  sentencing   remarks,   the
    appellant was trying to arrange  the  illegal  entry  into  the  United
    Kingdom of his mother and brother.

Applicable provisions

 6. Given that the appellant received a sentence of at least 12 months,  he
    falls within the definition of "foreign criminal" in s.117D(2)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the  "2002  Act").  As  a
    consequence, s.117C of the 2002 Act is applicable.

 7.  Furthermore,  given  that  this  appeal  is  an  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision in the February 2018 Decision  Letter  to  refuse
    the applicant's application for leave to remain on human rights grounds
    and to maintain the deportation order made against him on 31 May  2017,
    paras 390, 390A and 391A of  the  Immigration  Rules  apply.  Para  390
    provides that an application for revocation will be considered  in  the
    light of all of the circumstances including: (i) the grounds upon which
    it  was  made;  (ii)  any  representations  made  in  support  of   the
    revocation;  (iii)  the  interests  of  the  community,  including  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control; and (iv) the interests of
    the applicant including any compassionate circumstances.

 8. Para 390A states that, where para 398 applies, the Secretary  of  State
    will consider whether para 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,  it
    will be only in exceptional circumstances that the public  interest  in
    maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by other  factors.



 9. As can be seen from the relevant provisions, which are set out  in  the
    Appendix to this decision, s.117C makes provision  for  two  exceptions
    which are available in cases where a  foreign  criminal  has  not  been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 4 years or more.  Exception  1
    as set out in s.117C(4) is the private life exception and  Exception  2
    as set out in s.117C(5) is the family life exception. Para 399A of  the
    Immigration Rules sets out in more detail the criteria to be  satisfied
    in relation to Exception 1. Para 399(a) and (b) set out in more  detail
    the criteria to be satisfied in relation to Exception 2.

10. Section 117C(6) provides that, in the case of a  foreign  criminal  who
    has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years, the
    public interest requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and  2.
    Para 398 makes a similar provision.

11. However, the Court of Appeal held, in NA (Pakistan) and others  v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662, that foreign criminals who have not been sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of at  least  4  years  may  also  seek  to
    establish that there are very compelling circumstances, over and  above
    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

The issues

12. The respondent accepts that the appellant's partner  and  his  children
    are British citizens.

13. In relation to Exception 2, the respondent  accepted  in  the  February
    2018 Decision Letter that the appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his partner and his children and  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the partner and the children to relocate to Iraq.

14. The respondent did not accept that the appellant satisfied any  of  the
    criteria for Exception 1 to apply, nor did he accept  that  there  were
    very compelling circumstances, over and above Exceptions 1 and 2.

15. Accordingly, the issues before us are as follows:

      i)    In relation to Exception 2, whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh
        for the appellant's partner and/or his children to  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom without him.

      ii)   Whether Exception 1 applies.

      iii)  If Exceptions 1 and 2 do  not  apply,  whether  there  are  very
        compelling circumstances, over and above the exceptions.

16. The appellant is entitled to succeed in his appeal if he satisfies  any
    one of (i)-(iii) above.



Immigration history

17. The appellant entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on 7 July  2000.
    He claimed asylum on the same day. His asylum claim was refused  on  15
    August 2003. His appeal  against  the  decision  was  dismissed  on  19
    January 2004. He exhausted his appeal rights on 5 February 2004.

18. Both before and after his convictions of 15 March 2010, representations
    were made to the Secretary  of  State  on  his  behalf.  Following  his
    convictions  in  May  2010,  he  was  notified  of  his  liability   to
    deportation,  the  first  such  notice  being  dated  29  April   2010.
    Eventually, on 31 May 2017, a deportation order was signed against him.
    By a decision dated 1 June 2017  (hereafter  the  "June  2017  Decision
    Letter"), his further claim to fear persecution and  his  human  rights
    claim were refused. He lodged an appeal against the refusal on 16  June
    2017 but withdrew his appeal on 26 September 2017 on the basis that  he
    had a pending application with the Home Office.

19. On 23 January 2018,  the  appellant  lodged  an  application  dated  20
    November 2017 for leave to remain ("LTR") under the 10-year family  and
    private life rules. His human rights  claim  and  application  for  LTR
    under the 10-year route were refused for reasons given in the  February
    2018 Decision Letter. The respondent therefore decided  not  to  revoke
    the deportation order. The instant appeal  is  an  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse the appellant's human rights claim in  the  February
    2018 Decision Letter.

20. Para 5 of the February 2018 Decision Letter states that  the  appellant
    had been removed to Geneva in October 2008 but was encountered  in  the
    United Kingdom on 10 June 2009. The appellant does not accept  that  he
    was removed from the United Kingdom in 2008.

21. It is clear that the appellant has never had leave to enter  or  remain
    in the United Kingdom.

22. The appellant was released from his prison sentence in October 2010 but
    he was then held in immigration detention until December 2010  when  he
    was released.

"Error of law" decision on 15 January 2019

23. The Upper Tribunal set aside the decision of Judge Gurung-Thapa because
    it considered that the judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's  partner  and
    his children to remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant. The
    Upper Tribunal decided that it would determine all issues afresh.

Documentary evidence

24. Judge Gurung-Thapa had before her a bundle of documents submitted under
    cover of a letter dated 3 August 2018 by Taj Mughal Solicitors who were
    then the appellant's representatives. In addition, we  have  before  us
    the respondent's bundle.

Hearing on 15 February 2019

25. At the commencement of the hearing on 15 February 2019,  the  appellant
    confirmed that no further  evidence  or  witness  statements  had  been
    submitted following the hearing that took place  before  Judge  Gurung-
    Thapa.

26. The appellant gave oral evidence in English, which he  spoke  fluently.
    He also addressed us in response to Mr Malik's submissions.

Summary of the appellant's oral evidence

27. The appellant said that he has lived in the United Kingdom since he was
    20 years old. He is now 38 years old. He has  therefore  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for "more or less" half of his life, particularly if the
    first seven years of his life in Iraq, which he does  not  recall,  are
    deducted in the calculation of his age.

28. The appellant has lived with his partner since 2006.  His  partner  was
    only 19 years old when he met her. She is now 33 years  of  age.  Their
    relationship has lasted 13 years. They are  not  lawfully  married  but
    they went through a religious marriage ceremony in 2009. His partner is
    a British citizen. He has three children with his partner. The children
    are all British citizens. His eldest daughter is 7 years  old.  He  has
    cared for his children and nursed them all of their  lives.  They  have
    never lived apart. He  also  has  a  step-daughter  who  is  a  British
    citizen. His step-daughter lives with his partner's mother.

29. Under cross-examination,  the  appellant  initially  accepted  that  he
    entered the United Kingdom illegally. Although  he  accepted  that  his
    asylum claim was dismissed in 2004, he said that he did not  know  that
    he had no lawful basis to be in the United Kingdom  thereafter  because
    of his lack of English, the lack of an explanation and because  he  was
    promised that his case would be resolved one day. He has  made  several
    attempts to regularise his immigration status.

30. On being pressed, the appellant said that  he  did  not  know  when  he
    entered the United Kingdom in a lorry that he was  entering  illegally,
    although he now understands that he  had  entered  illegally.  He  then
    said, on the one hand, that he realised when his appeal  was  dismissed
    in 2004 that he had exhausted his case, and, on the other  hand,  that,
    when he received the judge's decision dismissing his appeal, he did not
    have a clear picture because there  are  many  cases  of  people  being
    refused leave but later being granted leave.

31. Asked if he knew, at the time that he began his relationship  with  his
    partner in 2006 and  when  he  married  her  in  a  religious  marriage
    ceremony in 2009, that he had no lawful  basis  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the appellant said he had  never  understood  the  meaning  of
    "lawful". It was his understanding that  he  was  not  present  in  the
    United Kingdom illegally in circumstances where the  Home  Office  knew
    where he was and he was signing on. The respondent knew his true  name,
    identity and nationality and had his genuine Iraqi passport  which  was
    issued by the Iraqi Embassy in 2015. The  passport,  which  expires  in
    2021, has been in the possession of the respondent since 2015.  If  the
    respondent had wanted to arrest him and deport him, he could have  done
    so.

32. The appellant said that he has never received a copy of the deportation
    order that was issued against him. He has never received any copies  of
    any deportation notices, although he  has  asked  the  Home  office  to
    provide him with copies.

33. When asked again whether he knew that he had no  leave  to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2009, the appellant said he did. However,  there  was
    no law against a person who was present illegally in the United Kingdom
    entering into a relationship.

34. The appellant said that he was granted a work permit from 2001 to  2008
    and from 2012 to 2016. He got  in  touch  with  the  Criminal  Casework
    Directorate and was sent a work permit  showing  the  occupations  that
    were prohibited and the occupations that were permitted.

35. The appellant is not currently working but his partner is working  with
    a company in Manchester as a credit controller. She has worked with the
    company for 5 to 6 years. His partner currently  works  full-time.  Her
    hours of work are from 9.15 a.m. to 4.45 p.m.

36. The appellant said that his partner was  not  present  at  the  hearing
    before us because she had gone to work. This was  because  her  request
    for a day off work was refused by her employer and also because she had
    to drop the children off to school and nursery and pick them up at  the
    end of the day.

37. The appellant said that, whilst his partner is at work,  he  drops  his
    elder two children at school and his youngest child at nursery. He also
    picks the children up from school and from nursery.

38. The appellant's partner had said in her witness statement that she  had
    an accident in 2007.  The  appellant  confirmed  that  his  partner  is
    currently in good health. She is not suffering from depression. She has
    no mental health issues. She suffered from depression after she  had  a
    still-birth when he was in prison. She stopped  taking  medication  for
    depression 2 or 3 years after he was released from detention. He had no
    medical evidence to support his assertion that his partner had suffered
    from depression.

39. The appellant confirmed that he was confident that the contents of  his
    witness statement dated 2 August 2018 were true. Asked whether para  14
    of his statement, where he confirmed that  his  partner  was  suffering
    from depression which "has been significantly worsened"  following  the
    stillbirth of their child in  2010  and  that  she  was  on  prescribed
    medication, was false, the appellant said that he miswrote para 14:  he
    meant to say that he confirmed that his partner was not suffering  from
    depression and was not then on medication. He denied that he was trying
    to mislead the Tribunal.

40. The appellant's children are in good health. The children attend after-
    school clubs. The school is in same road  as  their  home,  100  metres
    away. It would be possible for the children to attend the  after-school
    club every day if necessary.

41. Asked whether, if he were to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  his  partner
    would be able to continue working and at the same time look  after  his
    children, the appellant said that it would be a  struggle  financially.
    He did not know how his partner or his children would cope mentally. It
    is one thing for her to manage without him for the one day that he  had
    to attend his hearing but quite a different  thing  to  expect  her  to
    manage without him for 18 years. His partner's father has passed  away.
    Her mother lives about 15-20 minutes' drive from his home. However,  it
    was not possible for her mother to help her because her  mother  is  67
    years old and she is looking after his  step-daughter  who  lives  with
    her. His step-daughter is his partner's daughter. There was no  medical
    evidence concerning the health of his partner's  mother,  although  the
    appellant's partner had said in cross-examination at the hearing before
    Judge Gurung-Thapa (para 31 of Judge Gurung-Thapa's decision) that  her
    mother "suffers from health conditions".

42. The appellant said that his partner has two brothers who have their own
    families. The elder brother, who is a prison officer in  Redditch,  has
    four or five children. The younger brother, who is not  very  reliable,
    has six children by four or five women. His partner's siblings had  not
    provided witness statements because they had not been asked to do so.

43. Asked whether para 12 of his partner's  witness  statement,  where  she
    said she would be unable to work if the appellant  were  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, was incorrect in view  of  his  oral  evidence  at  the
    hearing before us, the appellant said that it would  be  difficult  for
    her to work. She may work part-time or she may not work at all.

44. The appellant denied that he was removed to Geneva  in  2008.  He  said
    that the judge who decided his  appeal  had  asked  the  respondent  to
    provide evidence that he  had  been  removed  to  Geneva  but  no  such
    evidence was provided.

45. The appellant said that he could not return to Iraq. The  situation  in
    Iraq was very bad in 2003 and it is still a war zone at present.

Submissions on behalf of the respondent

46. Mr Malik submitted that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  Exception  1
    because he simply had not lived in the United Kingdom for most  of  his
    life. The phrase "most of his life" means that  a  claimant  must  have
    lived in the United Kingdom for at least half of his life, pursuant  to
    para 53 of SC (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 2112. It  is  misconceived  for
    the appellant to suggest that  he  had  lived  at  least  half  of  his
    sentient life in the United Kingdom. The  phrase  "most  of  his  life"
    involves a quantitative evaluation and not a qualitative evaluation.  A
    simple mathematical calculation must be undertaken. Mr Malik  submitted
    that, further and in any event, the appellant  had  not  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully, as he has never had leave to enter or  remain.
    In addition, he had not suggested that there would be very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration in Iraq.

47. In relation to Exception 2, Mr Malik accepted that the  evidence  shows
    that the appellant cares for his children and that there  is  a  loving
    relationship between him and the  children.  The  respondent  does  not
    contend that the children should leave the  United  Kingdom.  Mr  Malik
    accepted that the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom may  well
    end his relationship with his partner and perhaps  even  the  children.
    However, this would be the usual consequence of deportation. Whilst the
    circumstances  described  by  the  appellant  may  well  give  rise  to
    difficulties, the threshold for undue hardship is not reached  even  if
    the evidence given in the witness statements of the appellant  and  his
    partner is accepted. The threshold is a high one, as is clear from  the
    Supreme Court's judgment in KO (Nigeria).

48. Mr Malik submitted that there were nevertheless difficulties  with  the
    evidence in  the  two  witness  statements  and  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence. At para 14 of his witness statement dated 2 August 2018,  the
    appellant confirmed that his wife was suffering from  depression,  that
    she was taking medication and attending courses, which contradicted his
    oral evidence before us that she stopped taking medication 2 to 3 years
    after he was released from prison in 2010. Mr Malik submitted that  the
    appellant's evidence in his witness statement was simply false and that
    he was seeking to mislead the Tribunal.

49. In addition, Mr Malik submitted that it was clear from the  appellant's
    oral evidence that his partner would be able to continue working as her
    hours of work would enable her to drop the children off to  school  and
    nursery and pick them up after their after-school  club.  The  children
    are in good  health.  There  is  no  suggestion  that  the  appellant's
    presence is needed and no suggestion that the appellant  would  not  be
    able to maintain contact with his children and partner.

50. Mr Malik submitted that, as the appellant entered the United Kingdom in
    a lorry, he knew that he was entering unlawfully. He  had  accepted  in
    evidence before us that he had no lawful basis  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom after the dismissal of his appeal in 2004. He therefore knew he
    had no basis to be in the United  Kingdom  when  he  entered  into  his
    relationship with his partner and when  he  went  through  a  religious
    marriage ceremony with her.

51. Although Mr Malik accepted that the respondent had not adduced evidence
    to show that the appellant was removed to Geneva in 2008, he  submitted
    that this makes no difference. Mr Malik submitted  that,  even  if  the
    appellant was not removed in 2008, he cannot meet  the  two  exceptions
    nor can he show that there are very compelling circumstances, over  and
    above the two exceptions.

The appellant's submissions

52. In relation to Exception 1, the appellant submitted that he  had  lived
    in the United Kingdom for more or less  half  of  his  life,  "give  or
    take". He has completely integrated into society in the United  Kingdom
    and has adapted well. He did not know any English when he  arrived  but
    now speaks English fluently. He has obtained a Masters qualification in
    Construction Project Management, a course which was  paid  for  by  his
    partner's father. He knew Iraq when he left Iraq in 2000. He  does  not
    know Iraq now. He has 'married' a black woman and his children  are  of
    mixed race. They would not even be able to visit him in Iraq. There  is
    discrimination in Iraq.

53. If the appellant were to leave the United Kingdom, his  children  would
    suffer financially and emotionally. He submitted that more  crimes  are
    committed by children of single parents.  His  deportation  would  also
    impact upon his partner. She would have to give up  work.  His  partner
    and his children would then become a burden upon the state. If he  were
    to remain, he would be able to obtain employment.  If  deported,  there
    would be a 10-year ban.

54. Iraq is a war zone. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office advises British
    citizens not to travel to Iraq unless absolutely necessary.

55. The appellant said that he was released from his prison  sentence  nine
    years ago but he has not been removed. He had asked the Home Office  to
    explain what steps were taken to remove him. He was told that the delay
    was because of the situation in Iraq. The respondent has had nine years
    to remove him. During that time, he has been improving his family  life
    and his private life. However, he has been unable to work  due  to  his
    immigration status and unable to travel.  He  is  unable  to  take  his
    children on holidays abroad.

56. In the criminal justice system, a sentence of 16 months is spent  after
    4 years. It has now been 9 years since he was released from his  prison
    sentence but  he  is  still  being  punished  for  his  crime  by  this
    deportation action.

57. The appellant submitted that it would  underestimate  his  relationship
    with his partner  if  little  weight  were  to  be  given  to  it.  His
    relationship with his partner has always been a subsisting one.

58. We reserved our decision.

ASSESSMENT

59. Before we begin our assessment, we make it clear  that  we  have  taken
    into account all of the documents that  are  in  the  bundle  that  was
    before Judge Gurung-Thapa and in the respondent's bundle. These include
    documents from a school and a nursery confirming that  the  appellant's
    children attend their institutions and that the appellant drops off his
    children and picks them up. There is also a letter of  support  from  a
    family friend (page 61 of the bundle  that  was  before  Judge  Gurung-
    Thapa) as well as several photographs. We have also taken into  account
    the witness statement of the appellant dated  2  August  2018  and  the
    witness statement from his partner dated 2 August 2018, although it  is
    clear from the appellant's oral evidence before us  that  some  matters
    have moved on. For example, the  appellant  said  at  para  15  of  his
    witness statement that his partner was working 3 days a week whereas it
    is clear from his oral evidence that she is now working  full-time.  We
    have also taken into account the oral evidence that Judge  Gurung-Thapa
    heard to which she referred, for example, at paras 29  and  31  of  her
    decision.

Exception 1

60. It is necessary for the appellant to show that  he  has  been  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life. As at the date  of
    the hearing before us, he was 38 years 11 months old. He first  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 7 July 2000 at the age of 20 years 3 months.

61. We decide the appeal on the basis that the appellant was not removed to
    Geneva in 2008. The appellant said at the hearing before us that  Judge
    Gurung-Thapa had asked for evidence that he was removed to  Geneva  but
    no such evidence was provided.

62. The appellant submitted that he had lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    "more or less" half of his life and that, given that he does not recall
    his life in Iraq during the first seven years of his life, he had lived
    in the United Kingdom for more than half of his sentient life.

63. We reject his submission which, in our judgment, is misconceived. It is
    clear from para 53 of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  SC  (Jamaica)
    that "most of his life" is a quantitative concept and not a qualitative
    concept. The word "most"  connotes  more  than  half.  Given  that  the
    appellant is now aged 38 years 11 months old, he must show that he  has
    lived in the UK for at least 19 years 5 months.  Even  if  he  was  not
    removed to Geneva in 2008, he has lived in the United  Kingdom  for  18
    years 8 months. This is less than half of his  life  and  therefore  it
    cannot be said that he has lived in the United Kingdom for most of  his
    life.

64.  In  addition,  the  appellant  cannot  satisfy  Exception  1  for   an
    alternative reason. He has never had  leave  to  enter  or  remain.  He
    therefore cannot show that he has been lawfully resident in the  United
    Kingdom.

65. Accordingly, we have concluded that Exception 1 does not apply.

Exception 2

66. At para 23 of its judgment in KO (Nigeria), the Supreme Court said:


         "23.    ... the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly  intended
             to introduce a higher hurdle  than  that  of  "reasonableness"
             under section 117B(6), taking account of the  public  interest
             in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.  Further  the  word
             "unduly" implies an element of  comparison.  It  assumes  that
             there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is a  level  which
             may be acceptable or  justifiable  in  the  relevant  context.
             "Unduly" implies something going beyond that level.... One  is
             looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would
             necessarily  be  involved  for  any  child  faced   with   the
             deportation of a parent...."

67. At para 27, the Supreme Court approved of  the  guidance  given  in  MK
    (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) as to the  meaning  of  the
    phrase "unduly harsh". Para 27 reads:


         "27.    Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh"
             in this context was given by the Upper Tribunal  (McCloskey  J
             President and  UT  Judge  Perkins)  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  UKUT  223
             (IAC), [2015] INLR 563, para 46, a decision given on 15  April
             2015. They referred to the "evaluative assessment" required of
             the tribunal:


                 "By way of self-direction, we  are  mindful  that  'unduly
                  harsh' does not equate with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
                  undesirable  or  merely  difficult.  Rather,  it  poses  a
                  considerably more  elevated  threshold.  'Harsh'  in  this
                  context, denotes something severe, or  bleak.  It  is  the
                  antithesis of pleasant or  comfortable.  Furthermore,  the
                  addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated
                  standard still higher."

68. The respondent accepted that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with his partner and his children. Indeed,  based  on  the
    documentary evidence before us and the appellant's  oral  evidence,  we
    have  no  difficulty  in  finding  that  he  has  a  close  and  loving
    relationship with his partner and his children. It is clear that he  is
    very much a "hands-on" father who is  involved  in  the  lives  of  his
    children, dropping them off to school and nursery every day and picking
    them up. We accept that they share other everyday activities  that  are
    part of normal family life. At para 11 of  his  witness  statement,  he
    says he  is  engaged  with  the  religious,  educational  and  physical
    development of his children. He takes his daughters swimming, to  their
    dance classes and to football. We accept his evidence in this regard.

69. We accept that, if the appellant is removed, his partner  and  children
    will be emotionally and psychologically affected. His partner says,  at
    para 4 of her witness statement, that she is emotionally and physically
    dependent upon the appellant. We accept her  evidence.  She  also  says
    that the appellant attended counselling  sessions  with  her  when  she
    suffered from depression following the still-birth of  their  child  in
    2010. She says that the children, including  her  daughter  by  another
    father, absolutely adore the appellant. We are prepared to accept  that
    the appellant plays the role of a father  in  the  life  of  his  step-
    daughter, given that there is nothing to suggest  that  her  biological
    father has any involvement in her life.

70. Plainly, it would be in the best interests of all the children  if  the
    appellant remained in the United Kingdom. They currently have a  stable
    environment with the appellant and his partner playing their individual
    roles. If the appellant is removed, we accept that this  would  have  a
    significant impact on the children as well as his partner.

71. However, there is no evidence before us to show that the emotional  and
    psychological impact on the appellant's  partner  and/or  his  children
    would be anything other than that which is ordinarily to be expected by
    the deportation of a partner/parent.

72. If the appellant is removed, his partner would be  left  to  cope  with
    looking after the children, attending to their many needs as they  grow
    up and dropping them  off  at  school  and  their  various  activities,
    without the appellant's help.

73. The appellant was keen to point out that his partner would not be  able
    to look to her siblings for help or her elderly mother who  is  already
    looking after the appellant's step-daughter. Nonetheless,  his  partner
    and  the  children  are  all  in  good  health,  although  the  partner
    previously had an accident and had previously suffered from depression.
    Although it is clear that the appellant's partner is now  working  full
    time, her hours of work are such that he  accepted  that  it  would  be
    possible for the children to attend after-school clubs  every  day  and
    for his partner to drop the children off before work and pick  them  up
    after work.

74. It was only when it was put to  the  appellant  that  para  12  of  his
    partner's witness statement, to the effect that she would be unable  to
    work if the appellant  were  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,  must  be
    incorrect in view of his oral evidence that the appellant said that  it
    would be difficult for his partner to continue working full-time if  he
    were to leave the United Kingdom.

75. In our view, even if it were the case that it becomes difficult for the
    appellant's partner to continue working full-time or at all, this is no
    more than the difficulties faced by many single parents  working  part-
    time or full-time. It is simply not enough to reach  the  threshold  of
    undue hardship.

76. It is very likely that the appellant's  removal  would  result  in  his
    separation from his partner and his children for at least 10 years,  if
    not permanently. It is far from ideal that the  appellant's  family  in
    the United Kingdom would only be able  to  maintain  contact  with  him
    through Skype and by telephone. These means  of  communication  are  no
    substitute for the appellant's physical presence in the United  Kingdom
    and his  day-to-day  involvement  in  the  lives  of  his  partner  and
    children.

77. We accept the appellant's evidence that it would be difficult  for  his
    partner and his children to visit him, due to financial constraints. He
    also said that, as his partner is black, he would have concerns for his
    partner and children as they would not be accepted in Iraq as  a  mixed
    race family. The appellant did not submit background evidence  to  show
    that his partner and children would experience  discrimination  in  the
    Iraqi Kurdish Region ("IKR") in northern Iraq, his place of origin,  if
    they were to visit him there. Nevertheless, we accept that, due to  his
    subjective  concerns  and  due  to  the  financial   constraints,   the
    likelihood is that the appellant's removal will bring  to  an  end  the
    ability of his children and partner to be in his physical presence  for
    the foreseeable future.

78. Having considered everything in the round and having taken into account
    the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  children   as   a   primary
    consideration, we find that it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's children to remain in the United Kingdom without him, given
    the elevated threshold that applies as explained in MK (Sierra  Leone).
    We further find that it would not be unduly harsh for  the  appellant's
    partner to remain in the United Kingdom without him, having  given  her
    circumstances separate consideration.

79. Accordingly, we have concluded that Exception  2  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's children does not apply and, further, that Exception  2  in
    relation to the appellant's partner does not apply.

Very compelling circumstances, over and above the exceptions

80. In SSHD v OP (Jamaica) [2018] EWCA Civ 316, the Court of  Appeal  said,
    at para 17, that:

            "17. A tribunal that  is  considering  the  circumstances  of  a
             serious offender should first of all consider  whether  any  of
             those  circumstances  are  of  the  kind   described   in   the
             exceptions.  It should then consider whether any of the factors
             identified are of such force, whether by themselves,  or  taken
             in conjunction with any other relevant factors not  covered  by
             the exceptions to satisfy the 'very compelling' test"

81. In NA (Pakistan), the Court of Appeal held that a deportee could  rely,
    by way of very compelling circumstances,  on  factual  matters  falling
    within  the  scope  of  the  exceptions  and  that   a   person   whose
    circumstances fell exclusively within the  exceptions  might  still  be
    able to  demonstrate  very  compelling  circumstances  if  the  factual
    matters which fell within the exceptions  went  well  beyond  what  was
    necessary to make out a bare case under the exceptions. In other words,
    a foreign criminal can rely on matters within or outside the  scope  of
    the circumstances described in the exceptions, but would need  to  rely
    on features which made their Article 8 claim "especially strong" in the
    case of an offender sentenced to a period imprisonment of less  than  4
    years but at least  12  months  (para  29  of  the  judgment)  and  "an
    especially  compelling  kind  ...  going  well  beyond  what  would  be
    necessary to make a bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 and
    2" in the case of an offender sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    at least 4 years (para 30 of the judgment).

82. At paras 33 and 34 of NA (Pakistan), the Court of Appeal said:


        "33.     Although there is no 'exceptionality' requirement, it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently compelling to outweigh
             the high public interest in deportation will be rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as ageing parents
             in poor health or the natural love between parents and
             children, will not be sufficient.


        34.      The best interests of children certainly carry great
             weight, as identified by Lord Kerr in HH v Deputy Prosecutor
             of the Italian Republic [2012] UKSC 25; [2013] 1 AC 338 at
             [145].  Nevertheless, it is a consequence of criminal conduct
             that offenders may be separated from their children for many
             years, contrary to the best interests of those children.  The
             desirability of children being with both parents is a
             commonplace of family life.  That is not usually a
             sufficiently compelling circumstance to outweigh the high
             public interest in deporting foreign criminals.  As Rafferty
             LJ observed in Secretary of State for the Home Department v CT
             (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]:


                 "Neither the British nationality of the respondent's
                  children nor their likely separation from their father for
                  a long time are exceptional circumstances which outweigh
                  the public interest in his deportation.""

            (our emphasis)

83. We therefore take into account the factual matters we  have  considered
    above, in relation to Exception 2 and whether it would be unduly  harsh
    for the appellant's partner and/or his children to remain in the United
    Kingdom without him.

84. As we said earlier, the appellant was unable to establish  Exception  1
    because he had not been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    most of his life. However, he relies upon his integration in the United
    Kingdom  and  the  difficulties  he  says   he   will   experience   in
    reintegrating in Iraq.

85. We therefore consider whether there are features of  his  private  life
    claim that have such great force for Article  8  purposes  that,  taken
    together with the features of his family  life  claim  relied  upon  in
    connection with Exception  2,  make  his  Article  8  claim  especially
    strong. He has not relied upon any features which do  not  fall  within
    the ambit of Exceptions 1 and 2.

86. As we said above, the appellant has lived in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    some 18 years 8 months, having arrived at the age of 20 years 3 months.
    He is now 38 years 11 months old. We find that he will have established
    private life during the period of his lengthy residence in  the  United
    Kingdom. There is some evidence, in the form of the letter  of  support
    at page 61 of the bundle that was before  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  and  the
    photographs that are contained in that bundle that he has some  friends
    and associates. However, the evidence before us  is  limited.  We  find
    that his private life in the United Kingdom is not particularly strong,
    notwithstanding the length of his residence.

87. The fact that the appellant was convicted of the offences for which  he
    received his sentence of 16 months does not, of itself, mean that he is
    not socially and culturally integrated in the  United  Kingdom.  He  is
    heavily involved in the lives of  his  partner  and  children  who,  as
    British citizens, have links with the community. There are  photographs
    of the appellant and his family attending a wedding  and  other  social
    events. He has obtained a Masters qualification in Construction Project
    Management. He demonstrated a high proficiency in the English  language
    at the hearing before us. On the whole of the evidence  before  us,  we
    accept that he is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
    Kingdom, albeit that, as we have said above, the evidence before us  is
    such that we find that his private life in the United  Kingdom  is  not
    particularly strong.

88. Throughout the time that the appellant has established his private life
    in the United Kingdom, he has not had  settled  status.  The  appellant
    attempted to suggest in oral evidence that he did not know at the  time
    of his entry into the United Kingdom that he was doing so illegally and
    that he did not know he was present in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully
    because  he  was  always  signing  on  and  the  respondent  knew   his
    whereabouts. We have no hesitation in rejecting his  evidence  in  this
    regard as wholly incredible, for the following reasons:

    i)      The appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally in a  lorry.
        We find it wholly incredible, in these circumstances, that  he  did
        not know at the time of his entry that he was  entering  illegally.
        We are fortified by the fact he was later convicted as a result  of
        his attempts to secure the illegal entry into the United Kingdom of
        his mother and his brother.

    ii)     His evidence that  he  had  never  understood  the  meaning  of
        "lawful" and that it was his understanding that he was not  present
        in the United Kingdom illegally because the Home Office knew  where
        he was and because he was signing on, is wholly incredible in  view
        of the fact that he made various applications to  be  permitted  to
        remain in the United Kingdom and the Home Office corresponded  with
        him, as we set out at para 90 below.

    iii)    His  evidence  that  he  has  never  received  a  copy  of  the
        deportation order that was issued against him and that he has never
        received any copies of any deportation notices is incredible, given
        that he appealed against the June 2017 Decision Letter.

89. We find that the appellant knew full well at the time of his entry that
    he was entering the United Kingdom illegally  and  that  he  has  known
    throughout his residence in the United Kingdom that his  residence  was
    unlawful. We  give  little  weight  to  the  appellant's  private  life
    established  in  the  United  Kingdom  whilst  he  has   been   present
    unlawfully, pursuant to s.117B(4) of the 2002 Act.

90. The appellant stressed at the hearing that the respondent  has  delayed
    in removing him. He said that his Iraqi passport,  which  he  said  was
    issued in 2015, has been in the possession of  the  respondent  who  he
    said has failed to remove him notwithstanding that he has been  signing
    on and the respondent was aware  of  his  address.  The  appellant  was
    convicted on 15 March 2010.  Nearly  nine  years  have  elapsed  since.
    However, we have noted, from  paras  6  to  16  of  the  February  2018
    Decision Letter as follows:

    i)      The respondent notified  the  appellant  of  his  liability  to
       automatic deportation on 29 April 2010. He did  not  respond  as  he
       claimed that the document did not have his correct details.

    ii)     On 16 September 2010, his legal representatives stated that his
       life would be in danger in Iraq due to his  partner's  ethnicity  in
       the United Kingdom.

    iii)    On  14  October  2010,  a  notification  of  his  liability  to
       deportation was re-served with the correct  person  details.  On  19
       October 2010, his legal representatives stated that he came  to  the
       United Kingdom to claim asylum and that he still  feared  return  on
       that basis. In addition, he claimed that his life would be in danger
       due to the ethnicity of his wife and that his removal  would  be  in
       breach of Article 8.

    iv)     On 29  March  2012,  his  legal  representatives  made  further
       submissions in reliance upon Articles 2, 3 and 8 and the judgment in
       Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09.

    v)      On 17  May  2013,  the  appellant  was  served  with  a  status
       questionnaire to which he replied  stating  "No  evidence  has  been
       submitted  as  it  has  not   been   requested   anywhere   in   the
       questionnaire".

    vi)     On 4 June 2013, the respondent wrote to the  appellant  stating
       that the onus was on him to provide evidence of what he was  seeking
       to rely on. The letter gave him two weeks in which to respond.

    vii)    On 18 June 2014, the appellant was served with a further status
       questionnaire.

    viii)   On 2 September 2016, the appellant was sent a decision to  make
       a deportation order by recorded delivery. On 28 September 2016,  the
       decision letter was returned to the Home Office as "un -called for".



    ix)     On 23 November 2016, he submitted a family/private  life  claim
       under the 10-year route, LTR(E) application.

    x)      On 1 June 2017, he was  served  with  the  June  2017  Decision
       Letter which refused  his  application  of  23  November  2016,  the
       deportation order having been issued on 31 May 2017.

    xi)     On 16 June 2017 the appellant lodged an appeal but he  withdrew
       the appeal on 26 September 2017 as he had a pending application with
       the Home Office.

    xii)    On 23 January 2018, the appellant  submitted  a  Family/Private
       life 10-year LTR(E) application dated 20  November  2017  which  was
       considered in the February 2018 Decision Letter.

91. We find that the above history shows that the respondent has acted with
    reasonable promptness in dealing with the  appellant's  case.  We  find
    that the appellant has contributed to  the  delays  by  making  various
    applications, including a claim to fear persecution in Iraq because his
    mother had allegedly threatened  him  on  account  of  his  mixed  race
    'marriage'. The June 2017 Decision Letter considered his  asylum  claim
    in detail. His appeal against the decision was withdrawn and he has not
    pursued his claim that he  still  fears  persecution  in  Iraq  in  the
    instant appeal.

92. In these circumstances, it does not behove the appellant to  raise  the
    respondent's delay in removing him, in our judgment. More  importantly,
    we are satisfied that the public interest in  his  deportation  is  not
    reduced to any significant extent solely as a consequence of the delay.



93. In any event, the effect of the delay was that it enabled the appellant
    to strengthen his private life ties  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his
    family  life,  which  we  have  considered  in  reaching  our   overall
    conclusions in this appeal.

94. In his witness  statement,  the  appellant  expressed  his  regret  for
    committing the offences of which he was convicted  in  March  2010  and
    said that he has not been convicted of any other offences since.

95. However, in Danso v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 596, the Court of Appeal said,
    at para 20, that rehabilitation and the lack  of  subsequent  offending
    are not uncommon and do not contribute greatly to the existence of very
    compelling circumstances required to outweigh deportation, although  it
    may amount to an important factor in a few cases.

96. In our view, there is nothing in the appellant's case  which  justifies
    treating the fact that he has not committed any further offences as  an
    important factor or one which contributes in any way in his  favour  in
    our assessment of whether there are very compelling circumstances, over
    and above the exceptions. This is not one of the  few  cases  in  which
    rehabilitation and the  lack  of  subsequent  offending  amount  to  an
    important factor. This  is  because  the  appellant  has  not  produced
    anything to suggest that these considerations  should  be  regarded  as
    important factors in his particular case.

97. In his submissions, the appellant said that he had served his  sentence
    and his sentence has become spent, and yet he is still  being  punished
    for his crime. This is an empty point, given that the criminal  justice
    system and the system of immigration control serve different functions.



98. In considering the appellant's circumstances  on  return  to  Iraq,  we
    remind ourselves of para 14 of the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in
    SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ  813, which reads:

      "14.  In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration"
              into the country to which it is proposed that he be deported,
              as set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a
              broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability to find a
              job or to sustain life while living in the other country. It
              is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject
              to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court
              or tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that
              Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls
              for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the
              individual will be enough of an insider in terms of
              understanding how life in the society in that other country
              is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
              have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be
              able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to
              build up within a reasonable time a variety of human
              relationships to give substance to the individual's private
              or family life."

99. We noted  that,  according  to  the  June  2017  Decision  Letter,  the
    appellant was born in Suleimaniya in northern Iraq in the IKR.  In  his
    oral evidence before us, he said that the respondent is  in  possession
    of his Iraqi passport, issued by the Iraqi Embassy in  2015  and  valid
    until 2021.

100. The country guidance in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544
    (IAC) was considered by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 944. The revised country guidance is to be found in the  Annex
    to the Court of Appeal's judgment. It is clear from the revised country
    guidance that the appellant, being an Iraqi Kurd  who  originates  from
    the IKR, would be returned to the IKR.

101. In his witness statement dated 2 August 2018, the appellant  said  that
    he is not in contact with any relatives in Iraq. We treat his  evidence
    that he is not in  contact  with  any  relatives  in  Iraq  with  great
    scepticism, for the following reasons:

    i)      According to the June 2017 Decision Letter, he had  claimed  to
       be in fear of his mother who he said had threatened him  on  account
       of his mixed race 'marriage'. His appeal  against  the  respondent's
       decision in the June 2017 Decision Letter to refuse his asylum claim
       was withdrawn and he has not pursued this aspect of his case in  the
       instant appeal.

    ii)     His evidence at the hearing before us that the  respondent  had
       delayed  in  removing  him  is  disingenuous   given   the   various
       applications that he made and the letters that were sent to  him  by
       the Home Office, as we have set out above.

      iii)  We agree with Mr Malik that the appellant attempted  to  mislead
       the Tribunal at para 14 of his witness statement dated 2 August 2018
       where he confirmed that his partner was suffering  from  depression,
       that  her  condition  had  significantly  worsened   following   the
       stillbirth of their child in 2010 and that  she  was  on  prescribed
       medication. It is clear that that evidence cannot have been true  at
       the date of his statement given his oral evidence that  his  partner
       stopped taking medication 2 or 3 years after he  was  released  from
       detention in 2010. We do not accept his explanation that he miswrote
       para 14, i.e. that he had meant to confirm that his partner was  not
       suffering from depression and she was not then on  medication.  This
       would simply make no sense of the sentences in question  bearing  in
       mind, in particular, that he said that his partner's  condition  had
       significantly worsened.

      iv)   As we have said above, his evidence at the hearing that  he  did
       not know when he entered the United Kingdom  that  he  was  entering
       illegally  is  incredible,  given  that  he  entered  in   a   lorry
       clandestinely.

102. However, even if the appellant is not in contact with  his  mother  and
    brother and even if he chooses to relocate in the  IKR  away  from  the
    place or town where they live, we note:

      i)    He is a Muslim by religion and a Kurd by ethnic origin.

      ii)   He studied in Suleimaniya until 1998.

      iii)  He was employed from October 1998 until 2000, during which  time
       he worked illegally  in  Suleimaniya  selling  alcohol  and  tobacco
       between Suleimaniya and Iran.

      iv)   In the determination of his asylum claim,  which  was  dismissed
       in January 2004, the judge noted that he spoke Kurdish Sorani  (para
       12 of the June 2017 Decision Letter).

      v)    As he has  a  valid  passport,  we  find  that  he  will  be  to
       establish his identity and origin in seeking employment in the IKR.

      vi)   Whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he  has  obtained  a  Masters
       qualification in Construction Project  Management,  a  qualification
       which will stand him in good stead in seeking employment in the IKR.



103. Whilst the general security situation in the IKR may not be  ideal,  it
    cannot be said that the situation in the IKR is  a  war  zone,  as  the
    appellant contended at the hearing. The current country  guidance  does
    not suggest that the situation is such that, in general, returns to the
    IKR would be in breach of Article 3 or would expose an individual to  a
    real risk of serious harm.

104. Whilst we note that the  appellant  said  that  he  has  no  assets  or
    property in Iraq and that he would be destitute there, we see no reason
    why he should not be able to obtain  some  employment  in  the  IKR  to
    support himself.

105. When the appellant left Iraq, he was 20 years  old.  He  was  therefore
    old enough to understand the way of life in the IKR. He  said  in  oral
    evidence that he does not know Iraq now. However, we do not accept that
    he has lost his cultural ties with the IKR and his knowledge of the way
    of life in the IKR.

106. In all of the circumstances, and for the reasons given  above,  we  are
    satisfied that the appellant  would  not  experience  very  significant
    obstacles in  his reintegration in Iraq.

107. The appellant has not relied upon any factual matters that do not  fall
    within the scope of Exceptions 1 and 2.

108. As we said above, this appeal was one of four appeals listed to  enable
    the Tribunal to consider how s.117C should be construed  following  the
    judgment of the Supreme Court in  KO  (Nigeria).  In  MS  (Philippines)
    (PA/09214/2017), we  decided  that  a  court  or  tribunal  engaged  in
    determining whether there are very compelling circumstances,  over  and
    above the exceptions, must take into account  the  seriousness  of  the
    particular offence  for  which  the  foreign  criminal  was  convicted,
    together with any other relevant public interest considerations.

109. The appellant attempted to secure the illegal  entry  into  the  United
    Kingdom of his mother and brother. This  is  a  serious  offence  which
    strikes at heart of the United Kingdom's system of immigration control.
    There is a strong public interest in deterring people  from  committing
    offences which undermine the United  Kingdom's  system  of  immigration
    control. We attach  due  weight  to  the  public  interest  in  general
    deterrence and the maintenance of immigration control.

110. Having taken into account everything and having given  such  weight  as
    we consider appropriate to the relevant factors, we have concluded that
    the appellant has failed to show that there are features  of  his  case
    that make his Article 8 claim especially strong. We are  not  satisfied
    that there are very  compelling  circumstances  which  would  make  the
    appellant's  deportation  a  disproportionate  interference  with   his
    Article 8 rights and those of his partner and his children, considering
    their circumstances individually and collectively.

111. We  therefore  re-make  the  decision  on  the  appellant's  appeal  by
    dismissing it.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
    a point of law.
We set it aside and re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing  it  on
human rights grounds.

[pic]
Signed
Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Gill
                     Date: 15 February 2019
                                  APPENDIX

Sections 117C and 117D (to the extent relevant) provide as follows:

        117C Article 8 additional considerations in cases involving foreign
        criminals.


        (1)      The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
        interest.


      (2)   The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
             the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
             criminal.


      (3)   In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1
             or Exception 2 applies.


        (4)      Exception 1 applies where-


           (a)   C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
        most of C's life,
           (b)   C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
        Kingdom, and
            (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                   integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                   deported.


      (5)   Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


      (6)   In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
             period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
             and 2.


      (7)   The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
             into account where a court or tribunal is considering a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that
             the reason for the decision was the offence or offences for
             which the criminal has been convicted.


        117D Interpretation of this Part
        (1)      ...
        (2)      In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-


           (a)   who is not a British citizen,
           (b)   who has  been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
        offence, and
           (c)   who -
                 (i)   has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
        least 12 months,
                 (ii)  has been convicted of an  offence  that  has  caused
        serious harm,  or
                 (iii) is a persistent offender.

Paras 390, 390A, 391, 391A, 398, 399  and  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
provide as follows:

        Revocation of deportation order
        390.     An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
             be considered in the light of all the  circumstances  including
             the following:
           (i)   the grounds on which the order was made;
           (ii)  any representations made in support of revocation;
           (iii) the interests of the community, including the  maintenance
                 of an effective immigration control;
            (iv)   the  interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
             compassionate circumstances.


        390A. Where paragraph 398  applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does
             not, it will only be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
             public interest in maintaining the deportation  order  will  be
             outweighed by other factors.


        391.     In the case of a person who has  been  deported  following
             conviction for  a  criminal  offence,  the  continuation  of  a
             deportation order  against  that  person  will  be  the  proper
             course:
           (a)   ..., or
           (b)   ...
           Unless, in either case, ....


        391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally  be
             authorised unless the situation has  been  materially  altered,
             either by a change of circumstances since the order  was  made,
             or by fresh information coming to light which  was  not  before
             the appellate  authorities  or  the  Secretary  of  State.  The
             passage of time since the  person  was  deported  may  also  in
             itself amount to such a change of circumstances as  to  warrant
             revocation of the order.

        398.     Where a person claims that their deportation would be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
             Rights Convention, and


      (a)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
             public good and in the public interest because they have been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
             period of imprisonment of at least four years;

      (b)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
             public good and in the public interest because they have been
             convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
             period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
             months; or

      (c)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
             public good and in the public interest because,  in the view of
             the Secretary of State,  their offending has caused serious
             harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a particular
             disregard for the law,
      the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider whether
        paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the public
        interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors
        where there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
        described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


        399.     This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)
        applies if -

      (a)   the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK and
                 (i)   the child is a British citizen;  or
                 (ii)  the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                   least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the
                   immigration decision;
            and in either case
            (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                   country to which the person is to be deported;  and
            (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
                   without the person who is to be deported;
      or
      (b)   the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen or settled in
             the UK, and
            (i)        the relationship was formed at a time when the
                   person (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their
                   immigration status was not precarious;  and
            (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
                   country to which the person is to be deported, because of
                   compelling circumstances over and above those described
                   in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM;  and
            (iii)      it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain
                   in the UK without the person who is to be deported.


      399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies if
        -


      (a)   the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
        life;  and
      (b)   he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK;  and
      (c)   there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
             into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.



