
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06487/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 January 2020                    |On 20 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 ISHTIAQ [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Chaggar, instructed by Bushra Ali solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 31 October 1976 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Pakistan. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 24 March 2019 to  refuse  his  application
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom. The First-tier Tribunal,  in
    a decision promulgation on 15 July  2019,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Appellant first came to United Kingdom in January 2010  as  a  student.
    His further leave to remain as a student was curtailed to expire on  12
    July 2013. Thereafter, the appellant made a number of applications  for
    leave to remain which did not succeed. The instant  appeal  follows  an
    application on human rights grounds for leave to remain on the basis of
    family life with the appellant's wife, [JK] and her son, [MK].

 3. The judge identified two issues in the  appeal.  First,  he  considered
    whether the appellant's marriage is genuine and  subsisting.  Secondly,
    he considered whether family life could be pursued abroad in  Pakistan.
    The judge found that the marriage is genuine and subsisting, a  finding
    which is not challenged by the Secretary of State. As regards Article 8
    ECHR, the judge noted that the appellant's wife's father  suffers  from
    dementia. He observed that the appellant's wife  is  not  her  father's
    'direct carer and he will remain in the care home where he  is  living'
    should the appellant or the family move to live in Pakistan  [13].  The
    appellant's stepson, [MK], suffers from mental health difficulties. The
    judge noted that [MK] is now over the age of 18 years  and,  whilst  he
    accepted that the appellant may have been a 'stabilising influence that
    enabled [his wife] and [MK] to make progress... [MK]  is  no  longer  a
    minor and different considerations apply and  these  will  continue  to
    develop' [15]. The judge found that the removal  of  the  appellant  to
    Pakistan would cause his wife and her son  difficulties  and  would  be
    'distressing for all concerned.' However, he noted that the family were
    in situation  'of  their  own  making'  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife having been  established  at  a  time  when  the
    appellant's removal was a 'distinct possibility.' The  judge  concluded
    that the circumstances which 'would prevail in the appellant's absence'
    would not be unduly harsh. He acknowledged that the appellant's wife Is
    reluctant to  live  in  Pakistan  but  he  found  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in that country.

 4. The grounds of appeal assert that  the  judge  failed  to  have  proper
    regard to the mental health of the appellant stepson, [MK].  The  judge
    had improperly considered [MK] as if he were 'any other normal 18-year-
    old 'not an  individual  who  had  suffered  'a  traumatic  childhood.'
    Further, the grounds challenge the judge's findings at  [13]  regarding
    the appellant's father-in-law. This was a submission developed  by  Mrs
    Chaggar, who appeared for the appellant, at the initial hearing in  the
    Upper Tribunal. She submitted that the judge had failed to engage  with
    the fact that it is necessary for the appellant's wife to act  under  a
    power of attorney for the father-in-law. The appellant's wife had moral
    and legal obligations towards her father  which  could  not  be  easily
    discharged from abroad. In particular, there would be problems with the
    time difference between Pakistan and the United Kingdom.

 5. I find that the judge has provided as a brief but adequate analysis  of
    the evidence. It is true that at [15] the judge does not make  specific
    reference to [MK]'s mental health problems but I am satisfied that  the
    judge was well aware of those difficulties when making his analysis; he
    has made clear that he considered all  the  evidence  in  reaching  his
    decision [7]. Moreover, there is nothing  in  the  evidence  concerning
    [MK] which would compel the conclusion that he could not  be  separated
    from the appellant or, indeed, his mother if she were to accompany  the
    appellant to Pakistan. I note from the  appellant's  witness  statement
    [43] that he refers to [MK] having  'his  friends  studies  and  future
    career in the United Kingdom.' The judge's  assessment  of  [MK]  as  a
    young adult who would naturally be moving away from reliance  upon  his
    mother and stepfather is not  inconsistent  with  the  appellant's  own
    evidence.

 6. I also find that the judge's brief analysis of the appellant's  father-
    in-law's position is adequate. Neither the appellant was wife  are  the
    day-to-day carers of this gentleman whose life in the  care  home  will
    continue undisturbed whether the appellant returns to Pakistan alone or
    if he departs with his wife. Counsel's submissions that the appellant's
    wife could not execute her duties under a power  of  attorney  are  not
    persuasive. I do not see why the time difference between  Pakistan  and
    the United Kingdom should  interfere  with  the  performance  of  those
    obligations and, whilst modern means of communication by  the  internet
    and telephone may not  be  appropriate,  for  example,  to  maintain  a
    relationship between a parent and a minor child, I see  no  reason  why
    such means should not enable the appellant's wife to fulfil obligations
    under the power of attorney from abroad.

 7. The judge has acknowledged that the family will  suffer  disruption  if
    either the appellant returns to  Pakistan  alone  to  make  an  out  of
    country application to return or if he returns  there  with  his  wife,
    either to live together whilst an application  is  made  or  to  settle
    permanently in that country. The judge did not err in law by concluding
    that the appellant and his wife might reasonably continue their  family
    life  together  in  Pakistan  and  that  there  were   no   exceptional
    circumstances in this appeal. Consequently, the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.




    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 15 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

