
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
HU/06522/2015

                                                    HU/06525/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 October 2017                        |On 08 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      debindra limbu (First Appellant)
                   Rajendra Kumar limbu (Second Appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Puar, instructed by N C Brothers & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State  (to  whom  I  shall  refer  hereafter  as  "the
    respondent" as she  was  before  the  First-tier  Judge)  appeals  with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  a  First-tier
    Judge who allowed the appeals of the respondents (hereafter referred to
    as "the appellants") against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  1
    September 2015 refusing them entry clearance with a view to  settlement
    with their father and sponsor Mr Surendra Kumar Limbu.

2.   The  sponsor  and  his  wife,  the  appellants'  mother,  were  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom  in  2010.   Prior  to
    that the sponsor had served with and was discharged  from  the  British
    Army owing to redundancy on 29 September  1988.   The  appellants  were
    born respectively in September 1986 and December 1988.  They were  both
    therefore over the age of 18  at  the  time  when  their  parents  were
    granted indefinite leave to remain.  The appellants' parents  initially
    tried to settle in the United Kingdom in 2012 but  they  went  back  to
    Nepal, the sponsor returning in 2014 and has  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom ever since.  The appellants made applications to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2015 but these were refused by the respondent.  Their
    mother did not want to leave them on their own in Nepal so she remained
    there with them as long  as  she  could  without  prejudicing  her  own
    settlement.  She subsequently joined the sponsor in the United  Kingdom
    in December 2016.  It seems that the appellants  are  not  working  but
    have now finished the studies that they were engaged in,  in  2012  and
    their parents initially settled in the United Kingdom.  They  had  been
    unable  to  find  work  in  Nepal.   Neither  is  married  nor   in   a
    relationship.  They are supported financially in Nepal by  the  sponsor
    who remits funds to them on a regular basis.

3.   The judge found the sponsor to be a credible witness.   The  claim  was
    based not on meeting the requirements  of  the  policy  in  respect  of
    families of former Ghurkha soldiers, but rather that as a result of the
    historic injustice caused  to  them  they  had  been  deprived  of  the
    opportunity to settle with  the  sponsor  and  that  as  a  consequence
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights was engaged.

4.   The judge  was  satisfied  that  there  was  family  life  between  the
    appellants, their mother and the sponsor.  He noted  that  the  reality
    was that the appellants had always lived at  home  with  their  mother,
    save for the brief period of one month when  she  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2012, and the evidence showed that she  had  found  it  very
    difficult to leave the appellants in Nepal, which the judge  considered
    to show the strength of the emotional bond that existed  between  them.
    The judge found the family situation  to  be  entirely  plausible.   He
    reminded himself of the immigration history I have set out above.   The
    judge considered it to  be  understandable  that  the  appellants  were
    unable to join the sponsor earlier as they were in full-time study  and
    they had looked for work but  had  been  unsuccessful.   There  was  no
    evidence before him to  suggest  that  the  appellants  had  formed  an
    independent family unit.  He found therefore  that  they  had  remained
    part of their parents' family.  The judge  had  noted  and  taken  into
    account among others the authorities of Gurung [2013] EWCA  Civ  8  and
    Ghising [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).

5.   As regards the proportionality of the decision, the  judge  noted  that
    the evidence showed that the sponsor and  the  appellants'  mother  had
    taken active steps to  pursue  their  settlement  arrangements  in  the
    United Kingdom following their grant of leave  by  the  respondent  and
    there was no reason to  believe  that  if  the  same  rights  had  been
    afforded to the appellants in the past they would not also have  chosen
    to exercise them and settle in the United Kingdom.  The judge concluded
    that accordingly the interference was disproportionate, Article  8  was
    engaged and leave should be granted to enable the appellants to  settle
    with the sponsor in the United Kingdom.

6.   The Secretary of State sought and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal
    against this decision, first on the basis that the guidance in Kugathas
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31 had not been followed, where it was noted that there
    was no presumption  of  family  life  and  that  family  life  was  not
    established between an adult child and his surviving  parent  or  other
    siblings unless something more  existed  than  normal  emotional  ties.
    Such ties might exist if the appellant was dependent on his  family  or
    vice versa.  It was argued  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
    whether more than the usual family ties between older  members  of  the
    same family existed in the instant case.

7.   It was also argued that the judge  had  failed  to  make  any  findings
    under section 117B  of  the  2002  Act  and  that  there  had  been  no
    consideration of the public interest aspects, nor any assessment as  to
    whether the sponsor's income was sufficient to keep him, his  wife  and
    the two appellants in the United Kingdom.

8.   In his submissions Mr Tarlow relied on and developed  the  points  made
    in the grounds.  He argued that nothing  brought  the  appellants  into
    more than the normal relationship between parents  and  adult  children
    and the judge had failed to mention Kugathas or consider whether  there
    were more than the normal family ties.  There was also the  failure  to
    refer to section 117B and that was also a material error of law.

9.   In his submissions Mr Puar argued that with regard to the section  117B
    point, that was addressed by what was said by the Court  of  Appeal  in
    Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320, at paragraphs 55 to 57.  Though the judge  had
    not referred expressly to  Kugathas  he  had  referred  to  Gurung  and
    Ghising which dealt with the same issue, including proportionality  and
    historic injustice.  The judge set the facts out carefully including  a
    finding that the sponsor was  credible  and  there  was  financial  and
    emotional dependency.  If the Tribunal did not accept that a  reference
    had been made to Kugathas then nevertheless there were  clear  findings
    of fact so the judge would have come to the same  conclusion.   It  was
    relevant to also note paragraph 61 in Ghising and the  reference  there
    to the decision in AA (application number 8,000/08)  on  the  situation
    of a person seeking to rely on family life, was married and that  of  a
    person who was still single.

10.  By way of reply Mr Tarlow argued that  he  would  expect  there  to  be
    family life between adult  children  and  their  parents,  but  it  was
    necessary to show something more than the normal family links and there
    was a lack of clear findings on that.

11.  I reserved my decision.

12.  The first point is what may be described as the  Kugathas  point,  that
    is to say the question whether the judge erred in law in  finding  that
    there was family life between the appellants and the sponsor such  that
    their relationship was entitled to protection under Article  8  of  the
    European Convention  on  Human  Rights.   Kugathas  was  most  recently
    described in Kopoi  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1511  as  the  leading  domestic
    authority on the ambit of "family life" for the purposes of Article  8.
    It was  said  though  that  it  was  not  an  absolute  requirement  of
    dependency in an economic sense for family life to exist, but  that  it
    is necessary for there to  be  real,  committed  or  effective  support
    between family members in order to show that family  life  exists.   It
    was also said that neither blood ties nor  the  concern  and  affection
    that ordinarily go with them are by themselves  altogether  sufficient.
    The judge noted that the reality was that  the  appellants  had  always
    lived at home with their mother, except for the  brief  period  of  one
    month when she came to the United Kingdom with  the  sponsor  in  2012.
    The judge commented that the evidence  showed  that  their  mother  had
    found it very difficult to leave the appellants in Nepal  which  showed
    the strength of the emotional bond  existing  between  them.   He  also
    referred to the fact that there was no evidence before him  to  suggest
    that the appellants had formed an independent family unit and he  found
    therefore that they had remained part of their parents' family.  Though
    he did not refer specifically to Kugathas, he did refer to  Gurung  and
    Ghising.  In the latter in particular there is  detailed  reference  to
    Kugathas.  The question is whether the judge identified, as it was  put
    in  Kugathas  at  paragraph  14:  "evidence  of  further  elements   of
    dependency, involving more than the normal emotional ties".

13.  The point is a marginal one.  I consider that  it  is  not  a  decision
    that every judge would have come to by any means, but  I  am  satisfied
    that on balance the judge had the appropriate  test  in  mind  when  he
    found that there was protected family life in this case  between  these
    appellants and their parents.   In  referring  to  the  length  of  the
    emotional bond and the difficulties that  the  appellants'  mother  had
    found in leaving them in Nepal, the  judge  clearly  had  in  mind  the
    statements of the appellants.  The first appellant said at paragraph  7
    of his statement that their mother could not get used to being  without
    them and came back to Nepal to look after them.  The  second  appellant
    endorsed that  statement  referring  to  the  financial  and  emotional
    dependence they had on their parents, and the fact that they  were  not
    independent from their parents.   In  my  view  there  was  enough,  on
    balance, to justify the judge's conclusion that there  is  family  life
    between the appellants and their parents and the necessary  element  of
    emotional dependency beyond the simple fact  of  the  relationship  was
    found.

14.  The second point is the failure to refer to section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act.  In this regard, as noted above, Mr Puar referred to paragraphs 55
    to 57 of Rai.  This was also a case involving the appeal  of  an  adult
    son of a former Ghurkha soldier arguing that his Article 8  rights  had
    been breached when he was refused leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Court of Appeal noted the argument made on behalf of the  appellant
    that in view of the "historic  injustice"  underlying  the  appellant's
    case, considerations arising under section 117A and section 117B  would
    have made no difference to the  outcome  and  certainly  no  difference
    adverse to the appellant.  On behalf of the respondent it was submitted
    that if the decision was otherwise  lawfully  made  the  considerations
    arising under sections 117A and B could not have made a  difference  in
    his favour.  The court agreed with these submissions.

15.  Though I do not think this goes quite as far as Mr  Puar  suggested  in
    never being able to assist the Secretary of State if historic injustice
    applies, I consider that what was said in particular at  paragraphs  56
    and 57 in Rai is such as to support Mr  Puar's  argument  sufficiently.
    In my view there is no error of law in the decision in the  failure  to
    refer to section 117A or B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002, bearing in mind the  historic  injustice  substratum  to  the
    appellants' case.  Nor as noted above do I find any error of law in the
    failure to refer to Kugathas but conclude that the findings  on  family
    life were also open to the judge.

16.  Bringing these matters together, I consider that it has not been  shown
    that the judge erred in law in coming to the conclusions that he did in
    this case, and accordingly his decision allowing  these  appeals  under
    Article 8 is upheld.

17.  No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 07 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen






