
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06224/2017
                                                               HU/06221/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2018                         |On 30 November 2018           |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                               Appellant
                                     and
                               DANIEL CORNICHE
                            MARIE MIMOSE CORNICHE

                                    Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. R. Megha, Campbell & Co Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondents are nationals  of  Mauritius.  On  9  March  2017  they
    applied for leave to remain outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on  human
    rights grounds.  Their application was refused on 4 May 2017  and  they
    appealed. First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert allowed their appeal  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 May 2018. The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal
    and First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert granted him permission to  appeal
    on 19 September 2018.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

2.    The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  and  the   Appellants'   legal
    representative made oral submission and I have taken these into account
    when reaching my  decision  below.   In  particular,  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer submitted that he was  not  relying  on  his  second
    ground of appeal, as the Respondents  lived  with  their  children  and
    there was no challenge to the level of their dependence. Therefore,  it
    was not necessary to address the cases of The Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department v HK (Turkey) [2010] EWCA Civ 583 and AP (India)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 89

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

3.   Counsel for the  Respondents  relied  upon  the  fact  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herbert was an experienced First-tier Tribunal Judge and
    submitted that he had taken into account all relevant factors.

4.   He also submitted that  the  Respondents  were  entitled  to  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules and  that
    they had not conceded that this was not the case at the appeal hearing,
    as recorded in paragraph 14  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herbert's
    decision. This had been referred to in their skeleton argument but they
    had not sought to cross-appeal on this basis.

5.   The  Respondents  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  adult  dependent
    relatives or, in the alternative, on human rights grounds  on  8  March
    2017. Their application was refused  on  4  May  2017  and  it  is  not
    submitted on behalf of the Respondents  that  they  could  qualify  for
    leave to remain under section EC-DR of Appendix FM to  the  Immigration
    Rules.

6.   The core of their application was that they are  dependent  upon  their
    children who are living in the United Kingdom and that they  would  not
    be able to access similar care if they were removed to Mauritius. It is
    on this basis that they primarily submit  that  they  are  entitled  to
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules. As submitted by the Home
    Office Presenting Officer, when considering whether  they  qualify  for
    such leave, it is appropriate to consider the fact that  provision  for
    leave for adult dependents has been incorporated into  the  Immigration
    Rules in order to meet some of the obligations arising from  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights. In  order  to  qualify  for
    leave under this Rules they would have  to  show  that  they  would  be
    unable, even with the practical and financial help of  their  children,
    to obtain the required level of care in  Mauritius  because  that  care
    would not be available  there  or  that  there  was  nobody  who  could
    reasonably provide it or it is not affordable. Therefore, in  order  to
    qualify for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules they need  to
    identify other factors which would mean that refusing them leave  would
    amount to a breach of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

7.    The  Appellants'  legal  representative  submitted  that  the  witness
    statements in the Appellants' Bundle went some way to showing that this
    was the case and that, therefore, they were entitled to leave to remain
    outside the Immigration Rules. However, these statements go no  further
    than asserting that there was no-one in Mauritius who would be able  to
    provide them with such a high level of help and support. There  was  no
    objective or medical evidence to confirm that this was the case. It was
    also asserted that they would not be able to access the same quality of
    medical care in Mauritius but again there was no medical  or  objective
    evidence to confirm that this was the case. There was also  no  current
    diagnosis and prognosis relating to their current medical needs and  no
    evidence that they would have to fly to India or a Gulf State or  South
    Africa to obtain any necessary medical treatment. This was despite  the
    Respondent asserting in his decision letter that they would be able  to
    access appropriate medical treatment in Mauritius.

8.   I was not able to base on  findings  on  the  facts  contained  in  the
    Respondents' skeleton argument as this  did  not  have  the  status  of
    evidence.

9.   It was not disputed that the Respondents had established a private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom but, as the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    acknowledged, the issue was whether the decision to refuse  them  leave
    was proportionate for the purposes of  Article  8(2)  of  the  European
    Convention on Human  Rights.  When  considering  this,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did remind himself of the contents of  section  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

10.  In particular, in paragraph 46 of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Herbert noted that little weight should be given to  the  private
    life of a person at a  time  when  a  person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious.  But in paragraph 47 he did not treat periods in which  the
    Respondents had been here with limited leave to remain, as  opposed  to
    periods when he had been an overstayer, as periods in which  his  leave
    had been precarious. In paragraph 44 of Rhuppiah v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58, Lord  Wilson  found  that  "the
    answer to the primary question posed by the present appeal is therefore
    that everyone who, not being a UK citizen, is present in the UK and who
    has leave to remain here  other  than  to  do  so  indefinitely  has  a
    precarious immigration status for  the  purposes  of  section  117B(5).
    Therefore, the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in  his  approach
    to the issue of precariousness  and  this  error  also  undermined  the
    weight that he gave to the necessity of maintaining immigration control
    in paragraph 52 of his decision.

11.  In addition, as  noted  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  in
    paragraph 44 of his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert  treated
    the fact that the  Respondents  could  speak  English  and  were  being
    financially supported by others, as a positive factor in their  favour.
    But, as found by the Upper Tribunal in AM (s 117B) Malawi  [2015]  UKUT
    0260 (IAC), these are at best neutral factors.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to  take  into  account  the
    Respondent's past immigration history, including any applications where
    were or were not made by their solicitors. However,  neither  this  nor
    any of the other factors relied upon met the test defined in R (on  the
    application of Agyarko) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2017]  UKSC  11,  where  it  was  held  that  "exceptionality"   means
    circumstances in which refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences  for  the  individual  such  that  the  refusal   of   the
    application would not be proportionate".

13.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert did set  out  a  number  of  factors,
    which he had taken into account for the purposes of his proportionality
    assessment, in paragraph 49 of his decision. However, these amounted to
    bare assertions and were not supported by objective evidence. The  fact
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  require  the  Respondents'
    witnesses from giving evidence did not enhance the weight  that  should
    properly have been given to this evidence.

14.  For all of these reasons I find that the decision  made  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herbert contained errors of law and must be set aside.

Decision

(1)  The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herbert or First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 16 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch



