
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)         Appeal Number: HU/06075/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 April 2019                        |   On 16 April 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                     I J
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - Sheffield
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Sponsor in person
For the Respondent:  Mr S Kotas of the Specialist Appeals Team

                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Gambia born on 24  December  1981.  On  5
    April 2012 in Gambia she contracted a marriage by proxy with  D  C  who
    was and remains in the United Kingdom. On 29 August 2012  the  marriage
    was registered with the Gambian state  authorities.  The  Appellant  is
    sponsored by her husband.

 2. The husband is a refugee from Gambia who on 21  May  2012  was  granted
    indefinite leave to  remain.  Subsequent  to  the  proxy  marriage  the
    husband had travelled to Senegal in July 2016 to meet the Appellant.

 3. On 18 December 2016 the Appellant applied for entry clearance  to  join
    her husband in the United Kingdom as the wife of a refugee.

The ECO's decision

 4. On 27 March 2017 the Respondent (the ECO) refused the  Appellant  entry
    clearance under reference SHEFO/365518. The ECO noted the marriage  had
    been contracted some two years after the husband had  left  Gambia  and
    that only minimal evidence of contact between  the  Appellant  and  the
    husband had been produced.  No  explanation  had  been  given  for  the
    substantial delay between the  marriage  and  the  Appellant's  reunion
    application.  The  ECO  doubted  the  marriage  was  genuine   or   the
    relationship subsisting. For these reasons the Appellant had not  shown
    she met the relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules and also had
    not shown that the State's  obligations  to  respect  the  private  and
    family life of the Appellant and the husband protected by Article 8  of
    the European Convention  were  engaged.  Subsequent  to  the  Appellant
    lodging notice of appeal on 5 May 2017,  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager
    reviewed the decision  and  noted  the  Appellant  had  produced  a  TB
    certificate.

 5. More importantly,  the  ECO  referred  to  paragraph  352A(ii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules setting  out  the  requirements  for  refugee  family
    reunion. It extended to marriages contracted prior to the flight of the
    refugee or to partners in a relationship akin  to  marriage  which  had
    subsisted for two years before the flight of the refugee.  The  husband
    had left Gambia in 2010 and not married the Appellant until 2012.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 6. On 09 May 2018 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal. The grounds noted
    that the  religion  and  culture  of  the  Appellant  and  the  husband
    prohibited living together prior to marriage. Photographic evidence had
    been submitted to the ECO and returned. The couple remain  in  constant
    contact by mobile  telephone.  The  Appellant's  application  had  been
    delayed because the husband had been diagnosed with sight problems  and
    as HIV+.

 7. The husband  attended  the  hearing  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Gribble at which the ECO was not represented. At paragraphs 26
    and 31 of her decision she accepted the husband had  by  proxy  married
    the Appellant in Gambia in 2012. She went  on  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    because the marriage had taken place after the husband fled Gambia  and
    there was no evidence that the Appellant and the husband had been in  a
    relationship akin to marriage for at least two years before he had left
    Gambia. She considered whether there were any exceptional or compelling
    circumstances such that  entry  clearance  should  be  granted  to  the
    Appellant  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and  after  assessing  the
    proportionality of the refusal to grant entry clearance  concluded  the
    refusal was proportionate and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 8. On 14 September 2018 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Beach  granted
    permission to appeal out of time and because it was arguable the  Judge
    had erred in making no finding whether the marriage was a  valid  proxy
    by marriage.





The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 9. The husband attended the hearing. In the course of  the  "housekeeping"
    exercise at the start of the hearing day I enquired of the  husband  if
    there were any documents not previously submitted which he wished me to
    consider. I repeated the enquiry at the start of the actual hearing. On
    both occasions the husband confirmed there was no  further  documentary
    evidence. He confirmed his present address.  I  explained  to  him  the
    purpose of the hearing and the nature of a material error  of  law.  As
    will appear, I did not need to hear from Mr Kotas for the ECO.

10. I explained the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  refugee
    family reunion imposed conditions in the case of a  marriage  that  the
    marriage needed to have been contracted before  the  refugee  fled  his
    home country and in the case of a relationship akin to marriage that it
    had subsisted for two years before the refugee's flight.

11. I explained that the Appellant's application had been made on the basis
    of  refugee  family  reunion.  There  are  other  provisions   in   the
    Immigration Rules  for  spouse  reunion  and  these  imposed  different
    requirements and in particular in relation to the sponsoring's spouse's
    income. There was no evidence in the  Tribunal  file  addressing  these
    different requirements.

12. Further in this appeal, the Upper Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to
    review  the  appeal  by  reference  to  a  different  category  of  the
    Immigration Rules, namely spouse reunion by reference to paragraph 281.
    I had in mind the recent decision of the Upper Tribunal in  AK  and  IK
    (s.85 NIAA 2002-new matters) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00067 (IAC).

13. I told the husband that the application  for  entry  clearance  on  the
    basis of refugee family reunion was  doomed  from  the  start  for  the
    reasons mentioned in  paragraph  10  of  this  decision.  I  noted  the
    earliest documentary evidence of his relationship  with  the  Appellant
    dated from 18 July 2011, being  the  date  that  the  Appellant's  wife
    became a co-signatory on his bank account.

14. I suggested to the husband he might seek legal advice about  a  further
    application under the appropriate Immigration Rules  and  that  if  his
    funds were limited, he might be able to obtain advice from a  Citizens'
    Advice Bureau or from a local Law Centre.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand. The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.

Signed/Official Crest                                          Date 15.  iv.
2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

