
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06610/2019
                                                               HU/06612/2019
                                                               HU/06614/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 17 March 2021                     |On 25 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                            (1) Mr. HITESH PATEL
                             (2) Mrs ZALAK RAMI
                              (3) AA (A Minor)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. H Patel, of Hiren Patel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. T Lindsay, Senior Presenting Officer

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cohen ('the Judge') sent to the parties on  20  December  2019
    dismissing the appellants' appeals against a decision of the respondent
    to refuse to grant them leave to remain on  human  rights  (article  8)
    grounds under, or alternatively, outside the Immigration Rules.

 2. By a decision sent to the parties on 18 May 2020 Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Wilson granted the appellants permission to appeal on all
    grounds.

Remote hearing

 3. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
    held during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing  room  at
    Field House. The hearing room and the building were open to the public.
    The hearing and its start time were listed in the  cause  list.  I  was
    addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as if we  were
    together in the hearing room. I am satisfied: that this  constituted  a
    hearing in open  court;  that  the  open  justice  principle  has  been
    secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as  there
    has been any restriction on a right or interest,  it  is  justified  as
    necessary and proportionate.

Anonymity

 4. The Judge did not issue an anonymity order and no request was  made  by
    either party for such order to be issued.

 5. This is not a matter where a statutory provision requires the making of
    an anonymity order. Paragraph 18 of the UTIAC Guidance Note 2013  No  1
    concerned with anonymity orders confirms that the identity of  children
    whether they are  appellants  or  the  children  of  an  appellant  (or
    otherwise  concerned  with  the  proceedings),  will  not  normally  be
    disclosed nor will their school, the names  of  their  teacher  or  any
    social worker or health professional  with  whom  they  are  concerned,
    unless there are good reasons in the interests of justice to do so.

 6. Upon considering the issues in this matter, there is no requirement for
    the child to be named, nor for their personal details to be given  save
    for that they are an appellant in these proceedings. The names  of  the
    child's parents are relatively commonplace, and there is no requirement
    to detail where the family reside in this country. Consequently,  I  am
    satisfied that the  requirements  of  open  justice  require  that  the
    parent's names are not anonymised. The open justice principles will  be
    met by the parents first and last  names  only  being  detailed.  I  am
    satisfied that there is no open justice requirement  for  an  anonymity
    order to be issued in respect of the child in circumstances where their
    sole reference in this decision is to their being the third  appellant.
    The child's interests can be preserved by their being  referred  to  as
    'AA'.

Background

 7. The first appellant is a  national  of  India.  He  was  granted  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 18 December 2009 and entered
    this country on 22 January 2010. He enjoyed leave  to  enter  until  28
    August 2012. He applied for leave to remain by an application  dated  9
    August 2012 and subsequently secured  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student until 30 October 2014.

 8. The first appellant made an in-time application for leave to remain  on
    human rights (article 8) grounds. The respondent refused by a  decision
    dated 22 January 2015. There was no exercise of an in-country right  of
    appeal.

 9. The second appellant is also a national of India. She was granted entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 21 December 2010 and entered
    this country on 6 January 2011. She enjoyed leave  to  enter  until  27
    November 2012. She successfully made an in-time application  for  leave
    to remain as Tier 4 (General) Student and enjoyed such leave  until  19
    April 2015.

10. The first and second appellants were married in 2013.

11. On 31 July 2018 the appellants made an application for leave to  remain
    on human  rights  (article  8)  grounds.  The  respondent  refused  the
    application by a decision dated 26 March 2019, with attendant rights of
    appeal. The decision detailed, inter alia:

         'Education Testing Services  (ETS)  is  obligated  to  report  test
         scores that accurately reflect the performance of test takers.  For
         that reason,  ETS  routinely  reviews  testing  irregularities  and
         questions test results believed to  be  earned  under  abnormal  or
         nonstandard circumstances. ETS's Score  Cancellation  Policy  state
         that ETS reserves the right to  cancel  scores  and/or  take  other
         action(s) deemed appropriate where ETS determines your test  centre
         was not following established guidelines set  forth  by  the  TOEIC
         Program.  During  an  administrative  review  process,   ETS   have
         confirmed that your test was obtained  through  deception.  Because
         the validity of your test results could not be authenticated,  your
         scores from the tests taken on 16 May 2012 at  Seven  Oaks  College
         have been cancelled. You are specifically considered a  person  who
         has sought  LTR  in  the  UK  by  deception  following  information
         provided to us by the Educational Testing Service  (ETS),  that  an
         anomaly with your speaking test indicated the presence of  a  proxy
         test taker.'

Hearing Before the FtT

12. The hearing came before  the  Judge  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  10
    December  2019.  The  appellant  was  represented  by  Mr.  Patel.  The
    respondent was unrepresented.

13. The core of the first appellant's case is detailed at paras. 9 to 12 of
    his witness statement, dated 3 December 2019:

         '9.  The Home Office states that I submitted ETS TOEIC  certificate
             of my speaking exam which I took on 16 May 2012 in  support  of
             my application  for  leave  to  remain  and  I  say  that  this
             completely false because I did not use that certificate because
             I failed in the test of 16 May 2012. Howe can I use failed test
             result  in  first  place  to  obtain  sponsorship  for  Tier  4
             (General) visa and secondly for my  application  for  leave  to
             remain?


         10.  I appeared for speaking exam on 16 May 2012 and scored 140 out
             of 200. I was required to score 160 to achieve B2 level, i.e. I
             scored less than what I was required to score.  I  appeared  in
             the examination without ant preparation but  when  I  took  the
             examination again I prepared and passed the same and used  that
             certificate in support of my application.


         11.  The certificates in which I passed was  valid  for  two  years
             hence I also destroyed that certificate but I did submitted  my
             original certificate of my speaking  examination  to  the  Home
             Office in support of my application of 9 August 2012.


         12.  The Home Office states that I achieved score of 140  with  the
             help of proxy, I ask if I have to cheat why would I  use  proxy
             who will fail to achieve 160 score.  The  fact  that  I  scored
             below required level of 160 itself shows that I would not  have
             used proxy.'


         [The various grammatical and spelling errors have  been  reproduced
         without amendment.]

14. In refusing the appeal,  the  Judge  addressed  the  first  appellant's
    explanation at [28] and [29] of his decision:

         '28. The appellant has attempted to claim that he did not  rely  on
             the test results dates [sic] 16 May 2012. He indicated that  he
             scored badly in that test result with a result of just  140  in
             speaking. He  [sic]  that  that  [sic]  he  has  destroyed  the
             certificate. He indicated that he then undertook the test on  a
             2nd occasion. The appellant has failed to submit  any  evidence
             to indicate that he took a 2nd test. He has not produced either
             certificate. The respondent on the  other  hand  has  used  the
             Lookup tool and produced the appellant test results for 16  May
             2012. I  find  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  incredible  and
             contrary to the evidence before me and further damaging to  his
             credibility.


         29.  The appellant claims that if he  had  utilised  a  proxy  test
             taker, that he would not have failed his first test  and  would
             not have needed to take a 2nd test. Using the appellant's logic
             however, I find to the contrary.  If  the  appellant  took  the
             first test and failed, he would have had more motivation to use
             a proxy test taker on the 2nd occasion in order to ensure  that
             he passed. I find the appellant's claims to be implausible  and
             further damaging to his credibility.'

Grounds of Appeal

15. By grounds of appeal dated 20 February 20202 and drafted by Ms.  Iqbal,
    Counsel, four complaints are advanced as identifying material errors of
    law:

         i. The Judge failed to lawfully consider the suitability ground.


        ii. The Judge failed to lawfully consider material facts.


       iii. The Judge failed to lawfully consider 'innocent explanation'.


        iv. The Judge made an unreasonable finding of fact.

16. In granting permission to appeal JFtT Wilson reasoned, inter alia:

         '3.  In an otherwise careful decision, it is  nonetheless  arguable
            that the judge failed to adequately, or  at  all,  consider  the
            Appellant's innocent  explanation  within  the  context  of  the
            relevant conclusions of the APPG  report.  That  is  arguably  a
            material error of law.'

Decision on Error of Law

17. At the commencement of the hearing Mr. Lindsay confirmed on  behalf  of
    the respondent that it was accepted that ground 1 identified a material
    error of law. He accepted that the respondent had not  elucidated  with
    precision whether the first test certificate of 16 May 2012 was  relied
    upon in the August  2012  application  for  leave  to  remain.  It  was
    accepted that in circumstances where the respondent was not represented
    at the hearing, the Judge erred in presuming that the test  certificate
    of 16 May 2012 had been relied upon  in  the  application  for  further
    leave to remain dated 9 August 2012.

18. Unfortunately, Mr. Lindsay was not in a  position  at  the  hearing  to
    confirm the true position as to which test certificate was provided  by
    the applicant to the respondent. He provided a reason as to why he  had
    not been able to provide the answer, which I accepted at the hearing as
    being a good reason. He confirmed that the respondent  would  establish
    the true position by the time of the resumed hearing.

19. Upon considering the decision of the Judge, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    position adopted by the respondent before me is appropriate. This is  a
    matter where consequent to the lack of precision in the decision letter
    the Judge should  properly  have  adjourned  the  hearing  on  his  own
    volition and sought  the  required  information  from  the  respondent.
    Having decided to proceed with his consideration, the Judge erroneously
    assumed that the test certificate complained of by the  respondent  was
    relied upon in the August 2012 application and so found  the  appellant
    incredible. Such approach was materially erroneous in law.

Remaking the Decision

20. As to the re-making of this decision, both parties agreed that it was a
    matter that could properly be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

21. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice  Statement  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the  disposal  of
    appeals in this Tribunal, in particular paragraph 7.2.  I  observe  the
    fundamental nature of the material error identified and  conclude  that
    the effect of the error has been to deprive the  appellant  of  a  fair
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. Consequently, I set aside  this
    decision and remit it back to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House.

22. The respondent will be expected to be in a position to inform both  the
    appellant and the First-tier Tribunal some time before the  listing  of
    the remitted hearing as to  the  true  position  regarding  which  test
    certificate was presented in the application of 9 August 2012.

23. The First-tier Tribunal will also be aided by  the  parties  addressing
    the reported decision of Mahmood (paras. S-LTR.1.6 & S-LTR.4.2.; Scope)
    [2020] UKUT 00376 (IAC).

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on
    20 December 2019 pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007.

25. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House  for
    a fresh hearing before any Judge other than Judge Cohen. No findings of
    fact are preserved.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 17 March 2021


