
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06176/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th August 2017                     |On 14th August 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                           amninder kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J. Weatherall, Counsel instructed on behalf of
the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Miss Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Kempton) who, in a  determination  promulgated  on
    26th  July  2016  dismissed  the  Appellant's  application  for   entry
    clearance as the spouse of her Sponsor  and  husband  pursuant  to  the
    provisions of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

 2. The background is set out in the determination.   The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of India.  In 2012 the Appellant married her husband, a British
    citizen.  The Appellant then applied for entry clearance as the  spouse
    of her husband, the Sponsor, under the provisions of Appendix FM to the
    Immigration Rules on the 3rd June 2015.  In a notice of a decision made
    on the 19th August 2015,  that  application  for  entry  clearance  was
    refused under paragraph EC-P.1.1 of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The reasons for refusing the application can be  summarised  as
    follows.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant and the sponsor were in a genuine and subsisting relationship
    or that they intended to live together permanently in the  UK.  It  was
    said that the only evidence  of  the  marriage  in  2012  were  wedding
    photographs. There was no other evidence to support them having been in
    touch with one another. It is said they last saw each other  on  7  May
    2015 but  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  that  statement.  This
    application was refused under EC-P.1.1(d) and EC-ECP2.6  and  2.10.  In
    addition it was refused because the Appellant had failed to provide the
    specified evidence to establish that the Appellant  met  the  financial
    provisions of Appendix FM, paragraph  E-ECP.3.1  because  she  did  not
    supply the evidence required by the provisions of Appendix FM-SE. As to
    the English language requirement, the Appellant had  not  provided  the
    mandatory three summary sheets.

 3. The Appellant submitted Grounds of Appeal on the  9th  September  2015.
    Those grounds made a number of assertions relating to  the  Immigration
    Rules and entry clearance as a partner. This included evidence relating
    to their relationship and marriage and reference at page 6 to a copy of
    the sponsors passport to show that he came to India on a  visit  on  23
    April 2015 and they lived together until 7  May  2015.  Other  evidence
    referred to them being in touch using mobile telephone calls. There was
    also a suggestion in the grounds of appeal, which were drafted  by  the
    Appellant in person that they were in a genuine relationship  and  that
    she wished to join her husband and live with him. The skeleton argument
    of Miss Weatherall at  paragraph  2  makes  reference  to  the  sponsor
    setting out in the grounds of appeal the following statement "how am  I
    to comply with the minimum income requirements while at the  same  time
    maintaining my marriage with the Appellant and visiting in India."

 4. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kempton) on  15th
    July 2016.  In a decision promulgated on  26th  July  2016,  the  judge
    dismissed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  at
    paragraph  [  15  ]  of  the  determination,  made  reference  to   the
    Immigration Rules which had  been  set  out  in  full  earlier  in  the
    determination. The judge made reference to the  sponsor's  income   and
    that he should be able to meet the financial criteria but only  on  the
    basis  that  he  provided  the  specified  documents.  There  was  also
    reference to the lack of clarity as to his self-employment.  The  judge
    went on to state that it was a case where "a legal representative or to
    assist the Appellant sponsor prior to making the  next  application  in
    order to ensure that all the necessary documents are  lodged  with  the
    application right the outset, in an effort to avoid any further delay."

 5. It is paragraph 16 of the determination brings the  appeal  before  the
    Upper Tribunal. At that paragraph the judge stated "there is no need at
    this point to consider the right  family  life  under  Article  8,  the
    application ought to be capable of being determined in  the  future  in
    terms of the Immigration Rules."

 6. As can be seen from the determination  and  the  application  form  the
    Appellant had no legal representation and the sponsor had advanced  the
    case in person.  Rather than make a  fresh  application  ,  grounds  of
    appeal were issued on 24 August 2016. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  (  EM
    Simpson) granted permission to appeal to the Appellant. I need not  set
    out the grant of permission in full as it is in the papers. However  it
    made reference to the decision being a "human rights appeal" under  the
    new provisions and section 82 which came into force on  6  April  2015.
    Judge Simpson went on to state that this was a human rights appeal  and
    as the Appellant was not legally represented, judge Simpson  looked  at
    the matters  raised  with  "greater  exactitude."  Judge  Simpson  then
    recorded paragraph 16, which I have referred to  above  and  cited  the
    decision of the Tribunal in Mostafa (Article 18 entry clearance) [2015]
    UKUT 00112. Judge Simpson concluded as follows: "the  judge's  omission
    to decide the Appellant's appeal an  Article  8  human  rights  grounds
    amounted to an arguable error  of  law  as  the  basis  of  her  appeal
    continued to remain unresolved."


 7. Thus the appeal came before the upper Tribunal. The Appellant was now
    represented by solicitors and by Counsel, Miss Weatherall. She had
    provided a written skeleton argument in which it was said that the
    Appellant had raised Article 8 grounds and in the light of the decision
    of the Supreme Court in MM(Lebanon) and others v the Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 10 which found that there was no
    objection in principle to the MIR but that it must not preclude the
    application of Article 8 ECHR in individual cases. She cited paragraph
    19 of that decision. Thus she invited the Tribunal to find that the
    first-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law failing to consider Article 8
    outside of the rules.

 8. In the event of an error of law being found, at paragraph (ii) she
    submitted that the Upper Tribunal remitted the outstanding issue of
    Article 8 to a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal. In her oral
    submissions before me, she made reference to the decision in MM
    (Lebanon) having clarified matters relating to Article 8 and that this
    had not been available to the judge when reaching a decision but that
    it did support her submission that the Appellant's case should be
    considered under Article 8.


 9. Miss Petterson relied upon the rule 24 response which made reference to
    the judge having directed himself to the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules (paragraph 5) and at paragraph 6 that the judge
    directed himself the fact that this is a human rights appeal and
    consider section 117 of the 2002 Act. At paragraph 7 it is submitted
    that there are "no compelling circumstances" that would warrant
    consideration of the appeal outside the rules. There is also reference
    in the rule 24 response to the law but no reference to the decision of
    MM (Lebanon)( as cited).


10. Miss Petterson submitted that paragraph 16 did not deal with the issue
    but that the original grounds did not go into any depth other than "I
    want to join my husband". In any event, she submitted that Judge
    Kempton did make reference to another remedy.


11. Having heard the parties make their submissions, I gave an oral
    decision that I had reached the conclusion that I agreed with the grant
    of permission of Judge Simpson and that there had been no consideration
    of Article 8 outside of the rules and this was a material error of law.
    In the decision of MM (Lebanon) & ors [2017] UKSC 10, handed down in
    February this year, their Lordships ruled that the MIR requirement is
    acceptable in principle.  The case also made reference to the scope  at
    the 'second stage' of an appeal to go beyond the Immigration Rules and
    determine whether the refusal of entry clearance or leave to remain was
    a disproportionate interference with Art 8 rights, if the only reason
    for the refusal was a failure to meet the minimum income threshold or
    provide the documentation.


12. In calculating the income available to a  couple,  the  Rules  did  not
    allow 'third party support' to be  taken  into  consideration,  or  the
    potential earnings of the overseas spouse.  But at the 'second  stage',
    an appellate Tribunal could judge for itself whether  such  alternative
    sources of income would realistically be  available.   As  the  Supreme
    Court put it,  this  was  part  of  "the  careful  evaluative  exercise
    required by Article 8."  So the result of  MM  (Lebanon)  was  that  it
    would be perfectly possible for a family case to  fail  under  Appendix
    FM, which was expressly intended by the Government to comply  with  Art
    8, but to succeed under Art 8 outside the Rules, because there would in
    fact be enough money to support the couple  and  any  children  without
    recourse to public funds.


13.  The  Supreme  Court  indicated  that   the   Immigration   Directorate
    Instructions needed revision in order to take  account  of  alternative
    sources of funding, and indeed that the Rules themselves might need  to
    be amended "to ensure that decisions  are  taken  consistent  with  the
    duties under the Human Rights Act."  The Rules also needed to  make  it
    clear that the 'section 55 duty' must be taken into account  in  family
    reunion applications.


14. A new GEN.3.1 has been inserted into Appendix FM from 1st  August  2017
    to deal with applications where the financial requirement cannot be met
    from the sources specified by the existing rules.  Thus, where -


    "it is evident from the information  provided  by  the  applicant  that
    there are exceptional circumstances which could render refusal of entry
    clearance or leave to remain a breach of Article  8  ...  because  such
    refusal could  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    applicant, their partner or a relevant child, then  the  decision-maker
    must consider whether such financial requirement is met through  taking
    into account the sources of income, financial support or funds set  out
    in paragraph 21A(2) of Appendix FM-SE."


15. The appeal was on human rights grounds and as can be seen above, the
    ability to meet the rules is a relevant consideration when taking
    account of the public interest. However whilst the judge considered the
    rules and compliance with them, there was no consideration of Article 8
    and whether there was family life ( where there was evidence in the
    papers) and looking at the issue of proportionality and whether there
    were any circumstances which may give rise to  justifiably harsh
    consequences for the appellant or her spouse such as to make the
    decision to refuse to grant entry clearance disproportionate. The human
    rights ground was the only ground of appeal. It does not appear that
    the presenting officer made any submissions in this regard and there
    was evidence that did challenge the entry clearance officers
    consideration of whether there was in fact "family life" by stating
    that there was no genuine and subsisting relationship,  in the grounds
    of appeal. At page 6 of those grounds, the Appellant challenged that
    assessment by making reference to their marriage, how they kept in
    touch and maintain their relationship and that there had been a visit
    made to India whereby the parties live together. That evidence was
    indicative of family life being established between the parties and
    therefore brought into play the Article 8 considerations.


16. I have set out earlier that Miss Weatherall submitted that the correct
    course to take was to remit the decision to a differently constituted
    First-tier Tribunal. I invited the parties to consider an alternative
    way forward which was to remit the appeal to be completed by Judge
    Kempton. This was not a case in which it could be said that there was
    any unfairness on the judge's part, which both advocates agreed was the
    position, and that the error identified was to have not completed the
    determination by considering Article 8. Both advocates agreed that that
    was the most appropriate way forward and therefore steps were taken to
    provide an early listing on 12 September 2017.


17. I therefore remit the appeal to the FTT (Judge Kempton) who will decide
    the appeal in accordance with the jurisprudence and the law and in the
    light of the evidence of the sponsor and any additional evidence that
    may be filed on the Appellant's behalf. The Appellant has now secured
    legal representation and Miss Weatherall indicated that there would be
    witness statements provided making reference to the relationship and
    the evidence in support of the Article 8 claim and any clarification of
    the sponsor's employment which would be served no later than seven days
    before the adjourned hearing as listed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error on a point  of  law;
it is remitted to the FTT (Judge Kempton) to hear the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed [pic]                            Date: 8/8/2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

