
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/06958/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On Tuesday 20 October 2020                  |On 11 November 2020            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   ALI [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHE/1177278
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by IMK Solicitors for the Appellant
Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

BACKGROUND

1.   By a decision promulgated on 19 August 2020, I found an  error  of  law
    in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge JWH Law.  I therefore  set
    aside that decision and  gave  directions  for  the  re-making  of  the
    decision.  My error of law decision  is  annexed  hereto  for  ease  of
    reference.

2.   I gave the Appellant  the  opportunity  to  file  further  evidence  in
    support of  his  appeal.   A  supplementary  bundle  was  filed  on  17
    September 2020 and a further letter from the  Appellant's  stepdaughter
    was filed on 15  October  2020.   I  refer  to  the  documents  in  the
    supplementary  bundle  as  [ABS/xx].   I  also  have  before   me   the
    Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal which I refer  to  as
    [AB/xx].

3.   The hearing before me was conducted  via  Skype  for  Business.   There
    were no technical issues and the advocates  confirmed  that  they  were
    able to follow the proceedings throughout.  Both the Appellant and  his
    spouse, [Z] (hereafter referred to as "the Sponsor") joined the hearing
    remotely but I did not hear evidence from them as Mr  Melvin  indicated
    that he did not wish to cross-examine them.

THE ISSUES AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK

4.   As I identified at [3] of my error of law decision, the Sponsor is  not
    settled in the UK.  She was granted limited leave to remain on  5  June
    2015.  The Appellant has now provided evidence as to the basis on which
    she was granted that  leave.   The  Sponsor  confirms  that  leave  was
    granted to her as the dependent of  her  parents  who  were,  in  turn,
    granted leave due to the presence in the  UK  of  the  Sponsor's  minor
    siblings.  As such, both the Sponsor and the  Appellant's  stepdaughter
    are  Pakistani  nationals  and  neither  can  provide   the   necessary
    relationship and status to fulfil the grant of leave to  remain  within
    Appendix FM to  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules").   Indeed,  the
    Sponsor's own leave to remain is now due for renewal.    She  has  only
    recently made an application for further leave to remain which has  yet
    to be considered.  It may well be that, in time, the  position  of  the
    Appellant's stepdaughter will give rise to a  separate  basis  for  the
    grant of leave to remain (as she is now aged over seven years) but that
    is not the basis upon which leave has been granted at present.

5.   The issue therefore is whether the decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant
    entry clearance  is  disproportionate  on  the  basis  that  it  causes
    unjustifiably harsh consequences.  The following paragraphs of Appendix
    FM are nonetheless relevant:

         "GEN.3.2.(1) Subject to sub-paragraph (4), where an application for
         entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  or  remain  made  under  this
         Appendix, or an application for leave to remain which has otherwise
         been considered under this Appendix, does not  otherwise  meet  the
         requirements of this Appendix or Part 9 of the Rules, the decision-
         maker must consider whether the circumstances in sub-paragraph  (2)
         apply.

         (2) Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the decision-maker  must
         consider,  on  the  basis  of  the  information  provided  by   the
         applicant, whether there are exceptional circumstances which  would
         render refusal of entry clearance, or leave to enter or  remain,  a
         breach of Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,
         because  such  refusal  would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences for the applicant, their partner, a relevant child  or
         another family member whose Article 8 rights  it  is  evident  from
         that information would be affected by  a  decision  to  refuse  the
         application.

         (3)  Where  the  exceptional  circumstances  referred  to  in  sub-
         paragraph (2) above apply, the  applicant  will  be  granted  entry
         clearance or leave  to  enter  or  remain  under,  as  appropriate,
         paragraph  D-ECP.1.2.,  D-LTRP.1.2.,  D-ECC.1.1.,  D-LTRC.1.1.,  D-
         ECPT.1.2., D-LTRPT.1.2., D-ECDR.1.1. or D-ECDR.1.2.

         (4) ....

         GEN.3.3.(1) In considering an application for  entry  clearance  or
         leave to enter or  remain  where  paragraph  GEN.3.1.  or  GEN.3.2.
         applies, the decision-maker must take into account,  as  a  primary
         consideration, the best interests of any relevant child.

         (2) In  paragraphs  GEN.3.1.  and  GEN.3.2.,  and  this  paragraph,
         "relevant child" means a person who:

             (a) is  under  the  age  of  18  years  at  the  date  of  the
             application; and

             (b) it  is  evident  from  the  information  provided  by  the
             applicant would be  affected  by  a  decision  to  refuse  the
             application."

6.   As I indicated in the course of the hearing,  the  central  dispute  in
    this case is whether family life between the Appellant, Sponsor and her
    child can be expected to be continued in Pakistan (permanently  or  via
    visits as now) or whether there are obstacles such that it  cannot  be.
    Against that, dealing with the Respondent's case, the issue is  whether
    the public interest requires that entry clearance be refused and if  so
    the extent of that public interest.  Outside the Rules  (which  is  the
    only basis on which the Appellant can succeed), the  issue  is  whether
    the interference with family life gives  rise  to  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences (see Agyarko and Ikuga v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 11 - "Agyarko" - at [19])

7.   I will come on in due course to the reasons why it is said that  family
    life cannot be continued in Pakistan.  In terms of the legal  position,
    I accept Mr Melvin's submission that the State has the right to control
    the entry of non-nationals even where family life has been established.
     That position dates back to at least the cases of  Abdulaziz,  Cabales
    and Balkandali v UK (application no 9214/80).  However, as those  cases
    also recognise, the State may have, in appropriate  circumstances,  the
    positive obligation  to  permit  entry  to  allow  family  life  to  be
    continued.  As the law has since developed, the essential question when
    considering whether that positive obligation arises  is  whether  there
    are "insurmountable obstacles" to family life being pursued outside the
    UK (see, for example, Agyarko at [42] of the judgment -  although  that
    was a removals case, the same principles apply by analogy).

8.   In terms of the public interest in refusing entry clearance,  although,
    as Ms Jegarajah submitted, the Appellant and Sponsor have followed  the
    legal procedures for seeking entry clearance and  have  not  sought  to
    circumvent the Rules, there  is,  as  Mr  Melvin  submitted,  a  public
    interest in refusing entry where the Rules are not met.  In this  case,
    the Rules are not and cannot be met due to the Sponsor's  status.   She
    has only limited leave to remain and not indefinite leave to remain.  I
    accept, as Mr Melvin submitted, that to hold that  an  individual  with
    limited leave should be allowed to sponsor the application for entry of
    a partner in every case, would drive a coach  and  horses  through  the
    Rules.  Indeed, Ms Jegarajah recognised as much.  The issue is  whether
    the circumstances of this case are sufficiently exceptional  to  permit
    that course.  Mr Melvin very helpfully indicated  that  the  Respondent
    did not rely on any other aspect of the public interest.  No  issue  is
    taken regarding  the  financial  circumstances  of  the  couple  or  in
    relation to Mr [A]'s ability to speak English for example.

9.   I recognise however that the Sponsor's lack of settled  status  is  not
    insignificant.  It is a particular difficulty in this case because,  as
    I observed at [4] above, she  has  recently  made  an  application  for
    further leave.  Although that was an in-time application and  therefore
    her leave continues under Section 3C Immigration Act 1971 until  it  is
    decided, as Mr Melvin pointed out, the Respondent has not yet  examined
    that application nor decided that the Sponsor's leave and that  of  her
    daughter should be continued.

10.  Leading on from that observation, the  other  crucial  aspect  of  this
    case, not least as to  the  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  in
    Pakistan, is the position of the Sponsor's child.  The  Respondent  did
    not and does not accept that there is a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship between the Appellant and his  stepchild  or  that  family
    life exists between the two.  That is an issue which I must  determine.
    However, irrespective of that issue, there is a child  affected  by  my
    decision and I need to take into account that child's best interests.

11.  Section 55 Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  ("Section
    55") provides that "[t]he Secretary of State must make arrangements for
    ensuring that  (a)  the  functions  mentioned  in  subsection  (2)  are
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who are in the United  Kingdom".   Those  functions
    include those which relate to immigration.

12.  Those obligations are reflected in statutory guidance published by  the
    Home Office entitled "Every Child Matters" (dated November  2009).   Ms
    Jegarajah drew my attention in  particular  to  [1.4]  which  reads  as
    follows:

         "Safeguarding and promoting the welfare of children is  defined  in
         the guidance to  section  11  of  the  2004  Act...and  in  Working
         Together to Safeguard Children as:

           . Protecting children from maltreatment;

           . Preventing impairment  of  children's  health  or  development
             (where  health  means  'physical   or   mental   health'   and
             development means 'physical, intellectual,  emotional,  social
             or behavioural development');

           .  Ensuring  that  children  are  growing  up  in  circumstances
             consistent with the provision of safe and effective care; and

           . Undertaking that role so as to enable those children  to  have
             optimum life chances and to enter adulthood successfully."

13.  The best interests of the child are a primary although not the  primary
    or paramount consideration.   The  importance  of  those  interests  is
    neatly encapsulated at [44] in the case of ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in the speech of Lord Hope:



         "There is an obvious tension between the need to maintain a  proper
         and efficient system of immigration control and the principle that,
         where children are involved, the best  interests  of  the  children
         must be a  primary  consideration.  The  proper  approach,  as  was
         explained in Wan  v  Minister  for  Immigration  and  Multicultural
         Affairs [2001] FCA 568, para 32,  is,  having  taken  this  as  the
         starting  point,  to  assess  whether  their  best  interests   are
         outweighed by the strength of any other  considerations.  The  fact
         that the mother's immigration status was precarious when they  were
         conceived may lead to a suspicion that the parents saw  this  as  a
         way of strengthening her case for being allowed to remain here. But
         considerations of that kind cannot be held against the children  in
         this assessment. It would be wrong in principle to devalue what was
         in their best interests by something for which they could in no way
         be held to be responsible."

14.  The Appellant's stepdaughter is now aged nearly eight years.   She  has
    lived in the UK for over seven years. I enquired of Mr Melvin whether I
    could or needed to  take  into  account  when  considering  the  public
    interest in refusal of entry clearance that the child is now or may  be
    a  qualifying  one  for  the  purposes  of  Section  117B  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section  117B").   Section  117B  (6)
    reads as follows:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

          a) The person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

          b) It would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom"

    A qualifying child is defined at section 117D(1) as "a  person  who  is
    under the age of 18 and who - (a) is a  British  citizen,  or  (b)  has
    lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven  years  or
    more..."

15.  In response to  my  question  concerning  the  application  of  Section
    117B(6) to this case, Mr Melvin drew my attention to  the  case  of  SD
    (British citizen children - entry clearance) Sri Lanka [2020]  UKUT  43
    (IAC) ("SD") at [47] and [48] as follows:

         "Statutory provisions and Section 117B(6)

         47. Section 117A-D of the 2002 Act only  apply  where  a court  or
         tribunal is considering human rights  claims  (s117A(1)).  Section
         117B(6) provides protection for persons in a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying child who is defined in  s.  117D(1)
         to mean a British citizen child or a child who has lived in the  UK
         for a continuous period of seven years or more.  From  this  it  is
         clear that  for  British  citizen  children  who  fall  within  the
         geographical scope of s.117B(6) (see next paragraph)  there  is  no
         residential requirement; they are  qualifying  children  merely  by
         virtue of their nationality (however, even the  person  who  has  a
         subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child  cannot
         succeed under s.117B(6) unless also able to show that 'it would not
         be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom'; the
         child's British citizenship is not enough on its own).

         48. We consider both parties correct to view s.117B(6) as having no
         application in entry clearance cases, since geographical  scope  is
         integral  to  its  wording.  That  its   sole   concern   is   with
         persons in the UK is clear from its reference to a 'removal' from
         the UK of persons in a parental relationship with a child and  from
         its reference, as regards the relevant child, to  whether  '(b)  it
         would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to leave  the
         UK (emphasis added). For that reason we think Mr Lewis goes too far
         in  asking  us  to  regard  the  underlying  policy  of  Parliament
         expressed in this subparagraph as being to give substantial  weight
         to  the  possession  of   British   citizenship   irrespective   of
         geographical location. There is no equivalent to s.117B(6)  in  any
         provision relating to entry clearance applicants. We cannot  assume
         that is unintentional. That said, as we  shall  come  back  to,  we
         consider it consistent with Home Office policy to treat  a  child's
         possession of British nationality as a relevant consideration."

16.  Whilst I accept that Section 117B (6) cannot apply directly because  it
    is concerned with removal of those in genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child, the case of SD is not directly on
    point either.  In that case, the children concerned (who  were  British
    nationals) were also outside the jurisdiction (living  in  Sri  Lanka).
    The guidance given in the headnote that "[t]here is  no  equivalent  to
    s.117B(6) ...in any provision  of  law  or  policy  relating  to  entry
    clearance applicants" has to be read in that context.  The children  on
    whose position reliance was placed in that  case  were  themselves  not
    living in the UK.  Although Section 55 is applied  to  their  situation
    via the lens of Gen 3.3 of Appendix FM, as a domestic  legal  provision
    applying to children living in the  UK,  it  does  not  apply  directly
    whereas in this case, Section 55 does apply to the Sponsor's  daughter.
    It is somewhat difficult to see why, if the Appellant in this  case  is
    found to be in a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a
    child who is found  to  meet  the  definition  of  a  qualifying  child
    (depending on the reasonableness question), the  public  interest  does
    not favour him being entitled to enter if  it  would  not  require  his
    removal even if he were in the UK illegally.

17.  As I understand the Respondent's position as regards  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and the Sponsor and  her  daughter,  she  accepts
    that the relationship is genuine and subsisting with both but she  does
    not  accept  that  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    stepdaughter is a parental one.  I have regard to what is  said  in  SR
    (subsisting parental relationship - s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT  334
    (IAC) that "[t]he determination of [whether  there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship] turns on the particular facts of  the
    case".  That was expanded upon by the Tribunal at [35] as follows:

         "35. The assessment of whether there is a 'genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship' for the purposes of  EX.1  and  section
             117B(6)(a) is different in form and  substance  to  whether  a
             parent has taken an 'active role' in the child's  'upbringing'
             for the purposes of R-LTRPT1.1.  It  is  possible  to  have  a
             genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a  child,
             particularly in cases where contact has only recently  resumed
             on a limited basis, but for that relationship not  to  include
             the parent playing an active role in the  child's  upbringing.
             The fact that SR has not been  involved  in  making  important
             decisions in A's life does not necessarily mean  that  he  has
             not developed a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.
             The  nature  and  extent  of  that  relationship  requires   a
             consideration of all the factors referred to in  RK  at  [42].
             The child's age is also likely to be a relevant factor."

    Paragraph [42] of RK (R (oao RK) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (s117B (6); "parental  relationship")  IJR  [2016]  UKUT  31
    (IAC) there referred to reads as follows:

         "42. Whether a person is in a 'parental relationship' with a  child
             must, necessarily, depend  on  the  individual  circumstances.
             Those circumstances will include what role they actually  play
             in caring for and making decisions in relation to  the  child.
             That is likely to be a most significant  factor.  However,  it
             will also include whether that relationship arises because  of
             their legal obligations as a parent or in  lieu  of  a  parent
             under a court order or other legal obligation. I  accept  that
             it is not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  'parental
             responsibility' in  law  for  there  to  exist  a  '  parental
             relationship', although whether or not that is the  case  will
             be a relevant factor. What is important is that the individual
             can establish that they have taken on the role that a 'parent'
             usually plays in the life of their child."

18.  There is also an issue whether the  relationship  which  the  Appellant
    has with the Sponsor and her daughter constitutes family life.  Whether
    or not that is the position, those relationships are  clearly  part  of
    their private lives and it is equally clear that the refusal  of  entry
    clearance interferes with the lives of  the Appellant, the Sponsor  and
    her daughter as they are prevented from forming  and  continuing  their
    relationship on a face to face basis within the UK.

19.  The issue thereafter is whether it  is  proportionate  to  continue  to
    refuse entry clearance on the basis that the Sponsor and  her  daughter
    can be expected to continue their relationship with  the  Appellant  in
    Pakistan.  I will come on in due course to the reasons why it  is  said
    that they cannot.

20.  Even if they cannot, I need to assess whether it  is  proportionate  to
    expect the Appellant, the Sponsor and her daughter  to  maintain  their
    relationship as they do now at distance until such time as the  Sponsor
    and/or her daughter are in a position to sponsor the Appellant's  entry
    within the Rules (in practice until the  Sponsor  is  given  indefinite
    leave to remain or her daughter is given leave in her own right and  if
    it is accepted that the Appellant enjoys a parental  relationship  with
    her). The assessment of proportionality requires a balance between  the
    level of interference and the  public  interest  said  to  justify  the
    refusal.

EVIDENCE

21.  As I have already noted,  Mr  Melvin  did  not  seek  to  cross-examine
    either  the  Appellant  or  the  Sponsor  and  their  written  evidence
    therefore stands unchallenged.

22.  I begin with the evidence as to the position between  the  Sponsor  and
    her former partner who is the father of her child.  In  response  to  a
    question which I asked during the hearing, the Sponsor confirmed  that,
    so far as she is aware, her former partner continues to live in the UK.
     It appears that he has formed another relationship.  She does not know
    his immigration status.  When she was in a relationship  with  him,  he
    had no lawful immigration status.  She also confirmed  that  they  were
    never married legally in the UK.  They underwent a  religious  marriage
    only.  As such, there is no formal divorce document.

23.  One of the main reasons why the Sponsor says that she and her  daughter
    cannot go to live in Pakistan with the  Appellant  is  because  she  is
    prevented from taking her daughter outside the jurisdiction of  England
    and Wales without the consent of her daughter's father.   That  emerges
    from the Family Court documents at [AB/56-62] which the Sponsor and the
    Appellant were permitted to adduce in evidence previously by the Family
    Court.

24.  Although it was  previously  indicated  that  further  documents  might
    assist the Appellant's case and therefore  that  the  protocol  between
    this Tribunal and the Family Court ought to be invoked, I rejected that
    submission in my error of law decision.  There appeared  to  me  to  be
    ample evidence in the orders already disclosed.  In particular, a  non-
    molestation order was made in the Sponsor's favour against  her  former
    partner indicating that there had been some form of  domestic  violence
    or other reason why it was considered appropriate to prevent her former
    partner having access to her.

25.  I was told that allegations have also been made against  the  Sponsor's
    former partner in relation to his treatment of the Sponsor's child, but
    I have no evidence of that (other than from the Sponsor).  However, the
    evidence shows that, although the final order made by the Family  Court
    in 2016 anticipated direct contact between the child and her biological
    father, that has not continued and the  contact  between  them  is  now
    extremely limited.  The contact now is set out in the letter  from  the
    child's school at [ABS/32] and is limited to "letters and cards that he
    sends to the school".  That development since the Family Court's  final
    order suggests that there has been a deterioration in the situation and
    the level of contact which the Court was initially prepared  to  permit
    and a recognition that direct contact is no longer appropriate.

26.  Although there is no indication of ongoing or intended  direct  contact
    between the Sponsor's child and that  child's  biological  father,  the
    Family Court did make an order preventing either  the  Sponsor  or  her
    former partner from removing the child from the jurisdiction of England
    and Wales "without the other parent's written agreement in  advance  or
    an order of the court".

27.  I do  not  accept  however  that  this  order  alone  is  a  sufficient
    impediment to constitute an "insurmountable obstacle"  to  family  life
    between the Sponsor and the Appellant continuing in  Pakistan  for  the
    following reasons.

28.  First, the order was made at the instigation of  the  Sponsor  herself.
    I will come on to reasons why she may  have  made  the  application  to
    prevent the child's biological father from taking the child out of  the
    UK.  However, although it  is  said  in  the  Sponsor's  first  witness
    statement that the child's father refused his consent to take the child
    to Pakistan in 2016, the Sponsor was  able  to  obtain  a  court  order
    allowing her to do so ([16] of the statement at [AB/12]).

29.  Second, there is no indication that  the  child's  father  has  opposed
    subsequent travel by the child outside the  UK  when  the  Sponsor  and
    child have visited the Appellant in Pakistan.  The  Sponsor's  evidence
    is that the child's  father  has  remarried  and  appears  to  have  no
    interest  in  contact  with  his  child  beyond  the  indirect  contact
    presently maintained.   The Sponsor says in  her first  statement  that
    the child's father sends her letters and cards "every three months" and
    that "every six months" the Sponsor sends him "a report on her  general
    welfare, wellbeing, likes and  dislikes"  ([24]  of  the  statement  at
    [AB/14]).  The formality of that arrangement suggests to me that it  is
    a court approved arrangement, but I do not have the evidence of that as
    (rightly) there has been no further disclosure of  documents  from  the
    Family Court.

30.  Third, there is no evidence that the Sponsor has applied  to  have  the
    order discharged.  The Family Court in  2016  was  concerned  with  the
    separation of husband and wife and arrangements to be made  as  between
    them for custody of and contact with their child.  It was not concerned
    with the immigration position.  If an application was made to discharge
    the order, the Court would be made aware, not only that the  biological
    father now has only  indirect  contact  and  that  the  Appellant  (the
    child's stepfather) lives  in  Pakistan  but  also  that  none  of  the
    Sponsor, the child or the child's father has the right indefinitely  to
    remain in the UK and that all are  Pakistani  nationals.   The  Sponsor
    cannot insist on the operation of a court order in the UK  as  evidence
    of her being unable to take her child to live abroad when she has  made
    no attempt to have that order varied  or  discharged  some  four  years
    later.

31.  As I have  already  indicated,  however,  there  appear  to  have  been
    reasons why the Sponsor sought the order she did preventing the  father
    from taking the child out of the  UK.   Those  appear  in  her  initial
    witness statement at [AB/10-17] as follows:

         "12. In October 2015, my parents took me to Pakistan with them  for
         a month, as they knew I was suffering with depression and thought I
         could do with a holiday. Unfortunately, Mohammed  found  out  about
         our trip on social media.

         13.  Whilst we were in Pakistan, Mohammed sent people  to  threaten
         me and my family, through his family and contacts there.   He  sent
         men to my uncle's shop and they made threats and asked my uncle for
         his home address so they could find us.

         14.  Following this incident, I had to stay  with  extended  family
         and could not visit my uncle until he had moved  to  a  new  house.
         Mohammed then made threats to take [B] away from me  and  'sort  me
         out'."

32.  Although, as Mr Melvin pointed out, the Sponsor has taken the child  to
    Pakistan since, apparently without incident, Ms Jegarajah  pointed  out
    that it would be by no means unusual for the father of a child (or  his
    family) to seek to remove a child from the mother in Pakistan  and  the
    law is likely to be on the father's side in that regard.

33.  That such  problems  might  continue  to  exist  is  evident  from  the
    Sponsor's second witness statement, where she says this ([ABS/6]):

         "4.  Although I have been awarded residence, I  do  not  have  sole
         parental responsibility.  I am prevented in taking my daughter  out
         of the UK for more than 5 weeks at a time.

         5.   There is currently an additional problem because the Pakistani
         authorities will not renew my daughter's passport because I am  not
         'divorced' from her father/ do not have his  authority.   I  cannot
         file for a new court order to address this issue at this  time  due
         to delays due  to  Covid,  which  means  that  I  have  no  way  of
         travelling to Pakistan with my daughter to see my husband, even  on
         holiday, for the foreseeable future."

34.  Even on her own evidence, however, that problem is not  insurmountable.
     There may be a delay due to the pandemic and any wrangles between  the
    parents which might delay resolution of the  issue.   However,  on  the
    evidence presently, the Family Court  orders,  and  objections  of  the
    child's biological father are not  an  insurmountable  reason  why  the
    Sponsor and child could not go to live in Pakistan with the Appellant.

35.  That though is not the end of the matter.  This case involves  a  child
    living in the UK.  As I have already pointed out, Section 55 applies to
    her and I have to assess what is in her best interests.

36.  The Sponsor's child, [B] was born in the UK on 22 November 2012.    [B]
    was granted leave to remain in line with her mother, initially,  on  25
    June 2015 ([AB/21]).  That leave was extended from 27 April 2018  to  1
    November 2020 ([AB/20] and [AB/53]) and an  application  to  extend  it
    further is currently under consideration.

37.  The breakdown  of  the  Sponsor's  religious  marriage  to  her  former
    partner is described in her first statement at [AB/11].   Following  an
    incident of domestic violence, the Sponsor separated from  the  child's
    father in 2013 and although she reconciled with him at their  families'
    behest in 2014, the relationship ended permanently in March 2015.   [B]
    has therefore not lived with her biological father after the age of two
    years.

38.  Although,  supervised  contact  was  permitted  followed  by  overnight
    contact by the Family Court order, the Sponsor says in her statement at
    [AB/12] that she reported her former partner for abuse following  [B]'s
    behaviour after the visits.  The contact after October 2017 is said  to
    have been indirect only as I have already noted.   At  that  time,  [B]
    would have been just under five years old.

39.  The Sponsor met the Appellant in 2016.  He  came  into  [B]'s  life  in
    January 2017 when the Sponsor allowed her  to  have  contact  with  him
    remotely.  [B] met the Appellant for the first time  when  the  Sponsor
    married him in July 2018.  She has therefore known  the  Appellant  for
    about two to three years.

40.  Dealing  first  with  the  evidence  of  [B]'s  relationship  with  the
    Appellant, the Sponsor says  the  following  about  it  in  her  second
    witness statement ([ABS/6]):

         "7.  It is expensive to visit and such  visits  would  have  to  be
         timed over the holidays to make it possible  for  my  daughter.   I
         stated to [B] that I might have to travel there  without  her  next
         year but she was very, very upset at the thought  and  states  that
         she misses him too.

         8.   Ali is the father she never had.  During  the  holidays,  they
         would talk on the phone for about an  hour  a  day,  he  tells  her
         stories, something I am not good at.  He plays games  with  her  on
         messenger and we use snapchat to help  them  send  funny  character
         photos to one and other.  She sends him cards on Father's  Day  and
         he dotes on her, is never angry with her and always makes time  for
         her.  They  have  a  special  bond  and  she  wants  to  share  her
         certificates and awards with him; he is proud of her.

         9.   With the return to school, she still speaks to him for half an
         hour most days in the week.  In total, we spend at least two  hours
         on the phone with each  other  every  day  as  a  family.   We  use
         messenger and WhatsApp and send  each  other  messages  and  photos
         frequently.

         10.  He can't visit us as the Home Office will not grant a  visitor
         visa as they will question his intention to leave.   Similarly,  we
         need visas for everywhere else we go and it is expensive to stay in
         hotels.

         11.  If Ali was here, he would be able to  help  by  either  taking
         care of [B] or allow me to reduce my hours and care for  her.   [B]
         wants me (or Ali) to be able to pick her up from  school  and  gets
         upset when her friends have both parents collecting.  When she sees
         her friends with siblings, she gets upset and always asks  when  we
         can have a brother for her.  She always express her  feelings  that
         she is alone and she needs a sibling to play with and it's not fair
         that her Papa Ali can't join us.  We would initially live  with  my
         parents if he joined us but would intend to save up and move out as
         quickly as we were able into local  rented  accommodation  near  my
         work and [B]'s school."

41.  The relationship  is  further  described  in  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement as follows ([ABS/2-3]):

         "1.  [B] had bad experiences with her biological  father,  but  she
         calls me Papa and I love her just as if she were my  own  daughter.
         We have continued to keep in touch by calls  and  messenger  during
         this period and this particularly important for her whilst she  was
         off school.  We have spent a lot longer on the phone to each  other
         during this period and she often sends me pictures and animations.

         2.   [B] has told me of all the plans she has for  when  I  finally
         join her and Huma in the UK.  Her dream is for  us  all  to  go  to
         Disneyland together, and she wants me to drop her off at school  in
         the mornings.  It is heart breaking to see [B] sad, I  want  to  do
         everything I can to join and her care for her [sic] and  make  Huma
         happy.

         3.   [B] wanted me to be with her on  her  birthday,  which  is  22
         November which I missed and I would like nothing more  than  to  be
         there with her this year.  I send  gifts  through  family  and  she
         sends thanks and posts messages on social media.

         4.   It has [been]  impossible  for  us  to  enjoy  a  family  life
         together. Seeing each other once a  year  and  having  to  maintain
         contact over messages and video  chats  is  hard  for  all  of  us,
         especially due to the Covid pandemic..."

42.  There is evidence in the bundles in support of  what  is  said  in  the
    statements about the regular contact  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor/ [B] by electronic means.

43.  The relationship is also described by [B]'s grandfather in a letter  at
    [AB/28] as follows:

         "We see [B] is very happy with Ali  (stepfather)  and  there  [sic]
         bonding is very good.  She talk to him over video chats and try  to
         show him every moment of her life as she miss him."

44.  The Sponsor's brother,  Zaman,  has  also  described  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and [B] in his letter at [AB/32] as follows:

         "I have been in communication with her husband since their marriage
         and I am happy with the way their relationship is going, especially
         in regards to [Z]'s daughter [B].  Being [B]'s uncle, it was  clear
         how much she was affected by not having a  present  father  as  she
         would see and hear about all the other children's fathers.   I  can
         see the change in [B]'s happiness too since [Z]'s marriage with Ali
         [A] but there has been the barrier of distance between  them.   [B]
         still does not get to experience the father  daughter  relationship
         to its fullest extent due to them being apart."

45.  The Sponsor's brother,  Ali,  says  the  following  in  his  letter  at
    [AB/38]:

         "I am the youngest brother of [Z] Shah and my name is Ali Shah.   I
         have been trying to assist my sister in any way possible for  being
         there when she needs, especially when it comes  to  my  niece  [B].
         Myself and my other family members have been  trying  to  fill  the
         fatherly role for my niece but it is difficult as I will always  be
         her uncle first.  I  therefore  think  that  Ali  [A]  has  done  a
         tremendous job and has built a great relationship with [B] which is
         clearly visible to me through observing the two communicating.   It
         has been difficult for [B] since the separation from [Z]'s  ex  but
         not due to her missing the actual person but due to the void  which
         was created by the separation.  I therefore could clearly  see  the
         change in the happiness of [B] once that void was filled by Ali [A]
         but even at the moment you can tell she clearly misses the physical
         company of a father due to them being apart."

46.  Letters from other family members in  the  Appellant's  initial  bundle
    are to like effect and provide strong support for the evidence given by
    the Sponsor and the Appellant about the Appellant's  relationship  with
    [B].  I also have a copy of a letter from [B] to  the  Appellant  where
    she says this:

         "To pappa

         I wish you were here.  I love you so dearly and  I  wish  you  were
         here. Just imagine. Things would be so much more  easier.   I  miss
         you lots and lots and I still remember all the fun  things  we  did
         like 1 year ago but I'm still praying for the passport and to still
         remind you that I am 7 years old.  How old are you?  And I hope you
         see this letter from me and I love you so so so much bye!"

    She has drawn a picture of herself and the Appellant at the  bottom  of
    the letter.

47.  That [B] clearly wishes to have the Appellant  in  her  life  does  not
    mean that she could not go to Pakistan with her mother to live with him
    there.  In terms of where her best interests lie in terms of country of
    residence, the Sponsor's statement points  out  that  her  family  (the
    child's grandparents) are in  the  UK  as  are  other  relatives.   The
    Sponsor and [B]  live  with  them.   The  Sponsor  says  in  her  first
    statement that  "[her]  whole  support  network,  [her]  education  and
    career, [her] daughter's school, [B's] grandparents and  all  the  life
    [B] has ever known and that [the Sponsor has] known as  an  adult,  has
    been in the UK".  There is confirmation that [B] attends primary school
    and has a very good attendance record.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

48.  As I noted at [4] above, and is accepted on his behalf,  the  Appellant
    can only succeed based on Article 8 outside the Rules.  That is not  to
    say that the Rules are entirely irrelevant, particularly since Appendix
    FM recognises that there may be exceptional circumstances where removal
    or  in  this  case  refusal  of  entry  clearance   would   result   in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences.

49.  As  I  note  at  [7]  above,  the  question  when  considering  whether
    interference with family life occasioned by removal (or, in this  case,
    refusal of entry clearance) is justified involves consideration whether
    there are "insurmountable obstacles" to family life continuing  in  the
    Appellant's home country, which is also the country of  nationality  of
    the Sponsor and her child.

50.  If this case had involved only the Appellant and the Sponsor,  I  would
    have had no hesitation in finding that refusal of entry  clearance  was
    proportionate.   I accept that, as husband and wife, even  though  they
    do not live together, their relationship constitutes  family  life  and
    that the refusal of entry clearance interferes to a substantial  extent
    with that family life.  They continue that family life at present  only
    by  infrequent  visits.   However,  on  the  evidence,  if   the   only
    consideration was  the  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor, that interference could be dealt with by them living  together
    in Pakistan.  There would be no insurmountable obstacles to them  doing
    so.

51.  However, at the heart of this case is the position of a seven-year  old
    child born and brought up in the UK.  I therefore begin with  her  best
    interests.   Those  are  a   primary   although   not   the   paramount
    consideration.

52.  I accept  that  I  have  limited  evidence  of  [B]'s  best  interests.
    However, it stands to reason that her best interests, indeed  the  only
    option for her continued welfare, are to stay with her mother.

53.  I have set out at some length above the evidence  which  I  have  about
    the Appellant's relationship with [B].  I accept that [B] has only  had
    the Appellant in her life for two to three years.  She has never  lived
    with him and has only visited on a handful of occasions.  That position
    though is as a result of the physical separation which is forced on the
    family by the immigration position.

54.  On the evidence, I have no doubt  that  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and [B] is strong and that both view it as a  father/daughter
    relationship.  [B] only has very  limited  indirect  contact  with  her
    biological father and, on the evidence, neither party has any  wish  to
    strengthen that bond.  On the  other  hand,  [B]  calls  the  Appellant
    "papa"and he plays  the  part  in  her  life  which  would  usually  be
    fulfilled by a natural father, albeit that he can do so  only  remotely
    due to the physical circumstances.  He reads her bedtime  stories,  she
    tells him of her achievements, and sends him cards on Fathers' day.

55.  I accept that there is no evidence that the Appellant  makes  decisions
    about [B]'s upbringing.  That is unsurprising in circumstances where he
    is not her natural father, and where she lives with her mother and at a
    physical distance from her stepfather.  However, in terms of  the  care
    which  the  Appellant  provides,  albeit  remotely,  I   consider   the
    relationship to be one which could be termed "parental".

56.  Of course, it is not necessary for me to  reach  a  conclusion  whether
    the Appellant is in a parental relationship with [B] as I  accept  that
    Section 117B (6) cannot apply directly in this case.   However,  again,
    the approach of  that  section  is  instructive  to  where  the  public
    interest lies as I explain at [16] above.

57.  The evidence shows that the continuing of the relationship between  the
    Appellant and [B] as it is  now  via  infrequent  visits  is  having  a
    detrimental effect on [B].  The Sponsor speaks of [B]  being  upset  by
    the fact that she does not have two parents as do  her  friends.   That
    evidence is confirmed by the statement of one  of  [B]'s  uncles.   The
    Appellant mentions that [B] looks forward to him being able to take her
    to and collect her from school if he is allowed to come to the UK.  [B]
    is an only child, and the Sponsor says has expressed a wish to  have  a
    brother or sister.  That is something which could not easily happen  if
    the family relationship continues as it does now.   [B] is aged  nearly
    eight years.  As Ms Jegarajah pointed out, if the Appellant and Sponsor
    had to wait to form a permanent family life in the UK until the Sponsor
    has indefinite leave, [B] would be  aged  thirteen  years.   Those  are
    important, formative years for a child and [B]'s  appreciation  of  the
    difference between her position and that of her friends is only  likely
    to increase over that time.

58.  On the evidence as set  out  above,  I  accept  that  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and [B] amounts to family life.  The Appellant is
    [B]'s father figure.  She treats him as such.  He recognises her as his
    daughter.  Their relationship as it currently stands is  not  in  [B]'s
    best interests.  The Appellant's absence from [B]'s life on a permanent
    basis is having a detrimental impact on  her  and  that  is  likely  to
    increase.  For that reason, I find that it is in [B]'s  best  interests
    to live also with the Appellant.

59.  The next issue is whether [B] could  be  expected  to  go  to  live  in
    Pakistan with the Appellant and the Sponsor.

60.  I have already indicated that I am unpersuaded that  the  Family  Court
    order prevents [B] being taken to live in Pakistan.  It may be that, if
    an application were made to discharge it, that application  would  fail
    and in those circumstances there would be evidence that it does prevent
    [B] going to live in Pakistan but I have no evidence that  the  Sponsor
    has tried to take that course.  There is no evidence that [B]'s natural
    father is interested in pursuing more direct contact with  [B]  and  it
    may be that, now he is in another relationship, he would  not  obstruct
    the Sponsor if she wished to take [B] to live  in  Pakistan  which  is,
    after all, her (and his) country of nationality.

61.   Whilst  I  accept  the  Sponsor's  unchallenged  evidence  about  what
    occurred with her former partner's family when she visited Pakistan  in
    2015, I am unpersuaded that this amounts to a reason  why  the  Sponsor
    and [B] could not go to live in  Pakistan.   As  I  say,  there  is  no
    evidence that [B]'s biological father has any desire  to  increase  his
    contact with [B] or have much to do with her at  all.   Whilst  it  may
    well be the case that the paternal family would, in Pakistan, have  the
    law on their side if they sought to take  [B]  away  from  her  mother,
    there is no evidence that they have tried to take such action  and  [B]
    has been taken to Pakistan on  at  least  two  occasions  without  such
    incident.

62.  It does appear  that  there  may  be  a  current  difficulty  with  the
    obtaining of  a  passport  for  [B]  without  her  biological  father's
    consent.  I am prepared to accept that  the  Pakistani  authorities  do
    require that in order to issue a new passport.  However, I do not  have
    evidence about possible  ways  around  that  difficulty  and  even  the
    Sponsor's own evidence indicates that  it  may  be  overcome  by  court
    intervention  if  necessary.   There  must  be  some  latitude  in  the
    procedure.  Absent any firm evidence  from  the  Pakistani  authorities
    that they are unwilling or unable to issue [B] with a new  passport,  I
    do not accept that the difficulty is an insurmountable obstacle.

63.  The question is then one whether [B]'s best  interests  are  served  by
    remaining in the UK or going to live in Pakistan.  I  accept  that,  on
    the evidence, [B] has not expressed  any  objection  to  travelling  to
    Pakistan.  Indeed, she appears to welcome visits to her  home  country.
    However, the reason for that attitude is no doubt  because  the  visits
    allow her to see her  stepfather.   There  is  also  a  big  difference
    between a visit for a few weeks to a month  and  going  to  live  in  a
    different country.

64.  I recognise that, at her age, [B] is likely to be  adaptable.   She  is
    doing well in school in the UK but there is no evidence that she  would
    not also do well in education in Pakistan.  She speaks Urdu albeit,  it
    is said, to a limited extent.  I note however that her grandmother (the
    Sponsor's mother) with whom [B] also lives needed an  Urdu  interpreter
    if she was to give evidence in the First-tier  Tribunal  and  therefore
    that is undoubtedly a language which is spoken at home.

65.  Ultimately, though, I have reached the conclusion that it is  in  [B]'s
    best interests to remain in the UK.  She has all her family (aside  the
    Appellant) here.  That is an important and unusual factor in this  case
    which is highlighted by the Respondent's own  actions  as  regards  the
    Sponsor and [B].   As I have set out at [4] and [36] above, the Sponsor
    and [B] were given limited leave to remain in  June  2015.   Mr  Melvin
    confirmed in his submissions that the Sponsor was given leave based  on
    her family life with her family members.  That leave  was  given  on  a
    discretionary basis outside the Rules.  Although  the  Sponsor  had  by
    then returned to  the  family  home  following  the  breakdown  of  her
    marriage to her former partner,  she  was  an  adult.   Her  leave  was
    premised on her relationship with her family  whose  leave  was  itself
    dependent  on  the  entitlement  to  leave  of  her  younger  siblings.
    Although the Sponsor had by  that  date  formed  her  own  family  unit
    (albeit one which had broken down) and had a child of her own, she  was
    nonetheless recognised by the Respondent as part of the family unit  of
    her parents and siblings to a sufficient  extent  that  the  Respondent
    accepted that it would be disproportionate to remove  her  and  [B]  to
    Pakistan.  At the time, [B] was aged only two years.

66.  Moreover, the Respondent was persuaded, in 2018, to renew  that  leave.
    I  do  not  know  if  the  Respondent  was  told  about  the  Sponsor's
    relationship with the Appellant at that time.  I suspect not.  She  did
    not marry him  until  July  2018,  after  further  leave  was  granted.
    However, by granting further leave, the Respondent recognised that  the
    Sponsor and [B] remained a part of the family unit in the UK to such an
    extent that it would be disproportionate to remove  them  to  Pakistan.
    [B] was then aged five years.  She is now aged nearly eight years.   If
    anything, her bond with her family in the UK and her private life  here
    will only have developed further.

67.  I cannot pre-judge what will be the  outcome  of  the  application  for
    further leave to remain which is currently before the Respondent.   The
    Sponsor's marriage to the Appellant may be thought to have changed  her
    circumstances.  However, on the other side  of  the  coin,  as  I  have
    already noted,  [B] may now be a "qualifying child" for the purposes of
    Section 117B(6) and may be able to succeed in an application for  leave
    to remain within the Rules under paragraph 276ADE due to her age.  That
    will depend on the view taken as to reasonableness of her going to live
    in Pakistan.  My decision is not of course  concerned  with  an  appeal
    against a decision to remove the Sponsor and [B] and I therefore do not
    intend to speculate as to the outcome of the pending application.

68.  However, I do consider material to the best  interests  assessment  the
    fact that the Respondent has recognised that the Sponsor and [B] should
    not be removed from the UK in the past due to  the  strength  of  their
    private and family life ties here.   They  have  been  given  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules but on a route which it is intended will  lead
    to settlement. The strength of the ties between the Sponsor and [B]  on
    the one hand and their family members on the other is,  in  this  case,
    such that [B]'s best interests are served by remaining  in  the  UK  as
    part of that family unit.

69.  I turn then to consider the factors on the other side of  the  balance,
    namely the public interest.

70.  The sole factor weighing against the Appellant in the  public  interest
    is  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control.   Mr  Melvin
    confirmed that to be the position.  That is an important factor.   That
    the Appellant is unable to satisfy the Rules is something which has  to
    be given weight.  As I have already remarked at [8] and [9] above,  the
    reason why he cannot do so due to the Sponsor's lack of settled  status
    is not insignificant.  I have also accepted Mr Melvin's submission that
    to allow a spouse of a person with limited leave only to enter  the  UK
    in every case would drive a coach and horses through  the  Rules  which
    contain a requirement for a sponsoring partner to be British or settled
    (or to have refugee leave).

71.  As  Ms  Jegarajah  pointed  out,  effective  immigration  control  also
    requires those seeking to enter or remain to follow  proper  procedures
    and not to seek to circumvent the Rules.  This is not a case where  the
    Appellant has entered illegally or has overstayed leave  and  seeks  to
    remain when he has no right to do so.  The Appellant  and  the  Sponsor
    have been married now for over two years and they met and  began  their
    relationship over four years ago.  They have waited patiently  for  the
    Appellant to be permitted to join  the  Sponsor  in  the  UK  lawfully.
    However, it is to be expected that those seeking to come to and  remain
    in the UK ought to follow the correct procedures  and  that  is  not  a
    factor which weighs in their favour.  It is neutral.

72.   The  Section  117B  factors  have  limited  application  in  an  entry
    clearance case.  This is not a case where I am bound to give little  or
    limited weight to private and  family  life  due  to  any  unlawful  or
    precarious immigration status.  The  Appellant  is  accepted  to  speak
    English and it is now accepted that the  Sponsor  meets  the  financial
    requirements (see [2] of my error of law decision).  Both  factors  are
    however neutral.

73.  Ultimately, as I noted at the outset, the outcome of this appeal  comes
    down to a balance between the obstacles to family life being  continued
    in Pakistan or as it is now via family visits and the public  interest.



74.  I have accepted that both the Sponsor and [B] enjoy  family  life  with
    the  Appellant.   The  refusal  of  entry  clearance  interferes  to  a
    sufficient extent with that family life to require justification.   The
    justification in this case is a legitimate one due to  the  Appellant's
    inability to meet the Rules.  The outcome therefore involves a balanced
    assessment between  the  level  of  the  interference  and  the  public
    interest and a determination of which of those  factors  outweighs  the
    other.

75.  I accept that what [B]'s best interests require  is  not  determinative
    of the balance.  Those interests are however a powerful  consideration.
    I have explained the impact of the Appellant's absence  on  [B]  and  I
    have reached the conclusion that  her  best  interests  are  served  by
    living with both the Sponsor and the Appellant and continuing  to  live
    in the UK.  The issue is whether those interests are outweighed by  the
    public interest.

76.  In this case, the public interest lies in the Appellant's inability  to
    meet the Rules.  He cannot do so because the Sponsor only  has  limited
    leave.  However, the Respondent has recognised  now  on  two  occasions
    that it would be disproportionate to remove the Sponsor  and  [B]  from
    the UK due to the strength of their ties and membership of  the  family
    unit of the Sponsor's parents and siblings in the  UK.   The  situation
    has changed in a technical sense due to the Sponsor's marriage  to  the
    Appellant but she and [B] remain living in that family unit.  [B]'s own
    position has undoubtedly strengthened as she has got older  and  is  in
    the process of forming her own life in the UK.   Whilst  a  failure  to
    meet the Rules is in general an important factor in favour  of  refusal
    of an application for entry clearance, in this case,  the  strength  of
    that factor is reduced by the weight which the Respondent  has  herself
    given to that consideration in the past  when  considering  whether  to
    give the Sponsor and [B] the right to remain.

77.  Balancing the impact of the refusal of entry clearance  on  the  family
    lives of the Appellant, the Sponsor and particularly  [B]  against  the
    public interest and giving appropriate weight to [B]'s best  interests,
    I am persuaded that the refusal has  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
    and the refusal is therefore disproportionate.



DECISION

The Appellant's appeal is allowed.  The Respondent's  decision  is  unlawful
under section 6 Human Rights Act 1998 (Article 8 ECHR).


Signed:  L K Smith     Dated: 5 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/06958/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |                                     |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On Monday 27 July 2020               |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   ALI [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHE/1177278
                                                                  Respondent


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

BACKGROUND

1.   The Appellant is a  national  of  Pakistan.   He  appeals  against  the
    decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  JWH  Law  promulgated  on  11
    December 2019 ("the Decision").  By the Decision, the  Judge  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision dated  3  July
    2019 refusing his  human  rights  claim  made  in  the  context  of  an
    application  for  entry  clearance  to  settle  with  his  wife   ("the
    Sponsor").  The Respondent refused the application because the  Sponsor
    is not settled in the UK and because her  income  was  just  below  the
    minimum threshold of 18,600.   The  Sponsor  is  also  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  She has lived in  the  UK  since  December  2006.   She  has
    limited leave to remain in the UK.

2.   The Sponsor's income had risen to over the  minimum  threshold  by  the
    date of the hearing before Judge Law.  That was therefore no longer  an
    issue.  However, the application  still  fails  under  the  Immigration
    Rules ("the Rules") due to the Sponsor's non-settled status.  The issue
    for Judge Law was therefore, whether, assessing the human rights  claim
    outside the Rules, the Respondent's decision led to unjustifiably harsh
    consequences for the Appellant and the Sponsor.  The Sponsor also has a
    child of another relationship and therefore an issue arose whether  the
    consequences for that child would also  be  unjustifiably  harsh.   The
    child is the subject of  a  Family  Court  order  (disclosed  with  the
    permission of that Court) which prevents the Sponsor removing the child
    from the UK without the consent of her birth father.  The  Sponsor  has
    visited the Appellant in Pakistan with her  child.  The  focus  of  the
    child's interests therefore includes also her  relationship  with  both
    her stepfather and biological father.

3.   The Judge found that the Appellant's application  could  not  meet  the
    Rules, both due to the Sponsor's status but also because she could  not
    demonstrate sufficient income for the requisite  period.   Outside  the
    Rules, the Judge accepted that the Appellant has a family life with the
    Sponsor but not  with  the  Sponsor's  child  ([19]  and  [20]  of  the
    Decision).  He accepted that  interference  with  the  Appellant's  and
    Sponsor's  family  life  was   of   sufficient   gravity   to   require
    justification.  He concluded however that refusal  of  entry  clearance
    was not disproportionate.  In  relation  to  the  child,  the  evidence
    before the Judge was that the child had been taken  by  her  mother  to
    visit the Appellant in Pakistan on one occasion  in  2017  without  the
    permission of the child's biological father.   The  Sponsor  said  that
    this was because the child's father had  previously  refused  to  grant
    permission.  However, the Judge also noted the evidence that  the  only
    contact between the child and her biological father since October  2017
    had been via letters and cards every three months  ([27]).    Balancing
    the interference with the family life which  had  existed  for  several
    years at long distance against the public interest, the Judge concluded
    that refusal of entry clearance was proportionate.

4.   The Appellant appeals on four grounds as follows:

    Ground one: the Judge  has  erred  in  fact  when  asserting  that  the
    Respondent had not been informed of the existence of the child when the
    application for entry clearance was made.  Reference  is  made  to  the
    child not having physical contact with her father as such  contact  has
    been prevented by Social Services  because  of  allegations  of  sexual
    abuse of his daughter.  It is said therefore that the Respondent  would
    also have been aware of the particular vulnerability of the child.

    Ground two: the Judge has failed to consider the best interests of  the
    child. It is said that this was not considered because of the error  of
    fact identified in ground one.

    Ground three: (wrongly numbered as second ground two):  the  Judge  has
    failed to consider the Respondent's "positive obligation ... to develop
    family life".  The basis of the Judge's conclusions as to  family  life
    between the Appellant and the Sponsor's child  (that  none  exists)  is
    based on lack of emotional dependency.  The grounds point out that such
    could not be  established  as  the  child  has  never  lived  with  the
    Appellant.

    Ground four  (wrongly  numbered  as  ground  three):  the  Judge  acted
    irrationally in concluding that it was not disproportionate  to  refuse
    entry clearance because family life could be maintained  as  now  until
    such time as the Sponsor obtains indefinite leave  to  remain.   It  is
    said that it would be six years before she could be  entitled  to  such
    leave (although the grounds do not state when that period began).

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy  on
    23 April 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  The grounds  argue  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider
         GEN.3.3.(2)(b) of the Immigration Rules and the best interests of a
         child and failed to  properly  assess  the  Appellant's  Article  8
         claim.

         3.   In the decision the Judge made reasonable findings on many  of
         the issues however it appears that he excluded consideration of the
         child as he believed that  the  Respondent  was  not  told  of  the
         child's existence in the application.

         4.   The grounds disclose arguable errors of law."

6.   By a Note and Directions dated 14 May 2020, having reviewed  the  file,
    I reached  the  provisional  view  that  it  would  be  appropriate  to
    determine without a hearing  (pursuant  to  Rule  34  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  -  "the  Procedure  Rules")  the
    following questions:

    (a)  whether the making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  involved
         the making of an error of law and, if so

    (b)  whether that decision should be set aside.

    Directions were given for the parties to make submissions in writing on
    the appropriateness of that course and further submissions in  relation
    to the error of law. The reasons for the Note and  Directions  was  the
    "present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-19,  and
    the overriding objective expressed in the Procedure Rules".

7.   The Appellant filed submissions in response  on  22  May  2020.   Those
    read as follows:

         "I write further to the directions of UT Judge  Smith  and  confirm
         that we believe an in-person remote hearing is preferable  in  this
         complex matter and also to set aside and  remake  the  decision  if
         possible.  There are sensitive issues pertaining to the child which
         also warrant close consideration to properly consider the  arguable
         errors of law (set out at paragraphs 2 and 3  of  the  most  recent
         decision).  Counsel's grounds are resubmitted (last attachment) and
         these set those circumstances out.

         We would however respectfully refer the court to the Joint Protocol
         in relation to the sharing of information between the Family  Court
         and Immigration Tribunal which we believe would  set  out  in  more
         detail the domestic violence abuse suffered by the sponsor and  the
         arrangements for the child made by the  family  court  which  would
         provide further detail in relation to the exceptional circumstances
         and background to this which may  assist  the  UT  Judge  in  their
         considerations in relation to the best interest of  the  child  and
         contention that there are exceptional, compassionate and compelling
         factors in play.  The requests for consideration  of  the  protocol
         ahead of the FTT hearings are attached and although we were able to
         submit some documents from the family court, we believe  disclosure
         of all documents, directly to the UT would  be  useful,  given  the
         stage of this appeal."

8.   On 9 June 2020, the Respondent filed a Rule 24 reply.   The  writer  of
    that reply indicated that she did not have access  to  the  Appellant's
    file.  The Respondent opposes the appeal.  As she correctly identifies,
    the focus of the challenge is the Sponsor's child  and  the  impact  on
    that child.  The Respondent points  out  that  the  burden  is  on  the
    Appellant to provide evidence of his relationship with the  child.   It
    is accepted by the Respondent  (as  it  was  by  the  Judge)  that  the
    Sponsor's financial shortfall  might  be  overcome  under  Gen  3.1  of
    Appendix FM to the Rules if sufficient evidence had  been  provided  by
    the Appellant.   That is, though, no longer relevant and  the  sticking
    point now is the Sponsor's status and not the  financial  requirements.
    Paragraphs Gen 3.2 and Gen 3.3 of Appendix FM may still be relevant and
    I do not understand the Respondent to dispute that  the  Appellant  may
    still succeed outside the Rules if a refusal of entry  clearance  would
    be disproportionate when considered outside the Rules.  The  Respondent
    asserts  that  the  Judge  has  considered  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant, the Sponsor and the Sponsor's child and reached a conclusion
    which is open to him.  The Respondent draws attention in particular  to
    [27] to [30]  of  the  Decision  where,  she  asserts,  the  Judge  has
    considered the best interests of the child.   Finally,  the  Respondent
    submits that, if an error  of  law  is  found,  the  appeal  should  be
    considered afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

9.   Dealing first with the  Applicant's  submission  that  I  need  to  see
    additional documents  from  the  Family  Court  when  considering  this
    appeal, at this stage I reject that submission.  I  am  here  concerned
    with whether the Decision contains an error of law.  As such, it  would
    be neither helpful nor appropriate to consider documents which were not
    before Judge Law.  It might become appropriate if an error  of  law  is
    found when re-making but that issue requires separate consideration  at
    that stage.

10.  The Tribunal has the power to make a decision without a  hearing  under
    rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  In this case, neither  party  objects  to
    this  course.   The  exercise  of  my  discretion  is  subject  to  the
    overriding objective in rule 2 to enable  the  Tribunal  to  deal  with
    cases fairly and justly.

11.  The Appellant is in Pakistan and it is not suggested that either he  or
    the Sponsor wish to participate in  an  oral  hearing  which  would  be
    concerned only with the legal question whether there is an error of law
    in the Decision. The Appellant  has  had  two  opportunities,  via  the
    initial grounds and the further submissions, to set out his case as  to
    the error of law asserted in the Decision.  Whilst I recognise that the
    outcome of the error of law stage is of importance to the Appellant and
    the Sponsor, as failure at this stage will mean  that  the  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed finally, I do not consider that  fairness  requires
    an oral hearing of this issue.  The grounds  are  clearly  articulated,
    and I do not consider that amplification by way of oral submissions  is
    required.  The Appellant  contends  that  the  issues  are  complex  in
    nature.  I disagree.  They are relatively straightforward.

12.  It is difficult to see what more could be said  orally  in  support  of
    the grounds if a hearing were to be convened.  Although it is  possible
    for the Tribunal to hold remote hearings and even limited  face-to-face
    hearings at the present time, its capacity to do  so  is  reduced  from
    what would normally be available.  The convening of an oral hearing  is
    accordingly likely to lead to some delay in the determination  of  this
    appeal.  I have therefore reached the view that it  is  appropriate  to
    deal with the error of law issue on the  papers  and  without  an  oral
    hearing.

13.  At this stage, the issue for me is whether  the  Decision  contains  an
    error of law.  If I conclude it does, I  need  to  consider  whether  I
    should set aside the Decision based on that error.  If I decide  to  do
    so, I would either re-make the decision or  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

14.  I can take all the grounds together.  Grounds one and two both  concern
    the adequacy of consideration of the best interests  of  the  Sponsor's
    child. I do not consider that ground one adds anything as the issue for
    the  Judge  is  whether  refusal  of  entry  clearance   breaches   the
    Appellant's right to respect  for  his  family  life  not  whether  the
    Respondent has acted in accordance with the law.   In  any  event,  the
    Respondent's decision under appeal did consider the  existence  of  the
    Sponsor's child but concluded that  her  best  interests  were  not  of
    relevance because the child is not that of the  Appellant.   The  Judge
    had however to consider the child's best interests for himself  on  the
    evidence before him.  The adequacy of  the  Judge's  findings  in  that
    regard are then relevant to ground  three  concerning  the  Appellant's
    ability to form a family life with the Sponsor's child and ground  four
    concerns the proportionality balance which includes  the  relevance  of
    the Sponsor's status in the UK.

15.  In relation to the Judge's consideration of the best interests  of  the
    child, the Respondent draws  my  attention  to  [16]  of  the  Decision
    coupled with [27] to [30] of the Decision. In relation to the  entirety
    of  the  grounds,  it  is  appropriate  to  read  those  paragraphs  in
    conjunction with what is said at [19], [20], and [23] to  [26]  of  the
    Decision and the conclusion at [31].  The Judge's reasoning as a  whole
    is as follows:

         "16. In this case, I consider  it  is  appropriate  to  go  on  and
             consider the appeal under Article 8 itself.  This  is  because
             of the argument that the appellant  has  now  demonstrated  an
             income of more  than  the  minimum  threshold,  and  that  the
             consequences   of   dismissing   her   appeal   would   be   a
             disproportionate lack of respect for his family life  and  the
             family life of  the  sponsor  and  her  child.   In  addition,
             Appendix FM does not make specific provision  for  considering
             the  reasonableness  or  proportionality   of   requiring   an
             applicant to make a further application, with  the  consequent
             delay, which is analogous  to  the  situation  in  R  (on  the
             application of  Chen)  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -
             temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT  00189
             (IAC).

         ...

         19.  I am satisfied that the appellant has  family  life  with  the
             sponsor since they are married, have lived together briefly as
             man and wife in Pakistan and maintain contact by social  media
             and further visits.  The refusal of the application interferes
             with that family life in the sense that it  shows  a  lack  of
             respect for it.  I note that the respondent does  not  dispute
             that the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
             with the sponsor, and I find that to be the case.

         20.  I am not satisfied that the appellant has family life with the
             sponsor's daughter, since she is not his child and there is no
             evidence of dependency between them, other than the  emotional
             bond to which the sponsor referred in evidence.

         ...

         23.  With regard to the amended section 117B(2) and (3) of the 2002
             Act, which apply as much to those seeking to enter the  UK  as
             those seeking to remain, I am satisfied that the appellant  is
             able to speak English to the required standard since otherwise
             his application would have been  refused  on  that  additional
             ground.  However, I have no  evidence  as  to  whether  he  is
             financially independent, other  than  what  the  sponsor  said
             about him recently starting work as a  salesman  after  having
             previously done 'various bits of work'.

         24.  Even though the appellant did not demonstrate that  she  could
             meet the financial requirement at the date of  application,  I
             am satisfied the sponsor's income does now exceed the required
             threshold of 18,600.

         25.  Article 8 does not create  a  right  for  married  couples  to
             choose to live in a Contracting  State.   In  SS  (Congo)  and
             Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 in relation to one of the  appeals,
             the sponsor had arrived in the UK  aged  7  from  Somalia;  he
             became a British  citizen  in  2010.   He  and  the  appellant
             entered the marriage knowing  in  effect  she  would  have  to
             comply with the Immigration  Rules,  as  did  this  appellant.
             Richards LK said that the fact that the sponsor would lose his
             job in the United Kingdom if he had to leave to  enjoy  family
             life elsewhere and hence would prefer to establish family life
             here did not constitute compelling  circumstances  to  require
             the grant of leave to remain outside the rules.

         26.  In the Chen case referred to above, it was held  that  in  all
             cases, it will be for  the  individual  to  place  before  the
             respondent  evidence  that  such   further   separation   will
             interfere disproportionately with protected rights.

         27.  The best interests of the  child  require  that  she  continue
             living with her mother and it is relevant that the 2016  court
             order prevented her mother taking her to Pakistan to live with
             the appellant whether on a permanent or  temporary  basis,  in
             the absence of the consent of her birth father  or  a  further
             court order.  That order was  made  by  the  family  court  in
             August 2016 (page 56 in the appellant's bundle)  and  required
             the sponsor to ensure that her child was  available  to  spend
             time with  her  father  on  specified  dates  from  August  to
             November 2016 and  then  on  alternate  weekends  starting  in
             January 2017.  No further court order has been disclosed,  but
             I note from paragraph 22 of the sponsor's statement  that  she
             took her daughter to Pakistan for  her  brother's  wedding  in
             2017 without the father's permission and 'did  so  because  he
             previously  refused  to  grant   permission.'    The   sponsor
             presumably obtained a further court order before doing so  and
             she states in paragraph 24 that the only contact  between  the
             child and the father  since  October  2017  has  been  through
             letters and cards every three months.

         28.  I also take into account that  the  sponsor's  daughter  is  a
             Pakistani citizen according to her passport at page 50 of  the
             appellant's bundle and there would therefore be no obstacle in
             that respect to her  accompanying  her  mother  to  visit  the
             appellant, as long as the sponsor abides by  the  2016  family
             court order or any subsequent amendment to that order.

         29.  I also take into account that the sponsor has lived in the  UK
             since December 2006 and would prefer to stay here.

         30.  As referred to by the entry clearance manager  in  the  review
             conducted after  the  grounds  of  appeal  were  received  and
             details of the court order became  known,  the  appellant  and
             sponsor decided to marry in the knowledge that he would need a
             visa which was not  guaranteed.   The  only  document  in  the
             bundle (page 21) relating to the sponsor's status is the grant
             of limited leave  to  remain  until  24  December  2017.   The
             sponsor does not say in her statement whether a further  grant
             of leave to remain has been made, but there must be one as she
             has travelled to Pakistan in 2018 and 2019.  I note  that  the
             application form completed by the appellant (Part 6 -  sponsor
             details at question 70) describes the sponsor as  a  temporary
             resident in the UK, which I find means he was aware  that  she
             did not have settled status.  Contrary to what is said in  the
             grounds of appeal about the sponsor being unable to afford  to
             visit her husband, the sponsor did subsequently visit him  for
             two weeks in June 2019.

         31.  Taking all these considerations into account, I  am  satisfied
             that the respondent's decision  is  proportionate,  since  the
             appellant and  sponsor  knew  when  they  married  that  entry
             clearance  was  not  guaranteed  and  their  family  life  can
             continue to be conducted by means of social media  and  visits
             as it has been until now.  I have not been told  how  long  it
             will be before the sponsor is entitled to indefinite leave  to
             remain, so I have not been  able  to  take  that  period  into
             account, but  there  is  no  reason  why  family  life  cannot
             continue on the same basis in the meantime."

16.  Dealing first with the child's best interests, whether  the  Judge  was
    obliged to consider the position of the child under Gen 3.3 of Appendix
    FM to the Rules is  frankly  irrelevant.   The  Judge  was  obliged  to
    consider those interests and did so.  I reject the submission that  the
    Judge failed to carry out any welfare assessment. However,  I  consider
    that there are two errors made by the Judge when doing so.  First,  the
    Judge concludes that there is no family life between the Appellant  and
    the child based on lack of dependency.  That is  the  appropriate  test
    for adult dependents even where there is a family relationship and  the
    Judge may be right to consider that it applies  also  to  the  position
    between  non-biological  parents  and  children.   However,  the  Judge
    considers that issue too narrowly and appears to confine  consideration
    to the financial position.  That is evident from the  Judge's  apparent
    acceptance at [20] of the Decision of the Sponsor's evidence  that  the
    Appellant has an emotional bond with the child.

17.  Second, and flowing from that, the Judge confines consideration of  the
    child's best interests at [27] of  the  Decision  to  the  relationship
    between  the  child  and  her  biological   parents.    There   is   no
    consideration there of two factors.  First, that the  child  has  lived
    the entirety of her life in the UK, save for occasional visits  to  the
    Appellant and other  family  members.   The  child  is  not  a  British
    citizen; she has leave in line  with  her  mother.   Nor  indeed  do  I
    understand the Judge to conclude that it would be in her best interests
    to relocate permanently to Pakistan even if she is a  citizen  of  that
    country.  The Judge's conclusion at [28] of the Decision  is  that  she
    could continue to visit the Appellant with her mother as she does  now.
    That however begs the question  which  is  the  second  factor  of  the
    child's best interests viz a viz her relationship  with  the  Appellant
    who, according to the evidence, she views as her father.  There  is  no
    consideration by the Judge whether it is in the child's best  interests
    to remain living with her mother but apart from  her  stepfather  (save
    for occasional visits).  There  is  no  independent  evidence  in  that
    regard but there is some  detail  in  the  witness  statements  of  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor as to the depth of relationship and  what  it
    is that the child misses about having her stepfather living with her in
    the UK.  That is not considered.

18.  There is therefore  a  failure  to  consider  relevant  evidence  which
    amounts to an error of law.  I therefore set aside the Decision.  I  do
    not preserve any findings.

19.  Strictly speaking, having found an error in relation to ground  two,  I
    do not need to go on to consider whether there is an error  established
    in relation to the other two grounds.  However,  I  do  so  because  my
    comments may be relevant to the re-making of the decision.

20.  Although the way in which the Appellant's ground  three  is  formulated
    crosses with what I have said above, it is of course the  case  that  a
    Judge  considering  this  case  is  concerned   with   permitting   the
    development of family life within the UK rather than, as in a  removals
    case, the interference with family life already established here.  That
    is however recognised by the Judge at [25] and [26]  of  the  Decision.
    Cases dating as far back as Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v  United
    Kingdom in 1985 have recognised that there is no general obligation  to
    respect a choice of country in which family life may be established and
    continued.

21.  Moreover, here, family life has been continued  between  the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor at distance for two years now.  It is for the Appellant
    to demonstrate  the  level  of  interference  which  refusal  of  entry
    clearance has with his ability to  continue  family  life  and  why  he
    should be permitted to come to the UK to continue that family life on a
    permanent basis rather than, as now, on a temporary basis  via  visits.
    It is also for the Appellant (and the Sponsor) to show why it would  be
    unjustifiably harsh for them to continue their family life in Pakistan.



22.  That leads me on to a further unusual factor in this case which is  the
    reason why the Appellant is unable to meet the Rules.  Both the Sponsor
    and her daughter are Pakistani nationals.  Although  her  daughter  was
    born in the UK, I have seen no evidence to suggest that she has British
    nationality.  The evidence suggests  that  she  too  has  only  limited
    status in the UK.

23.  The evidence is also unclear about how and why the Sponsor was  granted
    limited leave to remain.  Unfortunately, the letter indicating a  grant
    of leave to remain outside the Rules at [AB/21] is missing  the  second
    and third pages.  The Sponsor says that her  ex-husband  did  not  have
    immigration status in the UK, and I assume that is the reason  why  the
    Sponsor's daughter is not a  British  citizen  from  birth.   Leave  to
    remain is not therefore  apparently  granted  based  on  the  Sponsor's
    relationship with her daughter.  Her  daughter  is  not  a  "qualifying
    child".  I note that Judge Laws says that the Sponsor has  leave  until
    December 2017 and it is not clear what is her status thereafter.   That
    ignores the evidence at [AB/20] that she has leave to  remain  from  27
    April 2018 to 1 November 2020.  I accept, on that basis,  that  if,  as
    the Sponsor says in her statement, she is  on  the  ten-year  route  to
    settlement, she has completed only five years of the ten years.  It  is
    however relevant to the proportionality assessment that  she  has  only
    temporary status in the UK as does  her  daughter  and  that  both  are
    nationals of the country in which the Appellant resides.

24.  I turn to the point made in the submissions regarding further  evidence
    from the Family Court and the invocation  of  the  Joint  Protocol  for
    disclosure of further documents from those  proceedings.   It  will  be
    recalled that those proceedings are  concerned  with  the  relationship
    between the Sponsor and her daughter on the one hand and the  Sponsor's
    ex-husband  and  the  child's  father  on  the  other.   The  important
    relationship in the re-making of the decision is between the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor's child and not between that child and  her  biological
    father.  I therefore find it difficult to see  what  relevance  further
    documents arising from those proceedings might have.  If  they  are  of
    relevance,  the  Appellant's  solicitors  can   make   an   application
    explaining the relevance which will be considered.

25.  Finally, in relation to the re-making of the decision, I see no  reason
    to remit the appeal.  There are no issues  of  credibility.   The  case
    involves an assessment of the Article 8 rights of those affected by the
    decision.  For that reason, I retain the appeal for re-making  in  this
    Tribunal.  Although there is no application to adduce further evidence,
    I consider it appropriate to allow the  Appellant  the  opportunity  to
    file further evidence, in particular about his  relationship  with  the
    Sponsor and her child.  It would also be helpful for  the  Tribunal  to
    understand the basis on which the  Sponsor  has  been  given  leave  to
    remain in the UK.

26.  For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that the Decision contains  a
    material error of  law.   I  set  aside  the  Decision.   I  have  made
    directions below for a resumed hearing.



DECISION

I am satisfied that the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  JWH  Law
promulgated on 11 December 2019 discloses an error  of  law.   I  set  aside
that decision.  I make the following directions for a resumed hearing:

      1. Within 28 days from the  date  when  this  decision  is  sent,  the
         Appellant shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the  Respondent
         any further evidence on which he wishes to rely.

      2. The appeal is to be relisted for a hearing via remote means  (Skype
         for Business).

         In relation to that hearing, no  later  than  14  days  after  this
         decision is sent, the parties shall file and serve by email

             (i)  Skype contact details and a contact telephone number  for
                  any person who wishes  to  attend  the  hearing  remotely,
                  which might include the advocates, instructing  solicitor,
                  the Appellant and any other witnesses;

             (ii)     dates to avoid.

      3. The parties are at liberty to  apply  to  amend  these  directions,
         giving reasons, if they face significant practical difficulties  in
         complying.


Signed:  L K Smith     Dated: 27 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
