
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06580/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th February 2020                |On 09th March 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    E A B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey, instructed by MTC & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on  28  November  1970.   He
    appeals against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Buckwell,
    promulgated  on  19  November  2019,  dismissing  his  appeal   against
    deportation on human rights grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on the ground that the judge  made  the
    following errors of law:-

      1) Failing to provide adequate reasons for finding that  an  exception
         to deportation under section 117C of the NIAA  2002  was  not  made
         out;


    (2)  Failing to consider the effect of deportation on  the  appellant's
         children separately from the appellant's offending behaviour;


    (3)  Failing to determine the extent  of  the  appellant's  social  and
         cultural integration and whether there would be obstacles to his re-
         integration as a distinct issue;


    (4)  According undue weight to the appellant's conviction and  sentence
         when determining whether the exception under 117C(6) was made out

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Gumsley
    on all grounds, on 17 December 2019, for the following reasons:


         "The Decision and Reasons contains a very thorough analysis of  the
         facts  in  the  case,  and  the  judge  identifies  in  detail  the
         applicable law to be applied in the case. However having considered
         the Grounds of Appeal advanced, I am  satisfied  that  is  arguable
         that the judge has approached the question  of  whether  there  are
         exceptions to s.117C and/or very compelling  circumstances  in  the
         case, wrongly. It  is  arguable  that  the  judge  has  taken  into
         account/afforded too much weight to the Appellant's  behaviour  and
         criminal convictions when  considering  this  issue.  Although  the
         judge identifies the first question to consider is whether it would
         in fact be unduly harsh to expect the children  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom without their father, no specific findings  on  this
         appeared to have been made  and  the  judge  proceeds  directly  to
         consider very compelling circumstances.  Further,  it  is  arguable
         that the effects on the children as identified in the evidence have
         not been adequately considered. It is also arguable that the reason
         for concluding that the exceptions in s.117C do not apply  are  not
         sufficiently clear."


Appellant's convictions

4.   In 2009, the Appellant was  convicted  of  possession  of  cocaine  and
    cannabis. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced  to  40  hours  community
    service for each offence. On 11 to  December  2018  the  appellant  was
    sentenced, after guilty pleas to four offences of supplying cocaine and
    heroine, to a term of imprisonment of four years.


Appellant's submissions

5.   Ms Harvey submitted that there was no dispute on the facts. The  judge
    accepted the children's behaviour had deteriorated while the  Appellant
    was in prison. It was accepted it would be unduly harsh to  expect  the
    Appellant's partner and his children to  go  to  Jamaica.  However,  no
    reasons were given for why it would not be unduly  harsh  for  them  to
    remain in the UK. In addition, there  were  no  findings  on  the  best
    interests of children. There was evidence before  the  judge  that  the
    Appellant's partner was afraid their son would become  involved  in  a
    criminal gang and the family unit would break down if the children were
    taken into care. The judge first addressed the Appellant's criminality,
    which was not relevant to whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children to remain in the UK without the Appellant. The judge  assessed
    the 'unduly harsh' issue through the prism of the  offence  because  he
    set out criminality at [90] after asking the question at [89].

6.   On the facts it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's  partner  and
    children to remain in the  UK  without  him.  The  judge  accepted  the
    situation was deteriorating and the Appellant's partner  was  receiving
    less help from her mother. The judge  considered  how  the  Appellant's
    partner was coping in a temporary  situation  rather  than  long  term.
    There was evidence that the Appellant's partner was  not  sleeping  and
    she feared the family unit  would  break  down.  The  judge  failed  to
    address this.

7.   Ms Harvey submitted the judge made the  following  errors  of  law:  He
    failed to address the best  interests  of  the  children;  he  assessed
    'unduly harsh' in the context of the Appellant's  criminality;  and  he
    failed to look at the accepted factual situation.  The  effect  on  the
    children was  not  considered  outside  the  test  of  very  compelling
    circumstances.

8.   Ms Harvey relied on GM (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1630  and  submitted
    the judge had not taken into account factors pertinent to the Appellant
    himself. Had the judge appreciated the Appellant's length of residence,
    his health and his lack  of  connections  in  Jamaica,  he  would  have
    concluded deportation was not proportionate. Further, the  judge  erred
    in assessing  very  compelling  circumstances  with  reference  to the
    Appellant's four year sentence of imprisonment. This gave rise  to  an
    element of 'double accounting' or 'weighing the offence twice'.


Respondent's submissions

Ground 1
9.   Ms Cunha submitted the judge referred to PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA  Civ
    1213 in which the natural consequence of criminal actions, resulting in
    one parent being a serving prisoner, was a single  parent  bringing  up
    the children on their own. The separation of the family was  a  natural
    consequence of the seriousness of offence. The  judge's  reasons  were
    adequate   and   consistent    with    PG    (Jamaica).    The    judge
    gave sufficient reasons for why  there   were   no   compelling
    circumstances.

Ground 2
10.  Ms Cunha submitted the judge applied KO (Nigeria). The  'unduly  harsh'
    test had a high threshold. The  Appellant  had  not  met  the  test  of
    'unduly harsh' and was unable to meet the  higher  threshold of 'very
    compelling circumstances'.  She submitted that JG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA
    Civ 982 endorsed NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662.  There  had  to  be
    something more to establish very compelling circumstances.

Ground 3
11.  The judge noted the Appellant's precarious immigration history and  his
    ties with the  UK. The Appellant had associated with 'bad company'  and
    engaged in criminality for financial gain. The judge's findings open to
    him on the evidence before him and his reasons were adequate.

Ground 4
12.  There was  no  error  of  law.  The  judge  applied  the  correct  test
    and considered the evidence holistically, including the best interests
    of the children. The Appellant had failed meet the  unduly  harsh  test
    and had failed to show very compelling circumstances.

13.   In  response,  Ms  Harvey  submitted  that  PG  (Jamaica)   could   be
    distinguished on its facts. She accepted the Appellant had to show more
    than the consequences of separation. In this case, it would  be  unduly
    harsh for the Appellant's partner and children  to  remain  in  the  UK
    without him. Very compelling circumstances can take into account all
    factors including those in exceptions 1 and  2.  The  judge  failed  to
    apply the structured approach required by section 117C  and  misapplied
    the law to the facts.

Conclusions and reasons

14.  The Appellant's partner and children  (aged  11  and  13)  are  British
    citizens. Both of the  Appellant's  children  have  ADHD,  suffer  from
    outbursts and are having difficulties at school.  The  Appellant's  son
    has asthma, vocal tics and sickle cell traits. He does  not  sleep  and
    his prescribed sleeping tablets do not work. The  Appellant's  daughter
    has asthma and a stutter. She attends two schools. Both  children  have
    one to one teaching.

15.  The Appellant's partner is struggling to cope as a single  mum  and  is
    worried that the children will be taken into care. Social services  are
    not involved and  the  children  are  currently  well  cared  for.  The
    Appellant's partner is worried  her  daughter  will  be  excluded  from
    school and her son will be come involved in a criminal gang. Her mother
    is not able to look after the children as often because she has  sickle
    cell.

16.  The Appellant's two sisters live in the UK and one of his sister's  has
    contact with the children on a  regular  basis.  The  Appellant  is  in
    contact with his grandparents and uncles in the UK. There  were  family
    members who could assist the Appellant's partner, although she was  not
    inclined to depend on people (see the Appellant's  evidence  at  [48]).
    The Appellant stated that his deportation would mess up the family unit
    and the children would misbehave more.

17.  I find the judge properly directed himself in law at [79] to  [82].  He
    gave adequate reasons for why it would not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant's partner and children to remain in the UK at [91] to [93].

18.  The judge stated at [100] "I have also  found  that  it  would  not  be
    unduly harsh for the Appellant to be removed  and  for  his  family  to
    remain in this country." This finding was open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before him. Any failure on the part of the judge to make  this
    finding before he concluded at  [95]  that  there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances was not material. At [89] the judge asked himself whether
    it would be unduly harsh for the family to remain  in  the  UK  if  the
    Appellant was removed. It is apparent that he  addressed  his  mind  to
    this issue. There was no material error of law as alleged in ground 1.

19.  The judge does not use the phrase 'the best interests of the  children'
    but the judge's findings at [91] to [93] adequately address this issue.
    The judge found that the Appellant's partner was able to care  for  the
    children and had the support of other family members. The children  had
    support at school notwithstanding the deterioration in their behaviour.



20.  The judge did not assess the effect of deportation on  the  Appellant's
    children through the prism  of  his  criminality  as  submitted  by  Ms
    Harvey. The judge acknowledged the significant weight to be attached to
    the public interest at [90] and then went  on  to  assess  whether  the
    effect on the Appellant's family could outweigh it. The judge  properly
    balanced the effect on the  children  against  the  significant  public
    interest in deportation given the seriousness of the offence.

21.  The judge's finding that there were no  very  compelling  circumstances
    was open to him on the evidence  before  him.  The  separation  of  the
    family is a natural consequence of  the  Appellant's  deportation.  The
    Appellant has to show the impact on his partner and children  would  be
    unduly harsh to a special degree.  The  judge  took  into  account  the
    report  of  the  independent  social  worker,  which  dealt  with   the
    significant impact on the Appellant's family. It was open to the  judge
    to find that the deterioration of  the  children's  behaviour  and  the
    effect this had on the Appellant's partner did not reach the  level  of
    severity required. Ground 2 fails for these reasons.

22.  Ground 3 has no merit. The Appellant's length  of  residence,  ties  to
    the UK and lack of connections in Jamaica, in addition to the effect on
    his family life, could not outweigh the public interest. Any failure on
    the part of the judge to consider this as  a  distinct  issue  was  not
    material.

23.  There was  no  question  of  'double  accounting'.  The  Appellant  had
    committed a serious offence  and  the  judge  was  entitled  to  attach
    significant weight to the public interest. The judge made no  error  of
    law in his application of section 117C and he gave adequate reasons for
    concluding that the Appellant's deportation was proportionate.

24.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision and I dismiss the appeal.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances
Signed                                                Date 24 February  2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                                Date 24 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

