
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06243/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Towers            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 July 2017                        |On 18 August 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                NOOR BADSHAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Kauser, Solicitor, Kausers Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS
                     (confirming an extempore judgment)

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing on human  rights  grounds  an  appeal  by  the
respondent, hereinafter "the claimant", against the decision of  the  Entry
Clearance Officer (Islamabad)  refusing  him  leave  to  enter  the  United
Kingdom to settle as the spouse of a British citizen.

2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge resolved several points in  the  claimant's
favour but  decided  that  the  claimant  did  not  satisfy  the  financial
requirements of the Rules.  Notwithstanding that finding, the Judge allowed
the appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

3. There was some disagreement about quite what test had to be applied.

4. I do not need to say very much  this  morning  because  there  was  clear
agreement between Mr Mills and Miss Kauser  that  the  application  of  the
correct test, not the usual test in immigration  cases  but  one  that  was
applicable for a person who was on benefits, would have led to  the  appeal
being allowed on human rights grounds.

5. The point is that there was  a  clear  finding  by  the  judge  that  the
claimant did satisfy all but the financial requirements of the Rules.  That
finding was wrong and in  those  circumstances  the  Secretary  of  State's
objection to the decision falls away as Mr Mills made clear.  The fact that
a person satisfies the requirements of the rules does not necessarily  lead
to the appeal being allowed on human rights grounds but it is a very strong
factor pointing in favour of the appeal being allowed and although  it  may
be that the judge's reasoning was not quite right, the  judge  reached  the
correct conclusion. The reasons for allowing the  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds are still more compelling when it is appreciated that the  claimant
did in fact satisfy the rules.

6. Mr Mills is content that that is recorded and  I  therefore  dismiss  the
Secretary of State's  appeal  acting  on  behalf  of  the  Entry  Clearance
Officer.

Decision

Appeal dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 18 August 2017                 |





