
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06487/2018
                                                               HU/06494/2018
                                                               HU/05238/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Priory Courts Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2019                   |On 26 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     SKG
                                     SG
                                     BKG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr A Mahmood of Counsel instructed by Maya
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Saffer (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 7 September 2018.

 2. The appellants are citizens of India. The first  and  third  appellants
    are the parents of the second appellant who was born in the  UK  on  10
    September 2010. They applied on 6 December 2017 for leave to remain  in
    the UK on the basis of their family and private lives. The applications
    were refused on 7 February 2018.

 3. The appeals were  heard  together  on  24  April  2018.  The  judge  at
    paragraph 21 found that if it were not for SG there would be 'no  merit
    whatsoever in this appeal.' The judge recognised at paragraph  26  that
    the issue in the appeals was whether it would be unreasonable for SG to
    go to India with her parents. The judge accepted that the parents had a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  SG  and  she  was  a
    qualifying child because she was born in the UK and had lived in the UK
    continuously  in  excess  of  seven  years.  If  it  was  found  to  be
    unreasonable to expect SG to leave the UK and go  to  India,  then  not
    only would her appeal succeed but so would the appeals of her  parents.



 4. The judge at paragraph 25 concluded that the best interests of SG would
    be served by remaining with her parents wherever that may be. The judge
    then went on to consider whether it would be reasonable to expect SG to
    leave the UK, and concluded in the circumstances  that  it  would.  The
    appeals were dismissed.

 5. The appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Robertson who found  arguable
    merit in two of the grounds, but little arguable merit in the remaining
    grounds although permission to appeal was granted without restriction.

 6. Judge Robertson found it arguable that the judge had erred at paragraph
    32 in making a finding that the third appellant  acted  dishonestly  in
    failing to disclose a criminal caution in her application  form  rather
    than mistakenly failed to disclose that caution. It  was  unclear  what
    weight was given to the dishonesty in the  proportionality  assessment,
    and given the  guidance  in  KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53  that  the
    criminality of a parent should not factor into an assessment of whether
    it would be reasonable for a child to leave the UK, it may be that this
    error, if established, is material.

 7. It was also found that the judge had arguably erred in law  in  failing
    to apply the principles in MT and ET [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC).

My Consideration and Conclusions

 8. At the hearing before  me  Mr  Mahmood  relied  upon  the  two  grounds
    referred to above. It was argued that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  find
    dishonesty on the third appellant's part and it was  pointed  out  that
    this point has not previously been taken by the respondent in  relation
    to numerous other applications that the third appellant  had  made  and
    the third  appellant  had  made  a  simple  error  rather  than  acting
    dishonestly and she did not regard the caution as a previous conviction
    because she had not gone to court. It was submitted that  this  finding
    of dishonesty had been used by the judge when  considering  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect SG to leave the UK.

 9. With reference to MT and ET, it was submitted that the  judge  had  not
    followed the guidance which is that there should  be  powerful  reasons
    for refusing leave to remain to  a  child  with  seven  years  or  more
    continuous residence.

10. Mr Diwnycz did not concede that there was a material error of  law  and
    took the view that it was a matter for the Tribunal to decide.

11. In my view the judge did not err in concluding that the first and third
    appellants could not succeed with their appeals in the absence  of  the
    second appellant (SG). I find no error of law in the judge's conclusion
    at paragraph 21 that there is no merit in the appeals of the first  and
    third appellants.

12. The judge recognised that the issue in the appeals was whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect SG to leave the UK. The judge was  aware  that  SG
    had been born in the UK and had lived in this country continuously  for
    in excess of seven years.

13. The judge was, in my view, entitled to find that  the  third  appellant
    had been dishonest in completing the application  form  by  failing  to
    disclose a  criminal  caution.  The  explanation  given  by  the  third
    appellant was that she did not  realise  the  caution  was  a  criminal
    conviction. That was not the question she was asked in the  application
    form, as at 6.3 the question specifically asked whether  an  individual
    has been subject to, or received, any other penalty in  relation  to  a
    criminal offence, for example caution, reprimand,  warning  or  similar
    penalties in the UK or any other country.

14. I do not accept that the  finding  of  dishonesty  against  the  parent
    featured in the consideration by the judge as to whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect SG to leave the UK. The judge at paragraph 32 when
    referring to the dishonesty of the third appellant records 'I also bear
    in mind the need to maintain the integrity of immigration control which
    counts against the adults but not SG.'

15. Having found at paragraph 25 that the best interests of SG would be  to
    remain with her parents, and I find no error of law in that conclusion,
    the judge goes on to consider  reasonableness  in  relation  to  SG  at
    paragraphs 27-30. The judge does not factor into that consideration his
    finding of dishonesty against the third appellant.

16. The judge records that SG was born in the UK and has lived all her life
    in this country, and makes reference to activities  such  as  attending
    school and extra-curricular activities and attending  birthday  parties
    of friends. The judge does not accept that SG could not communicate  in
    Punjabi and gives cogent and adequate reasons for that conclusion.

17. The judge considers a psychiatric report prepared by Dr Saleem,  making
    the point that this report was prepared on the basis  that  the  author
    had been told that SG would have linguistic difficulties in India,  and
    had been told that her parents were out of touch with  life  in  India,
    whereas the judge had made findings to the contrary. The judge has  not
    ignored the report and has given adequate reasons for not accepting the
    conclusion. The judge concludes  in  paragraph  29  that  the  evidence
    indicates that SG would be able to speak the  language  in  India,  'is
    academically able and sociable, and would be likely to form friendships
    with her school peers in the same way as she has done here.' I find  no
    error of law in the conclusion  reached  by  the  judge,  which  was  a
    conclusion open to him on the evidence.

18. The judge considered MT and ET at paragraph 40 observing that the child
    in that case had been in the UK for 10 years whereas SG had not, and SG
    was not at a crucial stage in her education. I do  not  find  that  the
    judge has acted contrary to the guidance in KO, which was not published
    when the judge made his decision. The judge has not held the dishonesty
    of the parent against SG, but has assessed the best interests  and  the
    issue of reasonableness on the basis that neither of  the  parents  has
    any leave to remain in the UK. At paragraph 18 of KO it is stated  that
    it is relevant to consider where the parents are expected to be,  since
    it will normally be reasonable for the child to be  with  them.  In  my
    view the judge provides strong reasons why it is reasonable for  SG  to
    leave the UK, noting that she is an Indian  citizen,  her  parents  are
    Indian citizens, she would not have linguistic difficulties, there is a
    developed education system in India which is accessible, she has family
    in India including her grandparents, she would have no unmet  needs  in
    India and she is returning with her parents.

19. The judge has considered the evidence with care and made findings  open
    to him on that evidence and  provided  sustainable  reasons  for  those
    findings. It may be that another judge would have reached  a  different
    conclusion but that is not the test and not relevant, as  the  decision
    in this case discloses no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose  a  material  error  of  law.  The
appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed  [pic]                       Date 14 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed  [pic]                       Date 14 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall













