
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |                                 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |Appeal Number: HU/06627/2019     |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via MS     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Teams)                           |                                 |
|On 25 May 2021                   |On 22 June 2021                  |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             syed mahbubul haque
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Mustafa, instructed by Barclay Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals, with permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien, against the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell to allow Mr Haque's appeal on  human
    rights grounds.

 2. To avoid confusion, I shall refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"): Mr Haque  as  the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.



Background

 3. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom as a student,  in  2009.
    Whilst he was in the UK, he met and  married  a  British  citizen.   He
    applied for and was granted leave to remain as her spouse.  That  leave
    was valid until 21 July 2016.

 4. The appellant and his wife went to Bangladesh for a  holiday  in  2014.
    When they returned to the UK on 13 August 2014, he was  interviewed  on
    suspicion of using a proxy to take a TOEIC English language test on his
    behalf and subsequently relying on the results of that test in  support
    of his application  for  leave  as  a  spouse.   There  was  a  further
    interview on 14 September 2014, after which the appellant's  leave  was
    cancelled by a Chief Immigration Officer ("CIO") on that basis.

 5. The appellant appealed against the decision of the CIO.  His appeal was
    heard by FtT  Judge  Griffith  on  13  November  2015.   There  was  no
    appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.  The judge proceeded  with
    the appeal in the appellant's absence.  She gave the following  reasons
    for doing so:

         [13] This appeal was set down to be heard on 13 November 2015.   On
         9 November 2015 a request for an adjournment was received from  the
         appellant's representatives RMS Immigration  Limited.   The  letter
         states that the appellant  was  in  detention  and  wished  for  an
         adjournment in the interests of justice.  The request  was  refused
         by the Tribunal on the grounds that the appeal had been ongoing  in
         excess of  twelve  months  during  the  whole  of  which  time  RMS
         Immigration  Limited  had  been  instructed.   The   decision   was
         communicated to the representatives by fax on 11 November 2015.

         [14] On the morning of the  hearing  the  representatives  did  not
         attend before the Tribunal and no explanation for their absence was
         received.  The Tribunal was also informed on  the  morning  of  the
         hearing that the appellant, who is detained, had refused  to  leave
         to  attend  the  appeal  hearing.   In  the  circumstances,   being
         satisfied that the  appellant  and  his  representatives  had  been
         properly notified that the adjournment  of  the  hearing  had  been
         refused, I proceeded to deal with the hearing in the absence of the
         appellant pursuant to Rule 28 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014.

 6. Judge Griffith reviewed the evidence upon which the CIO's decision  was
    based, including the generic witness statements of Peter Millington and
    Rebecca Collings and information relating to the specific  TOEIC  tests
    taken by the appellant at Eden College  International.   She  concluded
    that the respondent had discharged  the  burden  of  showing  that  the
    appellant had made a false representation in his application for  leave
    as a spouse: [25].  She went on to conclude, for reasons  she  gave  at
    [27]-[32] of her decision, that the appellant's removal from the United
    Kingdom was a proportionate course in Article 8 ECHR terms.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal from the FtT  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Both applications were  refused  and  the  appellant  became
    appeal rights exhausted.

 8. Whilst his first appeal was  in  train,  the  appellant  and  his  wife
    divorced.  On 31 August 2016, he applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain
    ("ILR") as the victim  of  Domestic  Violence.   That  application  was
    refused on  13  January  2017.   The  respondent  considered  that  the
    appellant fell to be refused on grounds of prior false  representations
    (his prior reliance on the TOEIC certificate) and because she  did  not
    accept that his marriage had  broken  down  as  a  result  of  domestic
    violence.   The  appellant  made  an   unsuccessful   application   for
    Administrative Review of that decision,  after  which  he  was  refused
    permission to apply for  judicial  review,  both  on  paper  (by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pitt) and following renewal at an  oral  hearing  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson.

 9. The appellant then made three applications for leave to remain on human
    rights grounds.  The first two were rejected because the respondent did
    not accept the appellant's application for a  fee  waiver.   The  third
    application was made on 28 September  2018.   The  appellant  submitted
    that there would be very significant obstacles to his reintegration  to
    Bangladesh and that his removal to that country would be in  breach  of
    Article  8  ECHR.   Reference  was  made  to   the   appellant's   poor
    relationship with his family in Bangladesh and to  his  mental  health.
    The letter of representation also included the following section, which
    related to the hearing before Judge Griffith:

         Our client requests that the Secretary of State considers  that  he
         did not attend court to provide oral  evidence  during  the  appeal
         hearing as he was in immigration detention  at  the  time  and  had
         acted upon the advice of his previous legal  representatives.   Our
         client wished to attend court to rebut  the  Secretary  of  State's
         allegation but regrettably,  he  was  advised  not  to  attend  the
         hearing and a request for the appeal to be considered on the papers
         was made instead by his previous representatives who also failed to
         attend court to represent  his  case.   This  is  [sic]  of  course
         prejudiced his appeal as the case was heard in his absence and  our
         client strongly believes that if he had given oral evidence  during
         the appeal he would have been able to properly rebut the  Secretary
         of State's allegation  that  he  fraudulently  obtained  the  TOEIC
         English Language certificate as part of his application  for  leave
         as a spouse.

10. The respondent refused the application on 26 March  2019.   There  were
    three grounds of refusal under the Immigration Rules: (i) the appellant
    had failed to declare a December 2014 police caution for common assault
    in his application  form  (S-LTR  1.6);  ii)  the  appellant  had  used
    deception in his application for leave as a spouse  by  relying  on  an
    improperly obtained TOEIC certificate (S-LTR4.2); and (iii) there would
    not be very significant obstacles to the appellant's  reintegration  to
    Bangladesh (276ADE(1)(vi)).   The  respondent  considered  whether  the
    appellant's removal to Bangladesh would be contrary to Article  8  ECHR
    and concluded that it would not.



The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appellant therefore appealed to the FtT for  a  second  time.   The
    lengthy  grounds  of  appeal  reiterated  the  arguments  made  in  the
    application to the respondent as regards the prior deception point  and
    Article 8 ECHR.   It  was  also  submitted  that  the  appellant  would
    encounter very significant obstacles  to  reintegration  on  return  to
    Bangladesh. He averred  that  he  had  not  attempted  to  mislead  the
    respondent  in  failing  to  declare  his  police  caution  from  2014.
    Reference was also made to the applicant having suffered spousal abuse.



12. The appeal came before FtT Judge Buckwell ("the judge") on  12  January
    2021.  The appellant and the respondent were  represented  by  counsel.
    The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  submissions  from
    both representatives before reserving his decision.

13. The judge's decision is detailed and carefully reasoned.  It is clearly
    the product of a great deal of thought, care and  analysis.   It  spans
    146 paragraphs and 31 pages of single-spaced type and what  follows  is
    intended to be merely a summary of his critical conclusions.

14. For reasons he gave  at  [117]-[119],  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant had given credible evidence that his  non-disclosure  of  the
    conviction was an innocent omission to which paragraph  S-LTR  1.6  did
    not apply.  At [120]-[134], the judge explained why he found  that  the
    respondent had failed to discharge the burden upon her of showing  that
    the appellant had used a proxy to take his TOEIC test.  At [137]-[139],
    the judge nevertheless concluded that the appellant could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules because he was unable to  show  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to his reintegration to Bangladesh.
     At [140]-[143], the judge  explained  his  reasons  for  allowing  the
    appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

15. The respondent's three pages of grounds of appeal are grouped  under  a
    single and rather uninformative heading "Making a material misdirection
    in law".  On analysis,  however,  the  grounds  contain  the  following
    complaints:

      i)  The  judge  misdirected  himself  in  law  by  failing  to  follow
         Devaseelan * [2003] Imm AR 1 and BT (Nepal)  [2004]  UKIAT  311  in
         departing from Judge Griffith's decision on the TOEIC issue.

     ii) The judge erred in  concluding  that  the  appellant's  failure  to
         disclose his caution  was  innocent,  in  that  he  overlooked  the
         precise question asked in the application for leave to remain.

    iii) The judge failed to provide sufficient reasons for  his  conclusion
         that the appellant had not used a proxy to take his English test.

     iv) The judge erred in law in taking account of what had been  said  in
         the All Party Parliamentary Group report on TOEIC, since to  do  so
         was contrary to OGC v ICO & HM Attorney  General  [2008]  EWHC  737
         (Admin); [2010] QB 98.

      v) The judge took an immaterial matter into account in  deciding  that
         the appellant had suffered domestic violence in his marriage, since
         that claim had been rejected by the respondent  and  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal.

16. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge O'Brien,  who  considered
    each of the grounds to be arguable.

17. On 20 May 2021, the appellant's solicitors filed and served a  detailed
    response to the respondent's grounds of appeal.  The response had  been
    settled by Mr Mustafa of counsel earlier that day.  I shall  return  to
    its contents in due course.



Submissions

18. For the Secretary of State, Ms  Petterson  submitted  as  follows.  The
    point raised  by  the  first  ground  was  a  simple  one  which  stood
    irrespective of whether the appellant  had  sought  to  appeal  against
    Judge Griffith's decision on the basis that he had been failed  by  his
    then representatives.  What was required by Devaseelan and  BT  (Nepal)
    was for the appellant's  current  solicitors  to  put  the  appellant's
    allegations to his former representatives.  They had not  done  so  and
    the judge had overlooked  that  failure,  which  was  material  to  his
    evaluation of the appellant's account.  The judge had  also  failed  to
    take account of the fact  that  the  appellant  had  not  produced  the
    recordings of his TOEIC test before Judge Griffith, which  should  have
    caused him to approach that evidence with the utmost circumspection.

19. The judge had also erred, Ms Petterson submitted, in  simply  accepting
    what was said by the appellant without considering what had  been  said
    in MA (Nigeria); there might be any number of reasons why a person  who
    is able to speak English fluently might nevertheless  use  a  proxy  to
    take an English test.  The APPG report should not have been  considered
    by the judge for the reasons given in DK & RK (India)  [2021]  UKUT  61
    (IAC).  The evidence given by Professor French to  the  Group  did  not
    nullify the conclusions reached in the authorities in any  event.   The
    judge had been wrong to attach weight to the appellant's claim that  he
    was a victim of domestic violence without  considering  what  had  been
    said by the respondent and the Upper Tribunal in respect of that claim.



20. Ms Petterson confirmed that she was not pursuing ground two in light of
    the submissions made by Mr Mustafa in his rule 24 response.

21. Mr Mustafa relied on his rule 24 response and confirmed, with reference
    to the 2016 grounds of appeal, that it had been submitted in support of
    the application for permission to appeal that the  appellant  had  been
    poorly served by his previous representatives.  At my request, he  took
    me to the parts of the judge's decision in which he had considered  the
    domestic violence assertion, making reference to [9],  [16],  [54]  and
    [136] in particular.  He submitted that what was said  in  [142]  about
    domestic violence was a 'remark, not a finding' and that the allegation
    of domestic violence had not been challenged by the respondent  at  the
    hearing.  The judge had been entitled to attach weight to the point  in
    all the circumstances.

22. As to the respondent's complaint about Devaseelan, it was  quite  clear
    that the judge had been aware of that starred decision.  He  had  cited
    it at [7] and had referred to the IAT's decision and to other authority
    cited by the appellant at [120] and [122].  The judge was not  required
    to expect there to be evidence from the appellant's previous  advisers,
    bearing in mind the flexibility  with  which  the  guidelines  were  to
    applied: SSHD v BK (Afghanistan) [2019] EWCA Civ  1358;  [2019]  4  WLR
    111, at [31]-[39].  There had been a properly reasoned basis for  Judge
    Buckwell to reach a different conclusion from Judge Griffith.   He  had
    been able to hear from the appellant and to  reach  a  view  about  his
    credibility,  whereas  Judge  Griffith  had  been  deprived   of   that
    opportunity.  In any event, the law had clearly and significantly moved
    on since Judge Griffith had considered the allegation.  That point  had
    not been lost on the judge, as was clear from his [124] in  particular.
    The respondent's grounds were nothing more than a disagreement and  the
    respondent continued to overlook the  point  that  she  had  failed  to
    adduce before either Tribunal the record of the  initial  interview  at
    Heathrow Airport.  The appellant was noted to have  provided  plausible
    answers in that interview.  If  Judge  Griffith  had  been  given  that
    interview, she would have been bound to find  that  the  appellant  had
    discharged the evidential burden  upon  him  of  adducing  an  innocent
    explanation for the respondent's concern.

23. As to the respondent's third  ground,  it  was  quite  clear  that  the
    judge's finding was  not  based  solely  on  his  acceptance  that  the
    appellant spoke good English.  He had given a number of reasons for his
    conclusion that the appellant had not cheated by using a proxy and  his
    reasoning could not properly be impugned for the reason  given  by  the
    respondent.  The judge was  plainly  well  aware  that  the  issue  was
    whether or not the appellant had used a proxy and  he  had  given  good
    reasons for resolving that conclusion in the appellant's favour.

24. Mr Mustafa submitted that the judge had been entitled to  consider  the
    APPG report and that he had not,  contrary  to  the  assertion  in  the
    respondent's  grounds,  found  that  the  report  had  'displaced'  the
    respondent's evidence.  The judge's approach was not contrary to  DK  &
    RK.  The reality of this case was that there were  good  reasons  given
    for the judge's conclusion that the appellant  had  not  cheated.   The
    appellant had adduced the voice recordings from Eden College, which the
    judge had examined in some detail.  There was no metadata to  link  the
    appellant to those recordings.  The respondent's preparation before the
    FtT had been lacklustre, with the key witness statement referring to  a
    different person.  The  Project  Fa�ade  report  which  the  respondent
    relied upon related to a period after the appellant had taken the test.
     The ultimate conclusion that the appeal should be allowed on Article 8
    ECHR grounds was open to the judge, particularly when it  was  recalled
    that the respondent's published policy mandated a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain for six months when an ETS allegation was not proved in a  human
    rights appeal.

25. Ms Petterson did not seek to respond.

26. I reserved my decision.



Analysis

27. Ms Petterson was correct not to pursue the second of the grounds I have
    summarised above.  As submitted by Mr Mustafa, the  appellant  was  not
    obliged to disclose his police caution because it  was  spent  and  the
    respondent failed to follow her published policy (Grounds for refusal -
    Criminality, version 1, 1 December 2020) when she  based  a  ground  of
    refusal on this point.

28. The respondent's third ground is equally unmeritorious.  The suggestion
    in that ground is that the judge based his decision on the  appellant's
    ability to speak English and that he gave  legally  inadequate  reasons
    for concluding that the  appellant  had  not  cheated  in  his  English
    language test.  The point is made with reference to the decision of the
    Upper Tribunal in MA (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT  450  (IAC),  in  which  the
    following appears:

         [57] Second, we acknowledge the suggestion that the  Appellant  had
         no reason to engage in the deception which we  have  found  proven.
         However, this has not deflected us in any  way  from  reaching  our
         main findings and conclusions. In the abstract, of course, there is
         a range of reasons why persons proficient in English may engage  in
         TOEIC fraud. These include,  inexhaustively,  lack  of  confidence,
         fear of failure, lack of time and commitment and contempt  for  the
         immigration system. These  reasons  could  conceivably  overlap  in
         individual cases and there is  scope  for  other  explanations  for
         deceitful conduct in this sphere. We are not required to  make  the
         further finding of why the Appellant engaged in  deception  and  to
         this we add that this issue was not explored during the hearing. We
         resist any temptation to speculate about this discrete matter.

29. As contended by Mr Mustafa in his thorough rule 24  response,  however,
    the judge did not base his conclusion on the fact that the appellant is
    proficient in English.  He gave a raft of reasons for  concluding  that
    the appellant had not cheated in his  test,  including  his  assessment
    that the appellant was  a  witness  of  truth  [128];  the  appellant's
    decision to adduce before the FtT the voice recordings provided to  him
    by ETS [129]; and the 'extremely careless' preparation of the appeal by
    the respondent, who had furnished the  FtT  with  a  witness  statement
    which related to a different case [131].  In  light  of  all  of  these
    reasons, the judge was entitled to note, as he did at [128],  that  the
    appellant had demonstrated his proficiency in English  long  before  he
    came to the UK.  The judge was not required, in addition, to  undertake
    a  further  process  of  reasoning  about  why  the   appellant   might
    nevertheless have chosen to cheat in an English language test.

30. The remaining grounds are more meritorious.   The  first  concerns  the
    judge's decision to depart from the starting point  provided  by  Judge
    Griffith's earlier  decision  on  the  TOEIC  issue.   I  should  state
    immediately that this experienced judge cited not only  Devaseelan  but
    also some of the subsequent authorities in which the flexibility of the
    guidance given in that starred decision has  been  underscored  by  the
    Court of Appeal.  Citation of  Devaseelan  appears  at  [84]  and  [94]
    (during the judge's summary of the competing submissions) and at [120].
     There is reference to SSHD v  BK  (Afghanistan)  and  Djebbar  v  SSHD
    [2004] EWCA Civ 804; [2004] Imm  AR  497  at  [122].   The  judge  made
    reference to the 'considerable significance' of the question of whether
    he should follow the decision of Judge Griffith or  whether  he  should
    consider the question of deception afresh,  in  light  of  all  of  the
    evidence before him: [120].  Having set the  scene  in  that  way,  the
    judge reasoned as follows:

         [121] It is appropriate to consider the circumstances faced by  the
         appellant in 2015  when  his  appeal  was  heard.   Again  he  gave
         specific evidence before me in that respect, amplifying points made
         in his adopted witness statement and  clarifying  certain  aspects.
         In essence the appellant maintains that his representatives at  the
         time had informed him that  the  appeal  hearing  would  not  be  a
         substantive hearing.  Indeed, they had assured him that the  appeal
         hearing would be adjourned.  For such reasons he was told  that  he
         need not attend.  I am conscious that at the time the appellant was
         detained and therefore communication with any representatives would
         not have been as easy or straightforward as  between  a  person  at
         liberty and their legal representative.  As stated,  the  appellant
         provided an explanation.  He was confident that he had  not  needed
         to attend the hearing.  He strongly denied that he had not attended
         because he had refused to take a conveyance  offered  to  him  from
         Brook House at Gatwick to Taylor House.  In that respect  what  was
         stated by Judge Griffith in  relation  to  his  non-attendance  was
         factually incorrect.  There is no other evidence before  me  beyond
         the brief remarks of Judge Griffith and the oral evidence  which  I
         heard from the appellant.  I do not know exactly  what  information
         Judge Griffith received or how she received it.  She does not refer
         to any written documentation wherein it was stated, for example, by
         the detention centre that the appellant had specifically refused to
         join a conveyance to Taylor House which had been  offered  to  him.
         On balance I find the evidence  given  by  the  appellant  on  this
         particular aspect to  be  credible.   I  do  not  believe  that  he
         wilfully refused to attend the 2015 hearing at Taylor House.

         [122] Judge Griffith determined that she should  proceed  with  the
         appeal hearing.  The appellant was unrepresented and therefore only
         the views of the respondent were taken into account, by way of oral
         contribution to the  appeal  hearing.   Judge  Griffith  thereafter
         found against the appellant and  subsequently  permission  was  not
         granted for a challenge  to  her  decision.   Taking  into  account
         caselaw guidance such as BK Afghanistan (above) and Djebbar  [2004]
         EWCA Civ 804, and taking into account the submissions made by  both
         representatives on the Devaseelan Sri Lanka *  principles  overall,
         for the following reasons I find that it is appropriate for  me  to
         depart from the findings of Judge  Griffith.  Consequently,  it  is
         appropriate that I will make my own findings  in  relation  to  the
         allegations of cheating which were brought against  the  appellant.
         My reasons for finding it appropriate to deport from  the  previous
         decision  are  based,  among   other   reasons,   on   applying   a
         consideration of fairness.  A fair approach must always be shown to
         both parties but here I find that it would be  specifically  unfair
         for further consideration not to be given to the ETS issue and  the
         cheating allegations. I set out further reasoning in that respect.

         [123] No  evidence  from  the  appellant  was  heard  before  Judge
         Griffith.  He has provided to my satisfaction an entirely plausible
         reason why he did not attend the 2015  hearing.   No  evidence  was
         before me to show that that particular issue had been considered in
         the permission applications made by or on behalf of  the  appellant
         subsequent to the promulgation of the decision of  Judge  Griffith.
         However,  the  reality  remains  that  the  appellant   could   not
         personally contribute to his own appeal hearing at which  the  very
         significant issue of the accusation of cheating  had  been  at  the
         very centre of that appeal.

31. At [124], the judge agreed with a submission made then and  now  by  Mr
    Mustafa, which is that the correct three-stage approach to  determining
    such allegations has only crystallised in authorities  which  post-date
    the  decision  of  the  Judge  Griffith.   At  [125],  the  judge  also
    considered that the APPG  report  amounted  to  'further  evidence'  in
    support of his conclusion that he should reconsider the  issue  of  the
    appellant's deception for himself.

32. At first blush, therefore, this was a specialist Tribunal judge who was
    well aware of the law and who was clearly at pains to apply it  to  the
    facts before him.  What is said by the respondent, however, is that the
    judge omitted a necessary consideration from his assessment of  whether
    he  should  depart  from  Judge  Griffith's  conclusion  regarding  the
    appellant's past conduct.  To express the same  point  in  a  different
    way, it is contended that the  judge  failed  to  consider  a  relevant
    matter when he decided at [121] that the appellant had given a credible
    explanation of what had happened at the time of  his  appeal  in  2015.
    The respondent's  ground  is  founded  upon  a  specific  part  of  the
    Devaseelan guidance and on what was also said by the IAT in BT (Nepal).



33. The relevant section of Devaseelan is as follows (the emboldening is in
    the original):

         (7) The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4) and (6) is
         greatly  reduced  if  there  is  some  very  good  reason  why  the
         Appellant's failure to adduce relevant evidence  before  the  first
         Adjudicator should not be, as it were, held against him.  We  think
         such reasons will be rare.  There  is  an  increasing  tendency  to
         suggest that unfavourable decisions  by  Adjudicators  are  brought
         about by error or incompetence on the part of representatives.  New
         representatives    blame     old     representatives;     sometimes
         representatives blame themselves for prolonging the  litigation  by
         their inadequacy (without,  of  course,  offering  the  public  any
         compensation for the wrong from which they have profited by  fees).
         Immigration  practitioners  come  within  the  supervision  of  the
         Immigration Services Commissioner under part V of the 1999 Act.  He
         has power to register, investigate and cancel the  registration  of
         any practitioner, and solicitors  and  counsel  are,  in  addition,
         subject to their own professional bodies. An Adjudicator should  be
         very slow to conclude that an appeal before another Adjudicator has
         been  materially  affected   by   a   representative's   error   or
         incompetence; and such a finding should always be reported (through
         arrangements made by the  Chief  Adjudicator)  to  the  Immigration
         Services Commissioner.

         Having said that, we do accept that there will be occasional  cases
         where the circumstances of the first appeal were such that it would
         be right for the second Adjudicator to look at the matter as if the
         first determination had never been made. (We think it unlikely that
         the second Adjudicator would, in such a case, be able to build very
         meaningfully on  the  first  Adjudicator's  determination;  but  we
         emphasise that, even in such a case, the first determination stands
         as the determination of the first appeal.)

34. The headnote to BT (Nepal), which is a decision of a three judge  panel
    of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal ("IAT") chaired by the (then) Deputy
    President, is as follows:

         If an appeal is based in whole or in part on allegations about  the
         conduct of former representatives,  there  must  be  evidence  that
         those allegations have been put to the former  representative,  and
         the Tribunal must be shown either the  response  or  correspondence
         indicating that there has been no response.

35. BT (Nepal) was a case  which  shares  an  important  feature  with  the
    present case.  The appellant was initially represented  by  a  firm  of
    solicitors but  they  wrote  to  the  Immigration  Appellate  Authority
    ("IAA") sixteen days before the hearing to state that  they  no  longer
    acted.  Nothing was received to suggest that another firm had  received
    instructions to  act.   When  the  appeal  was  called  on  before  the
    Adjudicator, there was no appearance by or on behalf of the  appellant.
    The judge proceeded in her absence and went on to dismiss the appeal.

36. On appeal to the IAT, BT stated that she  had  been  let  down  by  her
    solicitors, who had written to the IAA to come off the  record  because
    the appellant had not paid their fees.  The  IAT  declined  to  make  a
    finding of fact against the former solicitors because they had not been
    given an opportunity to respond and said that  it  would  generally  be
    inappropriate make such a finding unless the allegation has  been  put:
    [4]-[5].  The appeal was nevertheless allowed  because  the  judge  had
    failed to engage properly with the issues beyond adopting the reasoning
    in the respondent's decision: [9].

37. BT (Nepal) was cited and applied  by  the  High  Court  in  R  (on  the
    application of ROO (Nigeria)) v SSHD [2018] EWHC 1295  (Admin)  and  by
    the Upper Tribunal in HS (Zimbabwe) CG [2007] UKAIT 94.

38. The rationale for the principle in BT (Nepal) is not rooted  solely  in
    the finality of litigation. As is clear from what was said  at  [4]  of
    the  IAT's  decision,  an  equally  important  consideration   is   the
    significance of a judicial finding against a professional  (whether  an
    individual or a firm) who is not a party to the  proceedings.   Similar
    concerns have arisen in other contexts,  as  might  be  seen  from  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in W (a child) (care proceedings:  non-
    party appeal) [2016] EWCA Civ 1140; [2017] 1 WLR 2415, in which a judge
    in family proceedings had failed  to  give  professional  witnesses  (a
    social worker and a police officer) any  opportunity  to  know  of,  or
    respond to, substantially and professionally damning criticisms he came
    to make in his judgment.

39.  Those  concerns,  and  the  principle  in  BT  (Nepal),  were  clearly
    applicable in the circumstances which  arose  in  the  instant  appeal.
    Before Judge Griffith, the picture was quite clear.  The appellant  was
    represented by RMS Immigration of London E1.  An adjournment  had  been
    refused on the papers and the appellant refused to leave  his  cell  to
    attend the hearing.  In the grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    dated 13 June 2016,  it  was  asserted  that  the  appellant  had  been
    'advised by [RMS Immigration] that his attendance was  not  necessary'.
    There was no suggestion at that time that this serious  allegation  had
    been put to RMS Immigration.

40. More than four years later, when the instant  appeal  came  before  the
    judge, the allegations against  RMS  Immigration  had  multiplied.   As
    recorded in [121] of the judge's decision, the appellant stated that he
    had been told by his representatives that the hearing would  not  be  a
    substantive hearing; that it would in any event be adjourned; and  that
    he need not attend the hearing. At [77], the judge  recorded  that  the
    appellant had confirmed that he had  been  'given  an  opportunity'  to
    attend the hearing but that he had  decided  not  to  attend  precisely
    because he had accepted the advice from his representatives  that  'the
    hearing would only be an adjournment at which he was not required'.

41. These are serious allegations  indeed.   They  encompass  not  only  an
    express allegation that the appellant was actively misled by  his  then
    representatives about the nature of  the  hearing  and  the  course  of
    action which the FtT would adopt.  There is also  an  implication  that
    the representatives had decided to 'play the system'  by  advising  the
    appellant not to attend and by failing to  attend  themselves,  thereby
    seeking to present the FtT with a situation  in  which  it  would  feel
    compelled to adjourn the hearing.

42. It is not suggested that RMS Immigration has ceased to operate.   I  do
    not know whether it is a firm of solicitors or a firm regulated by  the
    Office of the Immigration Services Commissioner.  Nor  do  I  have  any
    detailed knowledge of the relevant provisions of the  code  of  conduct
    for either profession.  Even without such detailed knowledge,  however,
    it is quite clear that  these  allegations  are  likely  to  amount  to
    serious professional misconduct in either profession.

43. It is very easy to make such allegations, and to lay the blame for  all
    that has gone before at the feet of previous representatives.   But  it
    is clear from BT (Nepal) that a judge should not generally accept  such
    allegations  unless  the  advisers  in  question  have  had  a   proper
    opportunity to respond.  In failing to have regard to  that  principle,
    and in accepting what was said by the  appellant  about  the  wholesale
    failings of RMS Immigration, the judge erred in law by failing to  have
    regard to a material consideration.  The other reasons  given  for  his
    decision do not, contrary to the submissions made by Mr Mustafa  orally
    and in writing, serve to overcome that failing.  This error tainted the
    judge's decision to  depart  from  Judge  Griffith's  decision  and  it
    tainted his assessment of the appellant's credibility more widely.

44. The respondent's fourth grounds relates  to  the  judge's  decision  to
    'take the views expressed by the APPG into general account', as he  put
    it at [125] of his decision.  My conclusion in relation to this  ground
    may be stated more succinctly than my conclusion  in  relation  to  the
    second.  The judge erred in law in taking the views  expressed  in  the
    APPG into account.

45. In OGC v ICO, one criticism of the Information Tribunal was that it had
    taken into account an  opinion  expressed  by  a  Parliamentary  Select
    Committee.  In respect of that criticism, Stanley Burnton J (as he then
    was) held, inter alia, that in relying on the  opinion  of  the  select
    committee the tribunal had relied on evidence which had not been before
    it and had failed in its duty to make its decision only on the basis of
    the evidence and submissions before it.   For  reasons  connected  with
    parliamentary privilege, Stanley Burnton J went further and stated that
    neither a party to proceedings  before  a  tribunal  nor  the  tribunal
    itself should seek to rely on an opinion expressed by  a  parliamentary
    select committee.  For these reasons, he concluded  that  the  Tribunal
    had taken  an  illegitimate  and  irrelevant  matter  into  account  in
    considering the views expressed by the select committee.

46. What was said by Stanley Burnton J in OGC v ICO  was  set  out  by  the
    Upper Tribunal (Lane P and Ockelton V-P) at [10] of DK & RK [2021] UKUT
    61 (IAC).  That was a case like the present, concerning the APPG report
    on TOEIC.  The Upper Tribunal also considered what  had  been  said  by
    Cockerill J in R (on the application of Cartref Care Home Ltd & Others)
    v HMRC [2019] EWHC 3382 (Admin).  In that  case,  as  in  the  present,
    Cockerill J was asked to consider an APPG report which amounted, as she
    said at [169] and [171] to 'ex post facto commentary' and  a  'call  to
    action'.  Cockerill J concluded at [172] that the opinions expressed in
    the APPG report were not admissible opinion evidence.

47. The Upper Tribunal reached the same conclusions in respect of the  APPG
    report on TOEIC.  At [21], the President said that the opinions in  the
    APPG report were not 'opinions to which we can have any material regard
    in reaching conclusions about the evidence which will be placed  before
    us'.  The relevant part of the judicial headnote to the decision  reads
    as follows:

         Courts and tribunals determine cases by reference to  the  evidence
         before them and not by reference to the views of others,  expressed
         in a non-judicial setting, on evidence which is  not  the  same  as
         that before the court or tribunal.  Indeed, even  if  the  evidence
         were the same, the court or tribunal  must  reach  its  own  views,
         applying the relevant burden and standard of proof.

48. Mr Mustafa has attempted, orally  and  at  [19]-[23]  of  his  rule  24
    response, to submit that the judge was nevertheless entitled  to  reach
    the conclusions he reached in respect of the  allegation  made  against
    this appellant.  His submissions fail, however, to come to  grips  with
    the central point which is, to borrow the words of Stanley  Burnton  J,
    that the opinions expressed in the APPG report were  'illegitimate  and
    irrelevant' considerations in a judicial assessment.

49. Mr Mustafa is necessarily correct to highlight the fact that the  judge
    did not give the report any particular weight and  the  fact  that  the
    judge did not (contrary to the assertion in the  respondent's  grounds)
    consider that the report was capable of 'displacing'  the  respondent's
    evidence.  What is clear, however, is  that  the  judge  attached  some
    weight to those opinions, which clearly played a material part  in  his
    analysis.  The APPG report  clearly  played  a  material  part  in  the
    judge's decision to depart from Judge Griffith's assessment: [125].  It
    also  played  a  material  part  in  the  judge's  assessment  of   the
    appellant's 'innocent explanation', at the second stage of the  process
    required by the authorities: [129].  It is clear from  [134]  that  the
    judge then  considered  'in  the  round'  whether  the  respondent  had
    discharged the burden of proof which ultimately fell upon  her.  In  so
    doing, he must be taken to have factored into his  assessment  what  he
    had previously said about the APPG report, including what he  described
    at [129] as the issues which were raised in the  deliberations  of  the
    APPG.  It is not possible to state with any certainty  what  conclusion
    the judge would have reached in the appeal without having attached some
    weight to those deliberations.

50. The respondent's final ground is also made out.  It is quite clear from
    the respondent's decision dated 13 January 2017 that she did not accept
    that the appellant's marriage had broken down as a result  of  domestic
    violence.  Judicial review proceedings in  which  that  conclusion  was
    under challenge were resolved in the respondent's favour, both  on  the
    papers and at an oral permission hearing. At [136],  the  judge  stated
    that it was not for him to  make  distinct  findings  on  the  domestic
    violence grounds 'as though there were a  specific  appeal  related  to
    domestic violence under the Immigration Rules'.  He was correct in that
    observation.  It was incorrect, therefore, for the judge to proceed  on
    the basis that the appellant was the 'victim of a cruel and  aggressive
    former wife and her family members' when he came to balance the  public
    interest  against  the  appellant's  private  life,  at  [142]  of  his
    decision.  There might not, as  Mr  Mustafa  records  in  his  rule  24
    response, have been any questions about that issue asked by counsel for
    the respondent in the FtT but it was nevertheless clear from  what  had
    gone before that the respondent  did  not  accept  the  allegations  of
    domestic violence made by the appellant.  It was wrong as a  matter  of
    law, in those circumstances, for the judge to treat this as an accepted
    fact which militated positively in the appellant's favour in the scales
    of proportionality.  I do not accept Mr Mustafa's submission that  what
    appeared in  that  section  of  the  judge's  decision  was  merely  an
    observation; it was plainly a matter which he weighed in the balance in
    deciding that the appellant's removal would be disproportionate.

51. It follows that  I  find  three  of  the  respondent's  grounds  to  be
    established.  Despite the obvious (and characteristic) care  which  the
    judge took in writing this reserved decision, I am  satisfied  that  it
    cannot stand.   The  errors  into  which  the  judge  fell  infect  his
    assessment of the appellant's credibility,  and  his  consideration  of
    Article 8 ECHR as a whole.

52. In so finding, I  should  record  my  agreement  with  certain  of  the
    submissions made by Mr Mustafa and certain of the findings made by  the
    judge.  It is a matter of concern that the respondent has  consistently
    failed to file and serve  the  interview  which  took  place  with  the
    appellant shortly after he  returned  to  the  UK  in  2014.   That  is
    particularly so when the appellant was thought by  the  interviewer  to
    have given plausible answers in that  interview.   Secondly,  it  is  a
    matter of at least equal concern that the respondent managed to file  a
    witness statement which related to another appellant.  That sloppy case
    preparation and  lacklustre  record  keeping  cannot  bear  the  weight
    suggested by Mr Mustafa, however.  As  the  judge  found,  the  generic
    evidence is nevertheless sufficient to discharge the evidential  burden
    on the respondent and what really matters in a case such as the present
    is whether the appellant has an innocent explanation  and  whether,  in
    the final analysis, the respondent has discharged the legal burden upon
    her.  Whilst the respondent's failings are undoubtedly relevant at both
    of those stages, they are insufficient of themselves to carry the  day.
    To a significant extent, the case therefore turns on the credibility of
    the appellant and the judge fell into clear error in his  consideration
    of that question.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of  errors  on  points  of  law.
That decision is set aside and the appeal is remitted  to  the  FtT,  to  be
heard de novo by a judge other than Judge Buckwell.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                                                                16 June 2021
