
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06840/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2019                           |On 14 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                             SHOWKET BILLAH DIP
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Otchie of Counsel instructed by Shah Jalal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Swaney
    promulgated on 4 July 2018 in which the Appellant's  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated 24 May 2017 refusing indefinite  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom was dismissed.


2.   I am grateful to both representatives for the helpful  discussion  that
    it has been possible to have this morning in respect of the  issues  in
    the appeal.


3.   At the core of the Appellant's  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain was an assertion that he qualified under the  Immigration  Rules
    pursuant to paragraph 276B for indefinite leave to remain on the  basis
    of ten years continuous lawful residence in the  United  Kingdom.   The
    application was refused for reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'
    letter ('RFRL') dated 24 May 2017.  In particular, the  Respondent  did
    not accept that the Appellant had demonstrated the required  period  of
    continuous lawful residence.   A  particular  issue  arose  as  to  the
    circumstances surrounding applications made in  2015.   The  Respondent
    considered that there had been a  hiatus  between  the  expiry  of  the
    Appellant's leave pursuant to a decision dated 22 October 2015  (served
    on 24 October 2015) and a subsequent application made on 24 May 2016.


4.   On appeal Judge Swaney accepted the Appellant's  evidence  in  relation
    to the making of the application  that  followed  the  decision  of  22
    October 2015.  Judge Swaney accepted that the  Appellant  had  in  fact
    made an application for leave to remain  on  7  November  2015  -  just
    within fourteen  days  of  the  earlier  decision.   Nonetheless  Judge
    Swaney,  after  consideration  of  various  provisions,   reached   the
    conclusion that the  Appellant  had  still  broken  his  continuity  of
    residence, and found he had not had  any  leave  to  remain  since  the
    expiry of his earlier leave in October 2015.


5.   Before me it is common ground that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  cited
    the wrong Immigration Rule.  Paragraph 276B(v) was amended with  effect
    from 24 November 2016.   The  version  of  subparagraph  (v)  that  was
    applicable from that date is the version considered  by  Judge  Swaney.
    It is clear that the amendment  was  such  that  it  was  to  apply  to
    applications made on or after that date.   Necessarily,  therefore,  an
    earlier version of the Rules applied at the  time  of  the  Appellant's
    application of 7 November 2015.  In that  regard  subparagraph  (v)  of
    276B was in these terms:

         "(v) The applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration
             laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of  28
             days or less  will  be  disregarded  as  will  any  period  of
             overstaying between periods of entry clearance, leave to enter
             or leave to remain  of  up  to  28  days  and  any  period  of
             overstaying pending the determination of an  application  made
             within that 28 day period".



6.   It is the final stanza in that  sub-paragraph  which  would  appear  to
    avail  the  Appellant:  the   period   of   overstaying   pending   the
    determination of his application made on  7  November  2015  is  to  be
    disregarded in the sense that the Appellant is not be treated as having
    been present in the UK in breach of immigration laws.  His  application
    of 7 November 2015 was indeed made within 28 days of the expiry of  his
    earlier leave, and thereafter up until the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision he remained pending the determination of the application.   It
    was during that timeframe that ten years from his initial entry to  the
    United Kingdom was reached. On this basis.  Mr Tufan does not  seek  to
    resist the challenge to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision,  and
    indeed on the same basis now acknowledges that the Appellant  can  take
    the benefit of paragraph 276B.




7.   This is an Article  8  appeal.  Absent  any  particular  circumstances,
    proportionality is generally considered to be encompassed by the  Rule.
    There being no particular adverse features, the fact that the Appellant
    satisfies the Rules is sufficient for the Tribunal to conclude that  it
    would be disproportionate for him to be expected to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom in consequence of the Respondent's decision.


Notice of Decision

8.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of law.


9.   I re-make the decision in the appeal. The appeal is  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR.


10.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed:                                 Date: 11 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and in all of the circumstances make a  whole  fee
award


Signed:                                 Date: 11 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)
