
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/06019/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 May 2019                          |  On 20 May 2019                      |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                              mr Santosh shahi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K McCarthy, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal  born  on  15  October  1983.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision  of
    the respondent Entry Clearance Officer dated 6 August  2015  to  refuse
    his application for entry clearance to settle in the United Kingdom  as
    the adult dependent son of Arjun Sahi, a former Gurkha.  The  appellant
    initially appealed this refusal at a hearing on 4  January  2017  where
    the appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.  That decision was
    vitiated by error of law following a decision of 18 January 2018 of the
    Upper Tribunal and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  de
    novo.  In a decision promulgated on 12  December  2018,  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal R L Walker dismissed the appellant's  human  rights
    appeal.

Error of Law Decision

The appellant appeals with permission on the grounds that:

    Ground 1

    The judge failed to apply the correct  test  for  family  life  between
    adults;

    Ground 2

    The judge's decision was unfair in disregarding relevant  evidence  and
    in making adverse  findings  that  the  appellant  could  have  applied
    earlier as a student when such was not raised either by the  respondent
    or at the hearing;

    Ground 3

    The judge erred in relation to proportionality.

 2. Following submissions on the  grounds  of  appeal  Miss  Everett  quite
    properly conceded that she could not defend  the  judge's  conclusions.
    She conceded that the judge was wrong in his conclusion at paragraph 32
    of the Decision and Reasons that the historic injustice point would  be
    insufficient to enable the appellant's human rights claim  to  succeed,
    when the jurisprudence (see including Rai v ECO,  New Delhi [2017] EWCA
    Civ 320 and others) said otherwise.

 3. It was Miss Everett's submission that, as the  only  way  to  save  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was to persuade the Upper  Tribunal
    that the judge's decision in relation to Article 8 not being engaged in
    respect of family life, she was in some  considerable  difficulty.   As
    she accepted although the judge referenced,  in  substance  if  not  in
    form, the Kugathas test, he failed to apply the correct test of whether
    the support between the appellant and his parents was  real,  effective
    or committed, as approved in Rai v ECO, New Delhi.

 4. That concession was properly made.   The  judge,  having  set  out  the
    evidence, went on to find that there was no  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his brother but that "the  situation  is  different  with
    regard to his parents.  I accept there is some  degree  of  established
    family life." ([24]). The judge based his findings on the fact that the
    appellant was  living  in  family  properties  which  was  demonstrated
    including through the appellant's father's oral  evidence.   The  judge
    went on to accept, at [25], that the appellant was in  regular  contact
    with his parents, including as shown by messages  and  that  there  had
    been regular money transfers.  Whereas the judge accepted that this was
    evidence of some financial support he  also  indicated  that  this  was
    intended for the upkeep of the family properties which the family  used
    for visits.  However, even if this is the case  any  such  use  of  the
    properties would not, in my view, detract from a  finding  of  real  or
    effective or committed support in terms of whether or not Article  8(1)
    is engaged and whether there is family life.  The judge failed  to  ask
    himself the correct question, when considering whether  Article  8  was
    engaged.  I am satisfied  that  ground  1  demonstrates  an  error,  as
    properly conceded by Miss Everett.  Even if I had not  been  there  was
    further merit in  both  the  remaining  grounds  in  relation  to  both
    fairness and proportionality.

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law.   I
    preserve the judge's findings of fact from paragraphs [19] to paragraph
    [25].

Remaking the Decision

 6. Although Miss Everett was not  entirely  convinced  that  the  decision
    could be remade without a further hearing given the errors made by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  I  am  satisfied  that   there   is   sufficient
    information in the information evidence before  me  to  remake  on  the
    papers, including on the basis of reserved findings.

 7. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal took the wrong approach  in
    its ultimate conclusions, in assessing  whether  family  life  existed,
    having made a number of positive findings on the facts,  which  I  have
    preserved.  Although the judge set out, at [5], the case law taken into
    consideration by the Entry Clearance Officer  including  Gurung  &  Ors
    [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and Ghising and others [2013] UKUT  00567  (IAC)  the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusions  failed  to   apply   the   correct
    rationale. Although the judge found that the appellant and his  parents
    had established some degree of family life, the judge was not satisfied
    that the relationship was one that goes beyond normal family  ties  and
    therefore  did  not  accept  that  any  interference  caused   by   the
    respondent's decision to  the  appellant's  family  life  was  of  such
    gravity as to engage Article 8 (the second limb of the Razgar test).

 8. It is undisputed in this case  that  the  appellant's  father  and  the
    sponsor was a Gurkha who served in the  Brigade  of  Gurkhas  for  over
    twenty years, discharged in 1993 with an exemplary record  of  conduct,
    having been promoted from the ranks to become  a  commissioned  officer
    and awarded the long service and good conduct medal.  The appellant was
    10 years old when his father was discharged from the Gurkhas and  along
    with other Gurkhas the sponsor was denied any opportunity to settle  in
    the UK, such injustice not being correct until 2009 by which stage  the
    appellant was an adult.  It has always been maintained by the  sponsor,
    and not specifically disputed and  which  I  accept,  that  he  had  an
    exemplary military conduct record upon completion of  his  service  and
    received a positive recommendation from his commanding officer based on
    his experience, being described by his superiors as honest  and  a  man
    who could be  wholly  relied  on  and  having  integrity.   Again  such
    descriptions of the sponsor were not disputed by the respondent  and  I
    accept that the sponsor is a man of good character.  Although such good
    character does not of course mean that I  must  accept  everything  the
    sponsor says, I have considered it in the round.

 9. I further accept that, as noted by the sponsor  in  his  first  witness
    statement dated 20 December 2016, he would have settled in the  UK  had
    he been given the opportunity on retirement and would  have  taken  his
    children, who were then aged 10 with the older child aged 4, with  him.
    The sponsor applied for settlement the year that the policy was revised
    and was granted indefinite leave to enter on  17  September  2009,  his
    wife receiving her indefinite leave to enter on 29 January  2010.   The
    sponsor notes that both his sons were over 18 and he was told that they
    would not qualify for  settlement.   His  younger  son  applied  for  a
    student visa to study in the UK, the sponsor noting that he could  only
    afford the education of one child at that point and therefore the older
    child, the appellant in this  case,  was  left  behind.   I  accept  on
    balance on the basis of all the evidence before me  that  this  is  the
    case, taking into consideration in the round, the undisputed  integrity
    of the sponsor.  Although in the findings I have set aside  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge stated  that  the  sponsor  had  his  income  as  a
    security guard and was able to accumulate savings, I accept, and  again
    such was not specifically disputed before me,  that  he  did  not  have
    either when he applied for settlement in 2009.

10. For the avoidance of doubt, although not specifically determinative  of
    family life, I am satisfied that there was no element of choice in  the
    appellant not entering the UK or seeking to enter the UK before he  did
    (and I further accept that although the appellant's brother entered  as
    a student, there was never any suggestion that the appellant wished  to
    study in the UK and chose not to).

11. I have considered the five stage test in  R  (Razgar)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2004] 2 AC 368.  It is settled law  that
    the Article 8 rights of the entire family must  be  considered  (Beoku-
    Betts [2009] 1 AC 115).  In  considering  whether  family  life  exists
    between the appellant and his family members I have considered all  the
    evidence.   The  appellant  was  10  years  old  when  his  father  was
    discharged from the Gurkhas.  I accept, and such is not disputed,  that
    the appellant resided with the family in Nepal until the  departure  of
    his parents, the sponsors, to the  United  Kingdom,  and  as  indicated
    above, there was no opportunity for the sponsor to apply for settlement
    before he did in 2009.  The appellant's younger brother obtained  leave
    to remain as a student in 2011 and has since settled in the UK.

12. Clearly the sponsor faced a choice between availing  of  settlement  in
    the UK or continuing family life as  it  then  was  in  Nepal.   It  is
    uncontroversial that family life, for the purpose  of  Article  8,  can
    exist  between  adult  children  and  their  parents.   I   take   into
    consideration that the appellant remained in the family home throughout
    and it  was  the  consistent  evidence  before  me  (including  in  the
    sponsor's three witness statements) that  the  appellant  has  remained
    dependent on his father for all of his needs, financial and  otherwise.



13. Although, again in findings set  aside,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    difficulty accepting the claims that the  appellant  is  unemployed,  I
    have considered all the evidence in the round.  As  identified  at  the
    hearing before me, the judge appeared to concentrate on just one of the
    sponsor's witness statements and did not appear to consider the witness
    statement dated 6 November 2018 which specifically addressed the issues
    of why the sponsor is not working and what he is doing in Nepal.

14. I take into consideration that the sponsor  in  his  witness  statement
    dated 6 November 2018 gave consistent evidence  about  the  appellant's
    life in Nepal, including that the appellant has during this  time  been
    concentrating on being reunited with his family in the UK and that  the
    family have focused their efforts on keeping his morale high, including
    with day-to-day contact and sending the appellant money for his day-to-
    day expenses and paying utility bills.  There is also evidence that the
    sponsor sends some clothes through friends going  to  Nepal  which  has
    never been specifically disputed  and  which  I  accept.   The  sponsor
    described how he was unable to visit between 2011 and 2014 due  to  his
    employment and the lack of holidays, but that he visited in  2014  with
    his wife and spent three weeks  in  Nepal  and  that  there  have  been
    subsequent, more frequent visits.

15. Although the appellant passed his school qualification in 2003 I accept
    the consistent evidence that he has not been in any  regular  education
    since then; it was the sponsor's evidence  that  although  the  sponsor
    made him take some courses in Nepal to see what his aptitude was  like,
    he did not pursue any career and since 2008 he  has  just  remained  at
    home.  It was the sponsor's evidence, which  has  been  consistent  and
    which I accept that he tried to encourage the appellant  to  leave  the
    house and find some more courses  and  that  he  is  committed  to  him
    standing on his "own two feet", but that this is difficult whilst he is
    alone and in  Nepal  without  his  father's  guidance.    I  take  into
    consideration the Gurkha culture of supporting adult children.  This is
    corroborated by the  sponsor's  evidence  that  he  has  supported  his
    younger son, Surendra, in the same way and  who,  although  he  is  now
    making his own living and contributing to the household,  continues  to
    live with his parents in the UK.

16. The sponsor noted in his witness statement that he has continued to try
    and guide the appellant and that his son tells him  that  he  does  not
    qualify for the jobs listed in the newspaper as  they  are  for  highly
    educated and highly skilled people and he does not have the courage  to
    apply for them, whereas basic jobs are  already  taken  by  people  who
    refer and recommend their  own  "kith  and  kin"  for  the  jobs.   The
    appellant feels he is at an advantage given that he is  "barely  school
    level educated" with just a three month long computer hardware  diploma
    course completed in 2007 and a one month certificate  course  for  food
    and beverage service.

17. I am satisfied that it is  plausible  that  the  appellant  might  have
    remained in the family home as claimed.  I take into  account  that  he
    has also consistently claimed to have been unmarried and unemployed and
    remained dependent on his father who has  given  consistent,  detailed,
    and what I find to be credible evidence, which I have considered in the
    context of someone who has been found  to  be  of  exemplary  character
    through his service as a Gurkha.

18. Although the respondent Entry Clearance Officer had queried contact and
    financial support the appellant had  produced  significant  documentary
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal of regular contact between  the
    appellant and his parents and of regular money transfers and I rely  on
    the preserved findings of Judge Walker at [25].  Although Judge  Walker
    had "no doubt" that the financial support to  the  appellant  was  also
    intended for the upkeep and maintenance of family properties in  Nepal,
    this does not advance the  respondent's  case  any  further  and  I  am
    satisfied that the appellant has demonstrated that  he  receives  real,
    committed and effective support,  including  that  he  resides  in  the
    family property and that the financial support also goes  to  meet  his
    own essential needs.

19. I find therefore that the appellant  was  dependent  and  has  remained
    dependent on his  father  throughout,  including  since  obtaining  his
    majority and since his  parents  and  brother  left  for  the  UK.   If
    anything, the emotional support which his family have had to  give  the
    appellant has increased during the  time  he  has  remained  alone  and
    focused on joining his family in the UK.  The extent  of  such  support
    which I accept is inherent  in  Gurkha  culture,  including  for  adult
    children, is emphasised  by  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  younger
    brother who is also an adult remains living with his parents in the UK.
     I am satisfied that family life existed,  including  at  the  date  of
    departure and has continued to do so and I have placed  weight  on  the
    witness statements and additional documentary evidence from the sponsor
    of the continued dependence

20. I accept the consistent evidence that regardless of the appellant's age
    he has remained emotionally close to his parents as  evidenced  by  the
    continuing contact and financial and emotional  support  and  I  accept
    that  I  can  place  weight  on  the  evidence  provided  including  of
    communication records of  Viber  and  phone  call  details,  electronic
    details, electronic  ticket  records,  family  photographs,  remittance
    evidence, bank statements and of visits, all of which I have considered
    in the round.

21. I accept that in deciding whether family life exists, the test  remains
    whether something more exists than normal emotional  ties  (Kugathas  v
    SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31) and relevant factors include who the relatives
    are, the nature of the links, age, where and with  whom  the  appellant
    has resided in the past and the nature of the contact.  I  accept  that
    in order to establish family life it is  not  necessary  to  find  that
    support is indispensable, which it is unlikely to be in an appellant of
    this age.  However, I must consider the nature of those ties  in  light
    of the Court of Appeal guidance in Rai and its endorsement at  [36]  of
    Sedley LJ's opinion in Kugathas that dependence means support which  is
    real, or committed or effective.  I have considered this in the context
    of the Upper Tribunal in Ghising [2012] UKUT 160 which  indicated  that
    Kugathas had been interpreted too restrictively in  the  past  and  the
    Court of Appeal in Patel &  Ors  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (Mumbai)
    [2010] EWCA Civ  17  confirmed  that  family  life  can  exist  without
    indispensable support.

22. Attainment of the age of majority in itself does not mean  that  family
    life has ended and in this case I have given weight to  the  fact  that
    family life has continued in the family home, together with what I have
    found to be evidence of continued emotional and financial  support.   I
    am satisfied that there is real, committed and effective support by the
    appellant's  father  and  mother  of  the  appellant,   and   in   such
    circumstances I am satisfied that family life has continued to exist.

23. I am satisfied that the question of whether  the  respondent's  refusal
    would  interfere  with  that  family  life  must  be  answered  in  the
    affirmative, and that given the low  threshold,  such  interference  is
    sufficiently  serious  to   potentially   engage   Article   8.    Such
    interference is in accordance with  the  law  and  for  the  legitimate
    purposes of maintaining effective  immigration  control.   I  therefore
    address the final question in Razgar, as to whether the interference is
    proportionate.  In so doing I have had regard to  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  the  public  interest
    consideration.  I take into consideration that Section 117B  represents
    the ordinary interests of immigration control.

24. I take into account that  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    proficiency in the English language or of  financial  independence  and
    that therefore the public interest  is  engaged  in  this  respect.   I
    further accept that the appellant cannot meet the Immigration Rules  or
    the policy. However, I  must  consider  this  in  the  context  of  the
    historic injustice to Gurkhas and the relevant jurisprudence.

25. I must give appropriate weight to the historic injustice,  as  conceded
    by Miss Everett, although I have reminded myself that this is  not  the
    only issue to be considered.  Patel & Ors (above) confirms that  whilst
    the interest in  immigration  control  would  in  most  cases  outweigh
    Article 8 rights, in historic injustice cases the reverse is  true  and
    the approach in Patel is a compensatory one in terms of  "righting  the
    wrong".  The Court of Appeal in Rai (as above)  confirmed  that  whilst
    the Tribunal must have regard to Section  117B,  it  was  correct  that
    given the historic injustice, such considerations, in themselves, would
    not make an adverse difference to the outcome.

26. I have considered, as outlined in Ghising and others  [2013]  UKUT  567
    (IAC) that a bad immigration history of criminal behaviour may tip  the
    balance in the respondent's favour, but if all that is relied on is the
    public interest, "the weight to be given to the historic injustice will
    normally require a decision in the Appellant's  favour.".   It  is  not
    disputed that this is not a case  where  there  is  a  bad  immigration
    history  of  criminal   behaviour,   and   therefore   there   are   no
    countervailing factors.

27. I  have considered further in the appellant's  favour that the  sponsor
    sacrificed many years of his family life to serve in the British  Army,
    serving well in excess of the  four  years  necessary  to  qualify  for
    settlement, and that the sponsor's access to  his  family  during  that
    time was more limited than  that  enjoyed  by  other  soldiers  of  the
    British Army (the sponsor gave evidence in his first witness  statement
    dated 20 December 2016 that he was only allowed to live with  his  wife
    during his six months' leave after three years of service and  that  in
    his view, which I accept, he sacrificed his family life in  service  of
    the crown) (see R (Perja) v MOD [2004] 1 WLR 289).

28. For the reasons set out above therefore I am satisfied the respondent's
    decision represents a disproportionate interference with family life.

Notice of Decision

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside (other than where  specifically  preserved).   I  remake  the
    decision allowing the appellant's appeal.

30. No anonymity direction was sought or is appropriate in  this  case  and
    none is made.


Signed                                  Date: 15 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make a full fee award.




Signed                                  Date: 15 May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson












