
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
                                                    Numbers: HU/06961/2018
                                                               HU/07178/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                             Md. AZHAR KHAN and
                                FATIMA KANEEZ
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S Ferguson of Counsel instructed by Burney
Legal, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are husband and wife,  born  respectively  in  1941  and
    1944.  They are both citizens  of  Pakistan.   On  22  July  2016  they
    entered as visitors on two year multi-visit visas.  Neither of them are
    in good health and they live with their daughter, Saima Sheikh  who  is
    their Sponsor.

The SSHD's Original Decision

 2. On 20 January 2017 they applied for leave to remain  on  the  basis  of
    their private and family life in the United Kingdom.  On 5  March  2018
    the Respondent refused the applications under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Appellants did not meet the time critical requirements of paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules and the Respondent considered  there
    were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  their  re-integration  into
    Pakistan on return.  Reference was made to the various medical  reports
    on each of the Appellants and the Respondent  concluded  that  although
    they may not have immediate family in Pakistan  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect their daughter and son-in-law and their daughter in  the  United
    States to continue maintaining them with funds  sent  from  the  United
    Kingdom and the United States. There were no exceptional  circumstances
    to warrant  the  grant  of  leave  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 3. On 16 March 2018 the Appellants lodged notice of appeal  under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds are entirely generic referring to  evidence  to
    be submitted later.

 4. By a decision promulgated on 24 August 2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal S. Aziz dismissed the appeals on all grounds.

 5. On 18 October 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb  granted
    the Appellants permission to appeal on the grounds principally that  it
    was arguable the Judge  had  erred  in  his  approach  to  the  medical
    evidence about the Appellants' fitness to fly and his assessment of the
    threshold to show that family life exists and to the proportionality of
    the decision to the  State's  obligation  to  respect  the  Appellants'
    private and family life, in particular with regard to  the  Appellants'
    grandchildren.  He further had concerns about the  Judge's  questioning
    of the Sponsor in relation to  her  e-mail  account  and  her  apparent
    inability to access it and the absence of  a  full  assessment  of  the
    extent to which the  Appellants  met  or  did  not  meet  the  relevant
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 6. The  Appellants  attended  the  hearing,  in  wheelchairs,  with  their
    daughter.  I was informed that although  the  daughter  spoke  English,
    each of the Appellants has very little English.  The Sponsor  confirmed
    they were living with her family at her home address.

 7. Ms Isherwood referred to the Respondent's response of 22 November  2018
    under Rule 24 of the Procedure Rules.  She rightly pointed out that  it
    appeared to relate only to the issue whether  the  Judge's  questioning
    about the Sponsor's e-mail account had been so pro-active as to  amount
    to "entering  the  arena".   The  response  refers  to  the  record  of
    proceedings made by the Judge.  Regrettably, the record  is  illegible.
    Ms Isherwood submitted that the response did not deal  with  the  other
    aspects of the  grounds  upon  which  permission  to  appeal  had  been
    granted.  Nonetheless, she would not seek to go behind it.

 8. I adjourned the hearing into Chambers with a view to a frank discussion
    about the Judge's decision.   Following  the  discussion,  the  parties
    reached a consensus that the Judge's decision was not  sustainable  and
    should be set aside.  On resuming the  open  hearing,  I  informed  the
    Appellants that I found there  were  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    Judge's decision and that for the reasons given in this decision I  had
    decided it was appropriate to set aside the  Judge's  decision  and  to
    direct the appeal be heard afresh with none  of  the  Judge's  findings
    retained.

Reasons

7.   I now give those reasons.  The Judge dealt with the  "fitness  to  fly"
    issue at paragraph 65.  Having noted the evidence, he then stated there
    was no evidence the husband could not be escorted by one of his  family
    in the United  Kingdom.   This  would  appear  to  assume  a  voluntary
    departure  but  neither  party  suggested  that  possibility  had  been
    canvassed at the hearing.

8.   Neither  at  paragraph  68  nor  elsewhere  does  the  Judge  make  any
    acknowledgment  of  his  duty  under  s.55  Borders,  Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009  with  regard  to  the  Appellants'  grandchildren
    although he does make a finding at paragraph 69.

9.   The Judge erred at paragraph 68 in setting out the  relevant  threshold
    to assess the Article  8  claim  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ. 1192  is  a  deportation  case.   The
    Appellants face removal but not  deportation.   The  relevant  citation
    would have been the judgment in R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11.

10.  The Judge did not state the extent to  which  the  Appellants  did  not
    meet the relevant Immigration Rules.  Failure to  assess  this  in  any
    detail infected any assessment of the proportionality of removal of the
    Appellants which to a considerable extent will go to the assessment  of
    the proportionality of the decision under appeal.  A  consideration  of
    s. 117B of the 2002  Act  is  not  sufficient  for  this  purpose:  see
    paragraphs 70 and 71 of the Judge's decision.

11.  The Judge found the Sponsor to be an unreliable  witness  on  the  sole
    basis of her ignorance of the password to access  her  e-mail  account.
    The Sponsor is recorded at the hearing before the Judge  as  giving  an
    explanation which may or may not be credible  but  given  her  age  and
    background is certainly plausible.  An adverse finding  on  this  point
    alone did not constitute adequate  reason  for  the  extensive  adverse
    credibility  findings  against  the  Sponsor  which  the  Judge   made.
    Further, it was that finding alone which enabled the  Judge  to  invoke
    the jurisprudence of Tanveer Ahmed *[2002] UKIAT 00439.

12.  For these reasons I find the Judge's decision contains  errors  of  law
    such that it is unsafe and should be set aside in its entirety with  no
    findings of fact preserved.  At the end of the hearing I handed back to
    Ms Ferguson for the Appellants their bundles which had previously  been
    served and filed so  that  for  any  resumed  hearing  her  instructing
    solicitors will have the opportunity to create a consolidated paginated
    and properly indexed bundle.

13.  Having regard to the extensive fact-finding which will be necessary  at
    the resumed hearing and s.12(2)b Tribunal's, Courts and Enforcement Act
    2007 and paragraph 7.2 of the practice statement of 10 February 2010 as
    amended, I direct the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    hearing afresh.

15.  The Appellants will note that the Respondent has filed and  served  the
    judgment in Ribeli v ECO-Pretoria [2018] EWCA  Civ.  611  and  will  be
    relying upon it at any resumed hearing, in particular paragraphs 66-72.

Anonymity

14.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the error of law appeal, I find none is required.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and  is
    set aside.  The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh.


    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   10.
xii. 2018

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

