
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06293/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On  31st October 2017                    |On 1st November 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                    E W A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Adama -Adams of Counsel, instructed by Tamsons
                 Legal Services
For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born in October 1982. He arrived
       in the UK in May  2004  on  a  visit  visa.  He  made  a  series  of
       applications, the last of which was a human rights application dated
       27th July 2015. His appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent
       refusing that human rights application dated 18th February 2016  was
       dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 6th February 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Adio on 23rd August 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that  the
       First-tier judge had erred in law in making  contradictory  findings
       relating  to  the  best  interests   of   the   children   and   the
       proportionality assessment under Article 8 ECHR.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal contend, in summary, that firstly  the  First-
       tier Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting what was
       said in the letter from Shan & Co solicitors; secondly it is  argued
       that the First-tier  Tribunal  contradicted  itself  by  finding  at
       paragraphs 44 and 50 of  the  decision  that  it  was  in  the  best
       interests of the two minor children to be allowed to continue  their
       private and family lives in the  UK,  but  then  in  dismissing  the
       appeal, and that this was a failure to properly apply  s.117B(6)  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002;  thirdly  it  is
       argued that there  was  a  failure  to  apply  Appendix  FM  of  the
       Immigration Rules and to make a  proper  proportionality  assessment
       under Article 8 ECHR.

    5. I said to the parties at the commencement of  the  hearing  that  my
       preliminary view was that there was an error of law at paragraphs 56
       and 57 of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  had  checked
       that this was the version of the decision Judge Ford had intended to
       send out and  she  had  confirmed  that  the  only  error  was  that
       paragraph 56 should have concluded "following the guidance given  in
       MA Pakistan", text which currently was at the beginning of paragraph
       57. There was no text missing from the decision.  The  parties  both
       agreed that the dismissal of  the  appeal  under  s.117B(6)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 erred in law as it  had
       not been sufficiently reasoned at paragraph 56 even with this  added
       portion of text. Mr Adama-Adams did not wish to pursue  any  of  the
       other grounds of appeal, and both parties were happy that we proceed
       to remake the appeal on this point immediately.  The  appellant  and
       his wife have had a further child, E, born in July  2017  since  the
       last hearing so there are now three British citizen children of  the
       family: D who is 9 years old, J who is 15 months  and  E  who  is  3
       months old.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    6. The conclusion that the letter from Shan &  Co  solicitors  was  not
       reliable evidence was based on the fact that it was only produced in
       copy form and was not in the original bundle. I  do  not  find  that
       this was a finding that was not open to the First-tier Tribunal.  In
       any case it was of  very  little  relevance  to  the  issues  to  be
       determined. The appellant was not  entitled  to  succeed  under  the
       Immigration Rules because he had criminal convictions which  he  had
       not declared and so could not meet the requirements of paragraph  S-
       LTR 2.2 which states whether or not  to  the  appellant's  knowledge
       false information had been  submitted  with  the  application.  Even
       though it was said to be an error by the caseworker at Shan & Co not
       to include the appellant's convictions, this was not relevant to the
       provision as  the  appellant  speaks  English  and  had  signed  the
       application form so can rationally be assumed in fact  to  have  had
       some sort of knowledge of the provision of the false information.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal had to determine whether the  appellant  was
       entitled to succeed on human rights  grounds.  He  did  not  have  a
       separate right of appeal under the Immigration  Rules.  However,  it
       was of course relevant to the public interest in his removal whether
       he could meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The  First-
       tier Tribunal sets out at paragraph 47  to  49  why  they  were  not
       satisfied that the appellant could meet the suitability requirements
       of the Immigration Rules with unarguably rational reasoning.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal unarguably considers  the  appeal  generally
       under Article 8 ECHR, starting from paragraph 50  of  the  decision.
       Correctly the first consideration is the best interests of the minor
       children which are,  again  unarguably  correctly,  noted  to  be  a
       primary consideration. There is no contradiction in the position  of
       the First-tier Tribunal: both at paragraph 44 and 50 it is  seen  as
       in the best interests of the  children  to  remain  in  the  UK  and
       continue their lives here.

    9. Consideration is unarguably given to s.117B(6) of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 at paragraph  56  of  the  decision,
       with the  First-tier  Tribunal  directing  itself  appropriately  by
       reference to the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  R  on  the
       application of MA (Pakistan) & Ors v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and
       Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705. I find however that this
       decision making is incomplete and the First-tier  Tribunal  errs  in
       law for failure to complete  a  reasoned  proportionality  balancing
       exercise before concluding the appeal should be  dismissed  on  this
       basis.

Submissions - Remaking

   10. Mr Tufan submits that it is reasonable to expect the  three  British
       children to leave the UK. This is clearly anticipated as permissible
       both  in  MA  (Pakistan)  and  under  the  Immigration   Directorate
       Instruction - Family Migration - Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B) "Family
       Life as a Partner or Parent and Private Life, 10 Year Routes"  which
       is set out in SF and Others (Guidance, post - 2014 Act) [2017]  UKUT
       120. The appellant has a criminal  record  and  a  poor  immigration
       history, and despite the finding that it was in the  best  interests
       of all the children to remain in the UK the  Upper  Tribunal  should
       conclude that it was reasonable to require the children to leave the
       UK.

   11. Mr Adama-Adams submitted that that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
       expect the three children to leave the UK. The appellant's wife  has
       long term incurable illnesses and currently is only able to care for
       the children with the help of the appellant and  her  mother-in-law.
       It was clearly  understood  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
       appellant's wife continued to have to attend  hospital  appointments
       and continued to need medical assistance for  these  conditions.  It
       was not reasonable to conclude  that  she  would  cope  without  the
       appellant  and  that  her  mother-in-law  could  do  more  than  she
       currently did to help. The assistance of the appellant  was  crucial
       to the well-being  of  the  children.  Although  the  appellant  had
       criminal convictions these were for  false  instrument  matters  and
       were not therefore for the most serious crimes,  and  this  and  his
       immigration record did not make it proportionate  or  reasonable  to
       expect the three British citizen children to leave the UK.

Conclusions - Remaking

   12. Under s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
       the public interest will not require the appellant's removal  if  he
       has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying
       child and it would not be reasonable to expect that child  to  leave
       the UK.

   13. In this case it is accepted by all that the  appellant  has  genuine
       and  subsisting  parental  relationships   with   three   qualifying
       children: his step-son D who has been in the UK for nine  years  and
       is a British citizen; and his two natural children, J and E, who are
       14 and 3 months old respectively and both British citizens.

   14. It is also accepted that it is in the best interests of the children
       to remain in the UK. They are all British citizens, and D has  lived
       in the UK for his entirely life and is in year 5 of primary  school.
       Their mother is a British citizen who was born and brought up in the
       UK. In the UK the children also have a close relationship with their
       paternal grandmother who assists their mother  in  their  upbringing
       most days for several hours, and they also have  some  contact  with
       their maternal grandfather and a maternal aunt who has  also  helped
       their mother. This assistance is important as the  appellant's  wife
       and mother of his  children  suffers  from  lupus,  an  auto  immune
       disease where by the body's immune system  mistakenly  attacks  body
       organs, following meningoencephalitis, which in turn causes a number
       of  serious  medical  problems   including   cognitive   impairment,
       arthritis and progressive kidney disease. It  was  accepted  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal that the appellant's wife  has  "very  difficult
       medical problems" and that she could not live in Ghana. Although  it
       was found that there was no evidence she could not travel  there  to
       enjoy a holiday,  it  was  not  "feasible  nor  advisable"  for  the
       appellant's wife to relocate to Ghana to enjoy family life  in  that
       country.

   15.  It is clear that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
       decisively that the best interests of the children were in remaining
       in the UK, and that this was a totally rational decision given their
       citizenship, the long residence of the child D, the extended  family
       support on both the maternal and paternal sides, and their  mother's
       serious medical problems which make  residence  in  the  appellant's
       country of origin impossible.

   16. I note that at paragraph 49 of MA (Pakistan) that a  child  who  has
       lived in the UK for seven years provides  a:  "starting  point  that
       leave should be granted unless there are  powerful  reasons  to  the
       contrary." Further the Immigration Directorate Instruction of August
       2015 which is set out in SF  and  others  at  paragraph  7  of  that
       decision states that: "it will usually be appropriate to grant leave
       to the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK
       with the child, provided that there is satisfactory  evidence  of  a
       genuine and subsisting parental relationship." That policy  suggests
       a refusal of leave might be appropriate if another parent could care
       for the child/children, or if there was criminality, or a very  poor
       immigration history, but the impact of separation for  the  children
       should be considered.

   17. It is accepted by the First-tier Tribunal that the children would be
       upset if their father disappeared from their lives. It is also found
       that he has worked, albeit illegally, to  support  the  family,  and
       that the appellant's wife has not been well enough to  work  outside
       of the home. The First-tier Tribunal seemed less certain whether the
       appellant had collected D from school on a regular basis, but he  is
       certainly the secondary point of contact after his mother  according
       to the  school  letter.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
       appellant's wife would be able to seek help from the UK relatives if
       she were to have to care for the two children she had at the time of
       that decision without the appellant. However in the context  of  the
       appellant having now a third child I find that the appellant's  wife
       would struggle to provide adequately for her  three  children  given
       her state of health, particular as two are babies,  given  that  her
       sister has a child of her own and is seeking work, her father is  72
       years old and given that her mother in law is already assisting  her
       for several hours most days, and in the context  of  the  acceptance
       that the appellant does have a genuine subsisting parental role with
       his children. I find in this context that the impact  of  separation
       from the appellant would be detrimental  for  the  three  children's
       well-being as well as upsetting.

   18. The appellant does have a criminal record: he was convicted in  June
       2013 of two counts of possessing false documents and sentenced to  6
       months imprisonment. This is plainly not  a  crime  of  violence  or
       related to drugs but must be given weight  in  favour  of  it  being
       reasonable for the children to be expected to leave.  The  appellant
       has also been in the UK since 2004 unlawfully, having  entered  aged
       21 years on a false passport in a different  name.   He  has  worked
       here unlawfully. He was found to have tried to  have  minimised  his
       contacts with Ghana; not  been  wholly  candid  about  his  criminal
       record with the Secretary of State in relation to this  application;
       and to have exaggerated his basis  to  stay  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. However, given that this is not a deportation  appeal  and
       given particularly that it is accepted that family life  cannot  for
       medical reasons relating to their mother take place in Ghana I  find
       by a narrow margin on a global consideration of all factors that the
       best interests of the  qualifying  children  outweigh  the  negative
       factors outlined above particularly due  to  the  impact  separation
       would have on those children, and so ultimately find that it  cannot
       be said to be reasonable to expect the children  to  leave  the  UK.





          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it  on  human  rights
      grounds.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the appellant's children.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  31st October 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







