
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/ 06365/ 2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 June 2017                               |On 20 September 2017          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 A---- O----
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells, Counsel instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellant. Breach of this order can be punished  as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order  because  the  welfare  of  children  is  a
       prominent in element in this  case  and  they  risk  harm  if  their
       circumstances are known.

    2. This is an appeal against a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of   the
       Secretary of State on 26 February 2016 refusing him leave to  remain
       on human rights grounds.

    3. At  the  risk  of  over  simplification  and  for  the  purposes  of
       introduction only, the appellant  is  a  foreign  criminal  who  was
       sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment on 17 July 2014  at  the  Crown
       Court sitting at Luton for offences arising from his involvement  in
       distributing false identity documents.  The appellant is married and
       has four children.   The  appellant's  wife  and  eldest  child  are
       British citizens.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  decided  that,
       notwithstanding the special consideration that have to be  given  to
       the rights of children, the appeal against the  decision  should  be
       dismissed.

    4. The case was opened to me on the basis  that  there  was  a  "narrow
       issue".  Whilst it was accepted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       had identified as the main feature of the  case  concern  about  the
       health  of  the  eldest  child,  these  needs  were  particular  and
       explained  and  considerable  and,  it  was  contended,   were   not
       considered properly in the decision and that therefore the  decision
       was unsound.

    5. It is necessary to consider the judge's decision with some  care  in
       order to set the criticism in context.

    6. She began by considering the appellant's immigration history.  It is
       his case that he entered the United Kingdom in 2001  using  a  false
       British passport.  He returned to Nigeria in early 2004 and was then
       issued with a two year multivisit visa in Lagos  and  used  that  to
       enter the United Kingdom.

    7. In March 2005 he came to the attention  of  the  Home  Office  after
       being  arrested  for  the  receipt  of  counterfeit  passports.   He
       identified himself with a name that he does  not  now  use  and  was
       served with illegal entry paperwork but  given  temporary  leave  to
       enter. He absconded.

    8. In December 2006 he applied for a five  year  multivisit  visa  from
       Lagos in a different name.  He was interviewed by an Entry Clearance
       Officer who discovered his true identity after taking a  fingerprint
       check.  The application was  refused  and  an  appeal  against  that
       decision was dismissed.

    9. Nevertheless  he  managed  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  and  was
       encountered in March 2010 when he identified himself in his  present
       name but claimed to be a national of South Africa and  he  supported
       that claim with a passport that was false.  In  March  2010  he  was
       convicted at the Crown Court sitting at Luton of possessing a  false
       instrument and was sentenced to six months' imprisonment.

   10. In May 2010 he applied for leave to remain but the  application  was
       refused.  His wife and children had been given discretionary leave.

   11. In February 2014 he  applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
       dependent spouse.  The application was rejected and he made a  fresh
       application in April 2014.

   12. In July 2014 he was convicted and sent to prison for 30  months.   I
       say more about this conviction below.

   13. He was warned of his liability for deportation  and  he  returned  a
       questionnaire  on  26  September   2014.    On   21   January   2015
       representations were made by his solicitors.

   14. In January 2015 his wife and three elder children were  given  three
       years' limited leave to remain and then in May  2016  his  wife  and
       eldest child were given British citizenship.

   15. The judge then summarised the appellant's case.  She noted that  the
       appellant lived with his wife and their four  children.   There  are
       three boys and one girl.  They were aged 10, 8, 5 and  1  year  when
       she made her decision.

   16. At paragraph 19 of  her  decision  she  summarised  the  appellant's
       attitude to the offence.  She said:

    "The appellant denies the offences for which he was convicted in  2014.
    He says he had no part in the carriage of the  identity  documents;  he
    did not know that they were there.  He  says  he  has  been  unable  to
    appeal the conviction.  Nonetheless he was compliant  with  the  prison
    sentence and probation.  He has explained his use of  false  names  and
    passports and  says  he  admitted  as  much  immediately.   He  is  now
    contrite: he has owned up to the Home Office about how he came  to  the
    UK with a false British passport.  Whilst in prison, he was visited  by
    his wife regularly but his children did not  come  often  because  they
    became distressed by their father's absence from the home.  He did  not
    tell them he  was  in  prison.   His  two  elder  children's  behaviour
    deteriorated when he was in prison."

   17. The judge then noted that there were particular concerns  about  the
       oldest child who I identify as "V".  The child V  is  disabled.   He
       has been diagnosed with Acute Cerebellar Ataxia.  This condition  is
       described and the consequences  explained.   Initially  V  needed  a
       helmet to protect him from falls when he walked.  He has needed  and
       benefited from physiotherapy and speech therapy  and  his  condition
       had stabilised so that he was able to attend a special school  where
       he  travelled,  supervised,  by  bus.   He   has   monthly   medical
       appointments and is on medication.  It was said that he enjoyed  his
       school and has friends and attends a  special  needs  club  twice  a
       week.  Significantly the judge also noted that:

    "V can behave aggressively on occasions and, as he  grows  and  becomes
    older, this is more difficult to manage.  V  is  sometimes  incontinent
    and  this  causes  him  embarrassment.   On   occasions,   he   becomes
    frustrated; this is part of his disability.  This  is  managed  by  his
    parents."

   18. It was noted as well that the appellant's wife has a heart condition
       for which she takes medication  and  she  was  taking  a  course  in
       healthcare.  The appellant cared for  the  children  while  she  was
       undergoing her education.

   19. The judge noted that the other children were doing well.  One of the
       children became disruptive while his father was away.

   20. The judge considered expressly the best interests of  the  children.
       She concluded, unremarkably, that it was in the  best  interests  of
       the children that they lived with the appellant.

   21. The judge considered particularly V's difficulties at paragraph  50.
       There she said:

    "V is disabled.  The oral evidence of the appellant's mother is that  V
    attends medical appointments about once a month  for  prescriptions  of
    Bisprolol.  This accords with the most recent view of these  conditions
    by Cambridgeshire Community Services NHS Trust dated 29  January  2015.
    It notes that he is  attending  Richmond  Hill  School  with  transport
    facilities.  His problems  were  then  identified  as  improving  acute
    cerebellar ataxia; learning difficulties;  first  seizure  in  December
    2012, no blanks or  seizures  since;  ventricular  ectopics,  no  blank
    episodes; poor sleep; and enuresis.  He is noted to  be  on  Bisoprolol
    2mgs daily which accords with his mother's oral  evidence.   Cardiology
    and metabolics investigations were normal.  A muscle biopsy was planned
    but, given there is no reference in the evidence to an adverse outcome,
    I assume this was  normal.   The  report  refers  to  V's  gait  having
    improved significantly, such that he was able  at  that  time  to  walk
    "long distances", jump, hop and to run fast  without  falling.   He  is
    described as having good sphincter control in daytime  with  occasional
    accidents.  He has enuresis for which he was referred to  a  specialist
    clinic and was on a waiting list  for  alarms.   He  needed  help  with
    dressing and personal hygiene.  As regards feeding, he was described as
    independent and able  to  finish  meals  without  assistance.   He  was
    described as not being aware of danger.   He  was  described  as  being
    healthy looking, speaking in short sentences  and  responsive;  he  had
    difficulties  with  comprehension  of  expression  and  with   learning
    difficulties.  His gait was stable, extremities were normal in tone and
    no contractures.  He had fine motor co-ordination difficulties.  He was
    to  continue  with  follow-up  appointments  but   no   treatment   was
    recommended save for his enuresis.  The conclusion was  that,  at  that
    time, V had special needs in personal care and was  "fully  independent
    with adult supervision". This evidence accords with the  oral  evidence
    of the appellant and his wife."

   22. There were  then  uncontroversial  findings  about  the  health  and
       educational attainments of the other children.  The judge also noted
       at paragraph 54 that the "appellant's wife has cared  for  three  of
       the children on her own during the  appellant's  absence  and  would
       have the benefit of family support in Nigeria."

   23. The judge said at paragraph 57:

    "I have found that it is in the best interests of the children to  live
    with and be brought up by both parents.  Theirs is  a  cohesive  family
    unit, interdependent and supportive; this is particularly so as regards
    the special needs of V and as a result of the "bad behaviour" of A.  In
    both cases, the parents derive support from each other in dealing  with
    these  children  and  their  learning  and   behaviour   issues.    The
    interdependency of the appellant and his children is such that it is in
    all of the children's interests that the  appellant  and  the  children
    live together."

   24. The judge then set out the sentencing remarks  of  HH  Judge  Mensah
       who, if I may say so respectfully, is  particularly  experienced  in
       the problems relating to immigration control.

   25. Judge Mensah expressed withering condemnation of the seriousness  of
       the offences describing the extent of  the  dishonesty  as  "breath-
       taking" and finding that the appellant was "involved in the thick of
       a fraud" and was not someone who  had  been  duped.   She  commented
       adversely on the aggravating elements of the offence  including  his
       having  had  a  previous  conviction  and  was   critical   of   his
       irresponsibility in committing the offences when he knew  full  well
       that his wife needed his support because  of  his  son's  condition.
       The judge then, unusually, commented on deportation and said:

    "I am also asked to consider deportation ... if it was the case that  I
    had to make a recommendation or  consider  a  recommendation,  I  would
    certainly make one in your case because it  seems  to  me  that  you've
    taken advantage of the system, here, you've taken advantage of having a
    good position, a decent opportunity for employment; you've ignored  the
    fact that you were once reprimanded by the court and have  nevertheless
    gone on to commit further fraudulent offences ..."

   26. There are two grounds of appeal.  The first complains that the First-
       tier Tribunal Judge misdirected herself by treating the  Immigration
       Rules as a complete code which, it  is  said,  is  contrary  to  the
       decision of the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali  (Iraq)  v  SSHD  [2016]
       UKSC 60.  The judge has lent herself to this  criticism  by  stating
       expressly at paragraph 35 that the Rules are a complete code but, as
       Mr Wells very sensibly accepted,  that  is  not  itself  a  material
       error. What matters is whether the  article  8  balancing  exercise,
       taken as a whole, was conducted  properly.   Mr  Wells  deliberately
       addressed me only on ground 2 which complained that  the  judge  had
       misdirected herself when she  considered  what  was  "unduly  harsh"
       within  the  meaning  of  section  117C(5)   of   the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  If  the  judge's  conclusion  that
       deportation would not be "unduly harsh" then, on the facts  of  this
       case, I do not see how recognising that the rules are not a complete
       code could have made any difference.

   27. The grounds recognise that the judge did have regard to the needs of
       the children and particularly the needs of the oldest child V.   The
       complaint is that the judge  did  not  have  proper  regard  to  the
       evidence that the problems in managing the child would  increase  as
       he got older.  The point is made at paragraph 15 where  the  grounds
       state:

    "It is submitted that though the judge has been very  detailed  in  her
    findings and consideration she has failed  to  take  into  account  the
    increasing aggression of the eldest child borne out of  frustration  at
    his condition.  It is this aspect of care for the eldest child  alluded
    to in paragraph 20 which is not referred to in later  paragraphs  which
    complicates the task of raising the eldest child to  provide  him  with
    the best opportunities as an adult.   The  Counsel  for  the  appellant
    argued that deportation would be unduly harsh and disproportionate,  in
    particular, because of the eldest child's disabilities."

   28. It is said that this point was not considered by the judge and is of
       such importance that the decision is flawed.

   29. Mr Wells drew to my attention parts of the evidence  that  were  not
       considered in much detail by the judge in the Decision and  Reasons.
       In particular there are parts of the  appellant's  wife's  statement
       where she refers to the difficulties in caring for V.  She  comments
       on the difficulties in finding a babysitter because of  V's  demands
       and refers to evidence in independent reports about  V's  aggressive
       behaviour.  It is the appellant's wife's evidence that she  is  only
       managing to pursue her  further  education  course  because  of  her
       husband's support and she needs that support.  Further although  the
       concern over A's misbehaviour is not of the same magnitude as is the
       concern over V, A's behaviour did cause concern.

   30. It was Mr Wells' submission, all the more powerful for being  brief,
       that although the judge has in many ways conducted a  very  thorough
       balancing exercise it is not clear from the Decision  that  she  has
       appreciated just how much  the  family  depend  on  the  appellant's
       presence and how much harm will be done by his being  removed.   The
       care and support that he provides is necessary and if  it  does  not
       come from him it will have to come from elsewhere.

   31. Mr Kotas pointed out that the judge did clearly have in mind some of
       the problems because she addressed them expressly.  For example, she
       referred to the mother having to cope while  the  appellant  was  in
       prison.

   32. However such findings are not a complete  answer  to  the  criticism
       because there are now four children and V in  particular  is  making
       big demands.

   33. The judge also referred to there being social and financial  support
       for the family  in  the  United  Kingdom.   This  appears  to  be  a
       reference both to formal  support  from  state  agencies  and  state
       funding and also informal support from the church community to which
       the appellant and his family belong.

   34. With the benefit of hindsight this decision would have  been  better
       if the judge had said more than she did about how the  family  would
       manage.  I am not persuaded that  this  counsel  of  perfection  has
       revealed a material error of law.  It is absolutely plain  that  the
       judge had at the front of her  mind  the  considerable  difficulties
       that exist in this family because of the ill  health  of  the  older
       child but that was never considered to be the only difficulty.   The
       judge clearly had in mind that professional help and community  help
       has  been  provided  and  can  be  provided  again   and   concluded
       unequivocally in paragraph 78 that "it would not be unduly harsh for
       V and A to remain in the UK without the appellant or leave with  the
       appellant and live with the family unit in Nigeria."

   35. Of course it is not the Secretary of State's case that  the  British
       citizen family should leave.

   36. The judge also had in mind the reasons for deportation in this  case
       and particularly the very clear steer given by HH Judge Mensah.   To
       the extent that the public interest in removal is a varying interest
       it is particularly high in this case.  The appellant's offences have
       been directed towards the system of immigration control.  That is  a
       very poor basis for saying he should  be  given  favoured  treatment
       when his deportation is considered.

   37. Nobody with a  crumb  of  human  decency  could  not  avoid  feeling
       considerable sympathy for the appellant's wife  and  children.   The
       appellant's many personal deficiencies  do  not  stop  him  being  a
       useful father figure and a supportive husband when he is at liberty.
        Deportation is a  savage  sanction  with  long  lasting  disruptive
       consequences not only on the person being deported but on those  who
       love him and benefit  from  his  presence.   Parliament  anticipates
       this.  These difficulties can in some circumstances be avoided  when
       they would be "unduly harsh".  It is the  necessary  implication  of
       this phrase that some harshness is due and the judge found  that  it
       is due here.

   38. This judge did not err and I dismiss the appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 September 2017              |





