
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06161/2019
                                                               HU/06155/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2020                     |On 01 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 LABH SINGH
                               SALOCHANA DAVI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr K. Manzur e Mawla of Morgan Hall Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appealed the respondent's decision date 20  March  2019
    to refuse a human rights claim.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge C.A.S. O'Garro ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  19  July  2019.  The  appellants
    claimed to have entered the United Kingdom  in  April  1996.  The  most
    recent human rights application was  made  on  07  November  2018.  The
    respondent accepted that the appellants had been continuously  resident
    in the UK since 2000 but the decision letter did not provide a specific
    date. The judge accepted this concession [16].

3.   The key area of dispute was whether there was  sufficient  evidence  to
    show that the appellants had been residing in the United Kingdom  since
    either  November  1998  (to  meet   the   requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules at the date of the application)
    or March 1999 (to meet the requirements by the date of the hearing).

4.   The judge considered the two key pieces of evidence relied upon by  the
    appellants to cover that period. The  first  was  a  tenancy  agreement
    dated 19 June 1998 for a property at  Natal  Road.  The  second  was  a
    tenancy agreement dated 12 February 1999 for a property at Jersey Road.
    She rejected the first tenancy agreement for the following reasons [18-
    19]:

      i) There was no other evidence to show that they had ever lived at  an
         address in Natal Road;

     ii) The tenancy agreement stated that the tenants were responsible  for
         paying the bills for services to the property,  but  there  was  no
         evidence to show that they had paid bills;

    iii) The second appellant's claim in evidence that gas  and  electricity
         was included in the rent was inconsistent with the wording  of  the
         tenancy agreement;

     iv) The second appellant's explanation about the  overlap  between  the
         tenancy agreement for Natal Road and  a  tenancy  agreement  for  a
         property at Jersey Road was not credible.

5.   The judge went on to  consider  the  second  tenancy  agreement  for  a
    property at Jersey Road and gave  the  following  reasons  for  placing
    little weight on the document [20]:

         "20.  At  the  hearing  the  appellants  produced  another  tenancy
             agreement dated 12 February  1999  for  occupancy  of  [Jersey
             Road], Ilford Essex. In cross-examination it was  pointed  out
             to the second appellant that she had  given  evidence  earlier
             that she had lived at [Natal Road] for a year. Further, when I
             considered the tenancy agreement for [Natal Road],  the  terms
             of the tenancy says "a  term  certain  for  one  year..."  The
             second appellant said  that  they  were  looking  for  another
             property to move to, which is the  reason  the  two  tenancies
             overlapped. I do not find this explanation credible. It  makes
             no sense that the appellants would pay for  two  tenancies  at
             the same time. Further, I noted on the tenancy  agreement  for
             [Jersey Road], an incomplete date - 11-02-20- hand written  on
             the right hand corner of  the  document  which  causes  me  to
             question  what  is  the  commencement  date  of  that  tenancy
             agreement. Indeed if the appellant did move to  [Jersey  Road]
             on 12 February 1999, no explanation has been given  why  there
             are no utility bills for this property prior to 2000. I accept
             that the appellants are living at [Jersey Road], but I am  not
             satisfied that the appellants move to that  address  prior  to
             2000."

6.   The judge went on to consider evidence from the President of Shri  Guru
    Ravidas Mission and another person who both said that  they  had  known
    the appellants for 20 years, but she gave little weight to the evidence
    because they were friends and did not attend to give evidence.

7.    The  appellant  appeals  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on   the
following grounds:

      i) The judge erred in her approach to the tenancy agreements  and  the
         letter from the temple.

     ii) The judge erred in her approach to the  assessment  of  integration
         for the purpose  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  immigration
         rules.

Decision and reasons

Error of law

8.   I find that there is no merit to the first ground  of  appeal  relating
    to the judge's approach to the evidence  from  the  Shri  Guru  Ravidas
    Mission in London. The first ground asserts  that  the  letter  was  an
    "official reference from a religious authority" and was  not  a  letter
    from a friend. However, I note that there were  two  letters  from  the
    Shri Guru Ravidas Mission before the First-tier Tribunal. The first was
    dated 12 July 2018 in which the President of the mission said that  the
    appellants were "family  friends  and  also  visit  Shri  Guru  Ravidas
    Mission Temple often of which I am the president".  The  second  was  a
    letter dated 04 June  2019  in  which  the  President  of  the  mission
    confirmed their attendance at the temple for over 20 years but did  not
    mention the fact that he was a friend. In light of the first letter, it
    was open to the judge to reduce the weight to be given to the  evidence
    on the ground that Mr Luggah did not attend to give evidence, and as  a
    friend, might have had a motive to assist them.

9.   The second point is more persuasive. The judge accepted  that,  at  the
    date of the hearing, the appellants continued to live at the address in
    Jersey Road. Indeed,  the  appellants'  bundle  ran  to  296  pages  of
    evidence showing that they had lived at the same address in Jersey Road
    since  at  least  2000.  The  earliest  correspondence  to  the  second
    appellant at that address was from Newham  Primary  Care  Trust  on  18
    September 2000. It is reasonable to infer that the respondent  accepted
    that the appellants had been resident in the United Kingdom since  2000
    because of the weight of this evidence.

10.  The only piece of evidence pre-dating September 2000  was  the  tenancy
    agreement for Jersey Road. I conclude  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
    assessment of this evidence for the following reasons.

11.  The judge failed to  put  to  the  appellants  her  concern  about  the
    incomplete date on the tenancy  agreement.  The  copy  of  the  tenancy
    agreement in the appellant's bundle did show an incomplete date, but on
    considering that evidence, it seemed to me that it was likely that  the
    date was cut off by the way  in  which  the  document  was  photocopied
    because the postcode above the date was cut off at the  same  point.  A
    brief request to the appellant's representative before the start of the
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal produced a further copy of the  document,
    which showed that this was the case.  The  full  date  on  the  tenancy
    agreement showed that the initial tenancy was for a period of one  year
    from "12-02-1999" to "11-02-2000". If the judge had concerns about  the
    document,  she  should  have  raised  the  issue.  Her   approach   was
    procedurally unfair.

12.  The judge rejected both tenancy  agreements  on  the  ground  that  the
    second appellant's evidence relating to the  apparent  overlap  in  the
    tenancies was not  credible.  However,  having  rejected  the  evidence
    relating to the tenancy at Natal Road for sustainable reasons,  it  did
    not necessarily follow that  the  second  tenancy  agreement  could  be
    rejected for the same reason.

13.  The judge failed to consider the weight of the evidence,  which  showed
    that the appellants were long standing  residents  of  the  address  in
    Jersey Road. While there was doubt as to  whether  the  appellants  had
    lived at Natal Road, it was accepted that the appellants had  lived  at
    the same address in Jersey Road since at least 2000. The  judge  failed
    to consider whether it was more likely than not that they had some form
    of tenancy  agreement  for  the  property.  The  face  of  the  tenancy
    agreement stated that the tenancy began on 12 February 1999. The  front
    of the tenancy agreement said that the letting agents  were  "Gorden  &
    Ajeet Property" in Green Street  E7.  A  letter  from  Gorden  &  Ajeet
    Property Management dated 11 March 2001 was included  in  the  evidence
    contained in the appellant's bundle. The letter itemised works that the
    landlord was intending to complete and was broadly consistent with  the
    tenancy agreement.

14.  When properly analysed in the  context  of  the  evidence  taken  as  a
    whole, the judge's concerns about the  apparent  overlap  in  tenancies
    went far more to the credibility of the tenancy agreement  relating  to
    Natal Road. Had the judge  considered  relevant  evidence  relating  to
    their long-standing residence at the property in  Jersey  Road,  weight
    could and should have been accorded to the second tenancy agreement.

15.  Although I note that the tenancy agreement for Jersey Road ran  for  an
    initial period from 12 February 1999 to 11 February 2000, and there  is
    no copy of a subsequent agreement, I find that it is reasonable to take
    judicial notice of the fact  that  an  assured  shorthold  tenancy  can
    continue by operation of statute as a periodic tenancy without the need
    to sign a fresh agreement. I  note  that  most  of  the  utility  bills
    contained in the appellants' bundle are more recent. I would not expect
    the appellants to keep copies of utility bills  from  as  long  ago  as
    1999. The evidence relating to their early years of residence in Jersey
    Road largely comprises of correspondence  from  the  hospital  and  the
    property management company. For these reasons I find that the lack  of
    evidence relating to the payment of  bills  in  their  early  years  of
    residence at the property is not something that causes much concern.

16.   For  the  reasons  given  above,  I  conclude  that  the  judge   gave
    sustainable  reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  relating  to   the
    appellants' claimed residence at Natal  Road  but  failed  to  consider
    relevant evidence when assessing their residence at  Jersey  Road  from
    February 1999 onwards. That part of the decision is set aside.

17.  The second point relating to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  was  not  pursued
    with any  vigour  at  the  hearing  and  is  unarguable.  Although  the
    appellants have lived in the UK for many years, they were born in India
    and have spent most of their lives  there.  The  judge's  finding  that
    there would not be 'very  significant  obstacles'  to  integration  was
    within a range of reasonable responses to the evidence.

Remaking

18.  I bear in mind that the appellants do not  need  to  prove  their  case
    with any certainty. For  the  reasons  given  above  I  find  that  the
    evidence shows on the balance of probabilities that the appellants have
    been resident in the United Kingdom since at least February 1999.

19.  At the date of the  human  rights  application  in  November  2018  the
    appellants had not been resident for a period of 20 years and  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the  immigration
    rules. However, at the date the Upper Tribunal is remaking the decision
    the evidence shows that it is more likely than not that the  appellants
    have been resident in the UK for a continuous period of 20 years.

20.  It is likely that the appellants have established  a  private  life  in
    the United Kingdom during this long period of residence. Their  removal
    is likely to interfere with that private life in a  sufficiently  grave
    way as to  engage  the  operation  of  Article  8(1)  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

21.  Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to private  and
    family life. However, it is not an absolute right and can be interfered
    with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law  that  the
    state has a right to control immigration and that rules  governing  the
    entry and residence of people into the country are "in accordance  with
    the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference with the  right
    to private or family life must be for a legitimate reason and should be
    reasonable and proportionate.

22.  Part 5A NIAA 2002 applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a
    person's right to respect for private and  family  life  under  Article
    8(2) of the European Convention.  It  is  in  the  public  interest  to
    maintain an effective system of immigration  control.  The  immigration
    rules reflect where the respondent considers a fair balance  is  struck
    for the purpose of Article 8(2).  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  recognises
    that, even in cases where a person has remained without leave, it would
    be disproportionate to remove them if they have  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of  20  years.  The  respondent  was
    satisfied that there were no other public interest considerations which
    precluded the appellants from meeting the 'Suitability' requirements of
    the immigration rules. None are apparent on the  evidence.  I  conclude
    that  removal  in  consequence  of  the  decision  would  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with the  appellants'  right  to  private
    life under Article 8 of the European Convention.

23.  I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision  involved  the  making
    of an error on a point of law. The decision is remade. The respondent's
    decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   M. Canavan    Date: 28 May 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____


NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email
