
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06463/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3rd August 2017                        |On 13th September 2017           |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                         MISS SCHANTOLL NORDIA WHYTE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Mr.C.Holmes, Counsel, instructed by Mohammed
                    Anderson and Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The respondent appeals, with permission, the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lea promulgated on 28th November 2016. For convenience,
    I will continue to refer to the parties as they where in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Jamaica who applied for leave to remain
    on the basis of her private life. The respondent considered her
    application under paragraph 276 ADE (1). She did not meet paragraph 276
    ADE (1) (v) because whilst she was aged between 18 and 25 she had not
    spent at least half her life in the United Kingdom. Instead, she was 21
    at the time of the application and had lived here since the age of 15.
    The respondent considered paragraph 276 ADE (1)(vi) which covers the
    situation of someone who has not lived in United Kingdom for the
    applicable period but where there would be very significant obstacles
    to their integration into the country to which they would have to go.
    The respondent took the view these did not exist. She still had
    familial ties with Jamaica consisting of her brother and sister and her
    grandmother. She held Jamaican citizenship and had lived there until
    the age of 15.

 3. The respondent considered article 8 on a freestanding basis but saw
    nothing about her situation which would mean the refusal was
    disproportionate. It was pointed out that the private life she had
    developed was in the knowledge she did not have permission to be here
    permanently.

The First tier Tribunal

 4. Her appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lea on the basis
    she satisfied paragraph 276 ADE (vi) and that the refusal breached her
    article 8 rights.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis the judge arguably erred
    in not applying the high test in paragraph 276 ADE (vi) of very
    significant obstacles to integration. It was also arguable that the
    judge, in allowing the appeal on a freestanding article 8 basis, did
    not give adequate reasons as to why the appellant's interest outweighed
    the public interest in immigration control. Finally, it was arguable
    the judge did not correctly apply section 117 B.

Consideration

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lea heard from the appellant, her mother, her
    stepbrother and friends and found their evidence credible. The
    background is uncontentious. The appellant was born and grew up in
    Jamaica. Her parents separated and her mother began a relationship with
    a Mr Harris, a British national. They married on 17 February 2007 and
    went to live in Holland. The appellant stayed with her grandmother.

 7. The appellant's mother gave birth to her stepsister, [M], on [ ] 2009.
    The appellant joined them in Holland. On 27 February 2010 she came to
    the United Kingdom to join them. The refusal letter sets out the
    various leaves she had, starting with a six-month visa.

 8. She lived with her mother, stepfather, and stepsister until 1 September
    2015. She attended college from 2010 until February 2015 and is
    employed as a care assistant. She now has her own apartment.

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lea found that she had close family ties and
    friendships in the United Kingdom. The judge found she has only
    occasional contact with her father. In her statement she said her
    father lived in Jamaica but worked on a cruise ship and was away for
    lengthy periods. The judge accepted that she did not have a good
    relationship with her grandmother in Jamaica. She does not have contact
    with her brother who lives with her grandmother. She does have contact
    with her sister in Jamaica. They are not in a position to provide her
    with accommodation or financial support should she be returned. The
    judge accepted that the appellant was suffering from arthritis. The
    judge found that she was financially independent and had her own flat
    and she is responsible for herself.

10. At paragraph 19 the judge found paragraph 276 ADE (vi) satisfied. The
    judge said she had been away from Jamaica seven years and during that
    time had established a private and family life in the United Kingdom.
    She had very close ties with her mother and stepfamily.

11. Without more, I find the judge materially erred in finding the very
    significant obstacles test satisfied on the reasons given. A high
    threshold is anticipated. In Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A -
    compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC) it was held that
    mere hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval and mere
    inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the test
    of "very significant hurdles" in paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration
    Rules.

12. The judge indicated that aside from paragraph 276 ADE (vi) the
    appellant, although 21 and living on her own, was still part of the
    family unit and played an important role in her stepsister's life. The
    judge found she had established a family life as well is a private
    life. To remove her would breach not only her article 8 rights but also
    those of her family members. The judge referred to section 117B and the
    appellant's ability to speak English, her financial independence and
    that she had formed her family and private life when she had leave to
    remain. However again I find the judge erred in consideration of
    section 117 B, particularly 117B(5). The section specifically requires
    that little weight should be given to a private life established by a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
    Her time here has been precarious as it was based upon a series of
    leaves.

13. My conclusion is that the judge materially erred in law allowing the
    appeal on the basis that section 276 ADE(vi) was satisfied or that the
    factors listed at paragraph 21 outweighed the presumption that
    immigration control is in the public interest and the specific
    stipulation at section 117 B(5). Consequently that decision can no
    longer stand.

14. I indicated my conclusion at the hearing. Both representatives
    suggested the appropriate course would be to remit the matter back to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing. The appellant's representative
    wanted to provide up-to-date evidence about her life here. At hearing
    he had criticised the respondent for not providing a representative at
    the hearing. The presenting officer accepted the desirability of a
    presenting officer attending but explained that on occasion there
    simply is not enough staff available. Had  one attended  they could
    have cross-examined the appellant particularly in relation to the
    section 117 B factors.

Decision.

A material error of law has been demonstrated by the respondent in the
decision of Judge of the First-tier Lea. Consequently, that decision
allowing the appellant's appeal under the immigration rules cannot stand.
The appeal is remitted to the first-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.



3rd September 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly





Directions

List for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal should be concluded within one and a half hours.

The appellant's representative should prepare up-to-date bundles. The
appellant's representative should consider whether family life within the
meaning of article 8 is engaged.

A presenting officer should attend.

There is no need for an interpreter.




3rd September 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly



