
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/06670/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5th September 2019                   |On 13th September 2019              |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                               Alikhalil Abadi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Dr E Mynott of Lattitude Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision  of  Judge  Mark  Davies  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the  FTT)  promulgated  following  a
    hearing on 10th June 2019.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the  basis  of  his  relationship  with  a  British
    citizen.

 3. The application was refused  on  26th  March  2019.   In  refusing  the
    application  the  Respondent  considered  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM,   not
    accepting that there would be insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
    continuing outside the UK.

 4. The Respondent considered paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, not accepting that there would be very significant obstacles  to
    the Appellant's integration into Sierra  Leone.   The  Respondent  then
    considered whether there were any exceptional circumstances which would
    justify granting leave to remain with reference to  Article  8  outside
    the  Immigration  Rules  and  found  there  were  no  such  exceptional
    circumstances.

 5. The Appellant appealed to the FTT and having heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and his partner, the judge dismissed the appeal on Article  8
    grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. The grounds are briefly summarised below.

 7. Firstly, it was submitted the judge had applied the wrong legal test in
    considering whether the Appellant should return to Sierra Leone to seek
    entry clearance.  The judge at paragraph 40 found that if it would take
    six months for the application for entry clearance to be processed that
    would  not  lead  to  undue  hardship.   It  was  submitted  that   the
    appropriate test was not whether this would cause  undue  hardship  and
    the judge should have considered whether it would be reasonable for the
    Appellant to leave the UK and seek entry clearance.

 8. Secondly, it was submitted that the judge had erred in law  by  failing
    to take into account witness and other evidence that  was  before  him.
    At paragraph 40 the judge recorded that no evidence had been put before
    him as to why the Appellant, who is fit and healthy, could  not  return
    to Sierra Leone on a  short-term  basis  to  make  an  entry  clearance
    application.  The judge had failed to take into account the submissions
    made on the Appellant's  behalf  at  paragraph  34  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable for  him  to  return  to  Sierra  Leone  to  make  a  visa
    application, as he had been in the UK for fifteen  and  a  half  years,
    which is the majority of his life.  It was submitted  that  he  had  no
    home, family or friends in Sierra Leone, and he supported  his  partner
    in the UK who suffers back problems.

 9. Thirdly, it was submitted that the judge materially  erred  in  law  by
    failing to consider the Appellant's private life claim  with  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant had  lived
    in the UK for in excess of fifteen years and had a strong private  life
    claim which the judge had failed to consider.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

10. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Pooler  in  the  following
    terms:

         "It is arguable that the judge failed to  consider  the  Article  8
         appeal first  by  reference  to,  or  through  the  prism  of,  the
         Immigration Rules and so  failed  to  direct  himself  to  consider
         whether the Appellant  met  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or
         paragraph  276ADE,  which  would  have  entailed  consideration  of
         whether there would be insurmountable obstacles to the continuation
         of family  life  abroad,  or  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
         Appellant's integration into Sierra Leone.

         All grounds may be argued."

    Following the grant of permission to appeal directions were issued that
    there should be an oral hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain
    whether the FTT had erred in law such that the decision should  be  set
    aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Mr Tan indicated at  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  that  it  was
    accepted that the judge had materially  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    consider paragraph 276ADE.  It was however contended that the judge had
    made adequate findings  in  relation  to  family  life  and  while  the
    decision would need to be remade  in  relation  to  private  life,  the
    findings in relation to family life could be preserved.

12. Dr Mynott relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal, and the grant of permission by Judge Pooler.

My Findings and Conclusions

13. The concession made on behalf of the Respondent  that  the  failure  to
    consider paragraph 276ADE amounts  to  a  material  error  of  law  was
    rightly made.  The grounds of appeal and the skeleton  argument  before
    the FTT make specific reference to  paragraph  276ADE,  and  the  judge
    should have analysed this aspect of the appeal, and made findings  upon
    it.

14. I am persuaded that  the  judge  adopted  an  incorrect  approach  when
    considering this appeal.  The correct approach is referred to by  Judge
    Pooler in that there should have  been  reference  to,  or  the  appeal
    should have been considered through the prism of the Immigration Rules.



15. Both the grounds of appeal to the FTT and the skeleton  argument,  made
    reference to EX.1 and insurmountable obstacles.  This had  specifically
    been considered by the Respondent in  refusing  the  application.   The
    judge, in my view, does not consider EX.1.(b) and does  not  adequately
    consider whether there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing in Sierra Leone.

16. There are some mistakes in the decision.  At paragraph 7 it would  seem
    that reference to the Appellant arriving in the  UK  in  December  2013
    should read December 2003.  At  paragraph  39  the  reference  to  2014
    should be 2004, and at paragraph 45  the  reference  to  the  Appellant
    suffering from a back condition should be a reference  to  the  Sponsor
    suffering from that condition.

17. Mr Tan submitted that paragraph 45 dealt adequately with insurmountable
    obstacles.  I am afraid that I disagree.  The  judge  makes  a  finding
    that "no evidence has been put before me that she could not  live  with
    the Appellant in Sierra Leone."  This is a reference  to  the  Sponsor.
    It is not accurate to say that no evidence was  submitted.   There  was
    evidence, and if the judge found the  evidence  to  be  inadequate,  he
    should have said so, and provided reasons for that finding.

18. In my view the correct approach when considering this appeal would have
    been to consider firstly EX.1, and whether insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the UK existed, taking into account  the
    definition of insurmountable obstacles contained in  EX.2.   Thereafter
    there should have been consideration of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and if
    it was found that the Appellant was unsuccessful  in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules, there should have been consideration as  to  whether
    there  were  any  exceptional  circumstances  which   would   lead   to
    unjustifiably harsh consequences.

19. I am persuaded that the decision is unsafe and therefore  must  be  set
    aside.  Both representatives agreed that if the decision was set  aside
    in its entirety, it would be appropriate to remit the  appeal  back  to
    the FTT to be heard again.

20. Having considered paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements I find myself  in  agreement.   This  is  because  there  is
    substantial judicial fact-finding that needs to be made.

21. The appeal is therefore remitted to the FTT to be heard afresh with  no
    findings preserved.  The appeal is to be heard by an  FTT  Judge  other
    than Judge Mark Davies.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT disclosed a material error of law and is set  aside.
 The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to the  FTT  to  be
heard afresh with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

There has been no application for anonymity and I see no  need  to  make  an
anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             5th September 2019

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The issue of any fee award will need to be  considered
by the FTT.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             5th September 2019

