
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
HU/06141/2015

                                                  HU/06145/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 31st August 2017                      | On 25th September 2017             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                           yathurshini loGenthiran
                         Savithirithevi logenthiran
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Proudman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Adio promulgated on 8 December 2016, in which the  Appellants'  appeals
    against the decisions to refuse their applications for entry  clearance
    to the United Kingdom dated 13 August 2015 were dismissed.

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Sri Lanka, born on 17 June 1997  and  4
    December 1960 respectively and are mother and daughter.  The Appellants
    sought entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  to  join  Mr  Velautham
    Logendiran, (the "Sponsor"),  their  father/husband,  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 13 August 2015 on  the  basis
    that not all of the required specific documents set out in Appendix FM-
    SE had been provided in relation to the financial requirements set  out
    in Appendix FM.  Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
    was considered but entry clearance  was  not  granted  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules on that basis.

 4. Judge Adio dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 8 December
    2016 under the Immigration Rules.  The Appellants had accepted that not
    all  of  the  specified  documents  had  been  submitted   with   their
    application, they were provided at  the  hearing  but  not  taken  into
    account given that the evidence had not been before the Entry Clearance
    Officer.  No  compelling  circumstances  were  found  to  consider  the
    Appellants' circumstances outside of the Immigration Rules.

The appeal

 5. The Appellants appeal on four  grounds,  which  can  be  summarised  as
    follows.  First, the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  in  failing  to
    consider material evidence, namely, specified documents submitted after
    the decision under appeal.   Secondly,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in not considering that the Respondent should have applied
    the evidential flexibility  rule  to  request  the  missing  documents.
    Thirdly, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  engage  with  the
    evidence and submissions as to why his salary  paid  in  cash  was  not
    deposited in full in his bank account.  Finally,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred  in  failing  to  consider  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Brunnen on 7 July 2017 on all
    grounds.  In addition, Judge Brunnen noted that it  was  arguable  that
    the Judge erred in dismissed the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    given that the only  ground  of  appeal  under  section  84(2)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was that the decision  was
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 7. At the hearing, Ms Proudman for the Appellant  relied  on  the  written
    grounds of appeal, although she accepted that it  was  paragraph  D  of
    Appendix FM-SE which potentially  applied  for  evidential  flexibility
    (rather than paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules  relied  upon  in
    the written grounds) and conceded that this  could  not  have  actually
    been applied by the Respondent as the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules in any event as his  salary  paid
    in cash was not deposited in his bank account.  However, she maintained
    the appeal on the basis that there was a failure  to  engage  with  the
    evidence of  why  that  was  the  case,  which  would  be  relevant  to
    consideration of the human rights  claim  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 8. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tarlow relied on the rule  24  response
    and emphasised that the fact that the Sponsor's salary was not paid  in
    to his bank account was fatal to the Appellants' applications under the
    Immigration Rules.  The circumstances of this employment and use of the
    cash was considered by the Judge in paragraph 10 of  the  decision  and
    there is no error of law on these grounds.  Further, it was open to the
    Judge to find the evidential flexibility rules did not  apply  to  this
    case.

 9. In relation to consideration of Article 8 outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, reasons were given as to why this was not pursued in the  First-
    tier Tribunal which disclose no error of law.  Mr Tarlow invited me  to
    set aside the decision dismissing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules (which was not a ground of appeal) and substitute the decision to
    dismiss the claim on human rights grounds.

Findings and reasons

 1. Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provides
    that a person may appeal to the Tribunal where the Secretary  of  State
    has decided to refuse a human rights claim and pursuant to  section  84
    of the same, the only ground of appeal against such a decision is  that
    the removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would be  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  It was a material  error
    of law  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  consider  and  dismiss  the
    Appellants' appeals under the Immigration Rules as  there  is  no  such
    ground  of  appeal  against  the  decisions  under  challenge.   It  is
    incorrect for the Judge to have stated in paragraph 10 of the  decision
    that the only issue in the appeal is whether  the  Appellants  met  the
    financial  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.    Although   the
    Immigration Rules are a relevant consideration in  determination  of  a
    human rights appeal, whether or not a person meets the requirements  is
    not determinative.  The whole  premise  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    approach to these appeals was in error by focusing on  the  Immigration
    Rules and not on Article 8 as a human rights appeal  and  the  decision
    must be set aside for that reason alone.  The  appeal  is  allowed  for
    essentially the same reasons on the fourth ground of  appeal  as  well,
    that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred  in  law  in  failing  to
    consider  the  Appellants'  human  rights  appeals   outside   of   the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. Although the appeal succeeds for the reasons set out above, I go on  to
    consider the remaining grounds of appeal against the Immigration  Rules
    part of the decision as these  may  still  be  relevant  to  the  fresh
    determination on human rights grounds.

 3. The first ground of appeal  concerns  the  ability  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  to  consider  post-decision  evidence  in   entry   clearance
    applications.  Judge Adio referred in paragraph 11 of his  decision  to
    the requirements of Appendix FM-SE  for  specified  documents  and  the
    evidential flexibility provisions in paragraph D which require an Entry
    Clearance Officer to consider only those documents submitted  with  the
    application unless specified conditions are met.  In  paragraph  11  he
    went on to state "... my jurisdiction relates to the  evidence  at  the
    date of decision for ECO cases however the specified evidence must have
    been submitted at the date of  application."   There  is  no  authority
    given for this statement  and  it  is  not  supported  by  the  current
    applicable provisions in Part V of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, nor by the requirements  set  out  in  Appendix  FM-SE
    itself.  The statement has some similarity to the earlier provisions of
    section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  which
    was repealed  from  20  October  2014,  although  even  this  was  only
    applicable to Points Based System applications and not to  applications
    for entry clearance of family members under Appendix FM.

 4. Section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  governs
    matters to be considered by the Tribunal which in the  present  appeal,
    would include specified documents not submitted with the  applications.
    Although this would appear to have the  effect  that  a  person  in  an
    application such as  this  would  have  the  opportunity  to  remedy  a
    defective application by the later submission of required  evidence  in
    the course of his or her appeal, the current statutory provisions allow
    for this as there is no  longer  any  restriction  in  Part  V  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on consideration  of  such
    evidence submitted post-decision.  Such evidence can potentially  still
    meet the requirements of Appendix FM-SE if it covers the  correct  time
    period set out therein.

 5. The second ground of appeal in relation to evidential  flexibility  was
    effectively conceded at the hearing on behalf of the  Appellants.   The
    First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in failing to  consider  whether
    the Respondent should have applied evidential flexibility when deciding
    on the application, as the provision in paragraph D of  Appendix  FM-SE
    of the Immigration Rules could not apply to the Appellants in this case
    as there was another reason why their application  was  bound  to  fail
    under the Immigration Rules - namely that because the Sponsor's  salary
    was paid in cash and not deposited in his  bank  account  in  full,  he
    could not establish the required salary level.

 6. The third ground of appeal, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider the reasons why the Sponsor's salary was not deposited in full
    in his bank account is not of itself a material error of law.   It  may
    be an argument that the Appellants wish to advance in  the  context  of
    their human rights appeal outside of the Immigration Rules, but that is
    not the basis of the ground of appeal as drafted which was directed  at
    the, albeit incorrect approach, of the First-tier Tribunal to  consider
    this as an appeal against the decision on the basis that it was not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.  In any event, as  the  decision
    is set aside and remitted for the reasons already given, this ground of
    appeal is not material.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  it  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for fresh determination by any Judge except Judge Adio.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed
         [pic]         Date         22nd September 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

