
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06051/2016
     HU/06055/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 December 2017                       |On 5 January 2018                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Om bahadur upreti
                               Mrs amina miya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The decision under challenge in this case is  that  by  Judge  Abebrese
    dated 27 July 2017 allowing on human rights grounds the appeal  of  the
    respondent  (hereafter  the  claimant)  against  the  decision  of  the
    appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State  or  SSHD)  to  refuse  his
    application for leave to remain.

2.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal submit first of all that the  judge  erred
    in law in concluding that the SSHD had not shown that the claimant  had
    used deception in relying on an ETS/TOEIC English  language  test.   It
    was  contended  secondly  that  this   error   coloured   the   judge's
    proportionality assessment.

3.   I find no merit in the SSHD's first ground.  The  grounds  allege  that
    the judge failed to appreciate that the SSHD  had  met  the  evidential
    burden and failed to make adequate findings in respect of an "innocent"
    explanation: "There is no innocent explanation when  anyone  who  takes
    the test is required to show identification as ETS have to  verify  the
    [claimant] via an official document."  The first difficulty  with  this
    ground is that the judge does not say or imply anything to  the  effect
    that the SSHD had not discharged the evidential burden.   Further,  the
    judge's reference in paragraph 22 to the case of Kadir ([2016] UKUT 229
    (IAC) and to the respondent's generic evidence in that case  being  "of
    general application" would, if anything, suggest  that  the  judge  was
    clearly aware of the Upper Tribunal's  view  that  the  SSHD's  generic
    evidence  discharged  the  evidential  burden  of  proof.    A   second
    difficulty is that the judge clearly treated as  central  to  the  case
    whether, on the facts of  this  case,  the  claimant  had  provided  an
    innocent explanation.  At paragraphs 18 - 20 he recorded the claimant's
    evidence as follows:

         "18. He did not sit the TOEIC as he was told that it was  necessary
             for him to take the examinations  because  he  already  had  a
             qualification at level 5 Diploma in  Business  Management  and
             this was acceptable as an equivalent to the  English  language
             requirement and the University of West  London  then  provided
             him with a Confirmation of Acceptance of Studies (CAS).

         19.  The appellant was then informed  by  the  University  that  he
             would not be able to take his remaining  modules  because  his
             name was on a list stating that his TOEIC was invalid.


         20.  The appellant in cross examination repeated these  points  and
             he explained further why it was not necessary for him to  take
             the TOIEC test.  He stated that he had never heard of  Cauldon
             College neither  had  he  ever  been  to  that  College.   The
             appellant gave evidence that he had  had  sight  of  the  test
             certificate and he could not explain how his personal  details
             were  on  the  test  certificate.   Unfortunately   the   test
             certificate  was  not  produced  by  the  respondents  at  the
             hearing."

4.   At paragraph 21 the judge noted  the  Presenting  Officer's  submission
    that the claimant had not provided a plausible reason to show  how  his
    personal details had been used by another person.  At paragraph 22  the
    judge held that he did not accept this as in his assessment  he  "found
    the evidence of [the claimant] to be credible [and  that]  the  details
    that were found in the test certificate did not necessarily  mean  that
    he took the test ...."  At paragraph 23 he concluded:

         "23. I find the first appellant to be credible when he states  that
             he did need to take the test because he already had a level  5
             Diploma which the University of West London  were  content  to
             accept in place of any other test.  In  this  instance  it  is
             likely that the information of the first  appellant  was  used
             for fraudulent purposes."

5.   In my judgement, it was open to the  judge  to  accept  the  claimant's
    explanation and to consider that in the claimant's individual case  the
    claimant's explanation was plausible.  Indeed not only did the claimant
    have good command of English but at the time he  was  alleged  to  have
    taken the test - on 19 November 2013 - he still had  student  leave  to
    remain and very shortly after - on 6 July 2014 - he was granted further
    leave to remain in the same capacity.   In  such  circumstances  it  is
    difficult to understand why the claimant needed to take a TOEIC test.

6.   The SSHD's failure  to  establish  an  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    treatment of the deception issue somewhat weakens the second ground  of
    challenge, since  it  cannot  be  said  any  longer  that  the  judge's
    proportionality  assessment  was  "coloured"  by  error  regarding  the
    deception issue.  It must be said, however, that the judge's  treatment
    of the proportionality assessment was at the very least incomplete.  At
    paragraph 25 the judge stated:

         "25. I find that the decision of respondent will interfere with the
             private and or family  life  of  both  the  first  and  second
             appellant and that it is likely  to  have  consequences  of  a
             grave nature.  The decision is not in accordance with the  law
             because inadequate weight was given to explanation provided by
             the appellant.   The  decision  is  also  not  in  the  public
             interest   because   the   appellant   has   an    appropriate
             qualification in English which was approved by the  University
             of West London.  In the  circumstances  the  decision  is  not
             proportionate."

7.   On the face of the SSHD's ground this treatment was inadequate  because
    the  judge  does  not  expressly  identify  any  exceptional/compelling
    circumstances or show he had weighed in the balance the fact  that  the
    claimant's stay in the UK has been precarious and had not shown if  the
    claimant and his wife could not continue their family  life  in  Nepal.
    Ordinarily such omission would very likely lead me to find  a  material
    error of law.  However, it is  clear  that  in  this  case  there  were
    unusual circumstances underlying the claimant's decision to  apply  for
    leave to remain on human  rights  grounds.   His  correspondence  shows
    clearly that he only wished to remain in the UK to continue his studies
    but was prevented from doing that because he did not have  a  CAS.   He
    could not get a CAS because the SSHD had  alleged  he  used  deception.
    His application and his grounds of appeal are careful to set out limits
    to his claim that he be granted further leave.  Seen in that context, I
    read  Judge  Abebrese's  cursory  treatment  of   the   proportionality
    assessment as being based on a recognition that, but for the deception,
    the claimant had a legitimate expectation he would be able to  continue
    to obtain leave as a student.  In discussions at the  hearing  Mr  Nath
    did not dispute the claimant's student credentials.  In  these  unusual
    circumstances, I conclude that the judge's  proportionality  assessment
    was not vitiated by legal error.

8.   I would add that if I had found the judge's proportionality  assessment
    legally erroneous, and gone on to re-make the decision,  I  would  have
    attached very significant weight to the fact that, absent the deception
    allegation, the claimant  had  realistic  prospects  of  success  in  a
    further student application.  However, in very likely going on to allow
    the appeal I would have borne closely in mind s.8 of the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998 and the requirement to afford an "appropriate remedy".   Given
    the claimant's own statement that he only sought  further  leave  as  a
    student, I would have encouraged the SSHD to  grant  further  leave  to
    remain only on a limited basis subject to the claimant  being  able  to
    show that he could meet all the requirements  of  the  Rules  governing
    students.  I would not have considered a free-standing grant  of  leave
    appropriate in his case.

9.   Since the judge did not turn his mind to the issue of remedy it may  be
    that the observations I have just made remain pertinent to what  action
    the SSHD elects to take in light of my upholding of that decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: [pic]

Dr H H Storey                                    Date: 4 January 2018

