
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06569/2019 (P)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 July 2020                    |On 6 August 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                 IQBAL KABIR

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Mr R Sharma of Counsel instructed by Shah Jahal
                    Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


           Background


        1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
           appeal to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin  sitting
           as a First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  3  March  2020  against  the
           determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Talbot,  promulgated
           on 28 October 2019 following a  hearing  at  Hendon  Magistrates
           Court on 7 October 2019.

        2. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on 9 October  1980.
           He appeals on human rights grounds against the  refusal  of  the
           respondent to grant his  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
           remain made on the basis of long residence.

        3. The judge considered  what  he  saw  as  a  crucial  issue:  the
           validity of the application under the rules and whether  it  was
           also a human rights application  (at  10).  He  found  that  the
           application could only be considered on a  human  rights  basis,
           that the 276B application was invalid and he went on to  dismiss
           the appeal having found that the decision to  interfere  in  the
           appellant's private life was a proportionate response.

        4. The grounds for permission argue that the  judge  was  wrong  to
           find that  the  application  was  invalid,  that  he  failed  to
           consider the Home Office guidance on the making of  applications
           and that he should have made a  finding  on  the  allegation  of
           deception. Permission was granted on all grounds.



           Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters


        5. The matter was due to be listed for a hearing at Field House but
           due to the Covid-19 pandemic and the need  to  take  precautions
           against its spread, this did not happen and directions were sent
           to the parties on 18 May 2020. They were asked  to  present  any
           objections to the matter being dealt with on the papers  and  to
           make any further submissions on the error of  law  issue  within
           certain time limits.

        6. The Tribunal has received written submissions from both parties.
           I now consider the matter.

        7. In doing so I have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
           Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment  of  Osborn  v
           The Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note
           No 1 2020: Arrangements during the Covid-19 pandemic  (PGN)  and
           the Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction  (PPD).  I  have
           regard to the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of
           the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being  "to
           enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly".
           To this end I have considered that dealing with  a  case  fairly
           and  justly  includes:  dealing  with  it  in  ways   that   are
           proportionate to the importance of the case, the  complexity  of
           the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking
           flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable,
           that  the  parties  are  able  to  participate  fully   in   the
           proceedings; using any special expertise of the  Upper  Tribunal
           effectively; and avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with
           proper consideration of the  issues  (Rule  2(2)  UT  rules  and
           PGN:5).

        8. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and to all the
           evidence  before  me  before  deciding  how  to   proceed.   The
           respondent has not  raised any objection  to  the  matter  being
           considered on the papers. The appellant's submissions appear  to
           agree to the error of law  matter  being  determined  without  a
           hearing provided that it is decided in the  appellant's  favour.
           Both sides express the view that an oral (remote) hearing  would
           be necessary for any re-making of the decision.

        9. A full account of the facts are set out in those papers and that
           the issue to be decided is straightforward. There are no matters
           arising from the papers which would require clarification and so
           an oral hearing would not be needed for  that  purpose.  I  have
           regard to the importance of the  matter  to  the  appellant  and
           consider that a speedy determination of this matter  is  in  his
           best interests. I am satisfied that I  am  able  to  fairly  and
           justly deal with this matter on the papers before me and  I  now
           proceed to do so.



           Submissions


       10.  The  appellant's  submissions  are  dated  21  May  2020.   The
           respondent replied on 17 June 2020, having obtained an extension
           of time. To date there do not appear to have  been  any  further
           submissions from the appellant.

       11. The appellant argues in his submissions that the judge was wrong
           to suggest that an application under paragraph 276B was distinct
           from a human rights claim. It  is  pointed  out  that  the  Home
           Office guidance  on  rights  of  appeal  confirms  that  certain
           applications, including those under 276B, are to be  treated  as
           human rights claims. It is submitted that the judge was in error
           to consider the human rights claim to be mutually exclusive from
           an application under  the  said  paragraph.  This  was  relevant
           because the rules were a starting point for the consideration of
           article 8 and the issue of whether the  appellant  satisfied  an
           immigration rule would, therefore, be the starting point for the
           consideration of his human rights claim. The judge had erred  by
           failing to consider whether the decision reached on the 10  year
           claim was correct.

       12. It is also argued that the judge erred in failing to resolve the
           issue of deception. The submissions conclude by maintaining that
           unless the respondent accepted that there were  material  errors
           requiring the determination to be set aside, the issues in  this
           appeal were inappropriate for a paper decision. It is  submitted
           that a further hearing would be necessary were the  decision  to
           be set aside.

       13. Mr Deller's submissions rightly  and  fairly  concede  that  the
           judge's determination contains errors of law such that it cannot
           stand. There is agreement with Counsel's  submissions  that  the
           judge had erred by conflating the questions of whether  a  valid
           application had been made and whether a human rights  claim  had
           been made. The judge's approach to the assessment of  article  8
           is also accepted as erroneous, given his decision to exclude any
           consideration of the relevance of  eligibility  under  paragraph
           276B. It is pointed out that the allegations  of  deception  are
           relevant to the consideration as a whole. Mr Deller agrees  that
           some  form  of  a  substantive  continuance  hearing  would   be
           required.



           Discussion and conclusions


       14. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds  for  permission
           and the submissions made by both parties. I  am  satisfied  that
           for the following reasons  the  judge's  determination  contains
           errors of law and that his decision is unsustainable.

       15. It is plain and the parties agree that the judge  was  wrong  to
           have found that the paragraph 276B application was  invalid  and
           that it and an article 8  claim  were  mutually  exclusive.  The
           respondent's guidance on rights of appeal, to  which  the  judge
           referred, confirm that a 276B application is to be treated as  a
           human rights claim. It was therefore incumbent upon the judge to
           consider whether  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  an
           immigration rule when commencing his  assessment  of  the  human
           rights claim. This did not happen here.

       16. Given that the judge should have considered the rules, he  would
           also have been required to consider the allegation of  deception
           which indeed is relevant to the assessment of  the  claim  as  a
           whole. This matter was not resolved and needs to be considered.

       17. This is an appeal where the appellant has not had a fair hearing
           of all the relevant issues and for that reason I set  aside  the
           determination in its entirety and remit it back  to  the  First-
           tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing and for a decision to be  made
           on all issues. Directions  will  be  issued  by  the  First-tier
           Tribunal in due course.



           Decision


       18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  and  shall
           be re-made on all issues by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.



           Anonymity


       19. There has been no request for an anonymity order  at  any  stage
           and I see no reason to make one.






      Signed




        R. Keki?

      Upper Tribunal Judge




      Date: 29 July 2020




