
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06632/2018
                                                               HU/11272/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 23 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                               mr parjit singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  Entry Clearance Officer - ukvs sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Barnfield, Counsel instructed by Bedfords
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of India who was born on 15 June  1984.  He
    appeals against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox
    promulgated on 14 May 2019.

 2. Curiously, there are two appeals  before  me.   Of  this,  in  granting
    permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge E.M. Simpson had this to say:

         "These linked appeals concerned the  same  appellant  who  appealed
         against two separate ECO decisions, however it  appeared  from  the
         Decision that by the time of hearing the parties  agreed  that  one
         ECO decision was materially under appeal  i.e.  the  later  one  of
         30/04/2018, against which the appellant appealed on 17/05/2018. Why
         in the  foregoing  circumstances  either  the  respondent  had  not
         withdrawn the earlier decision of  22/02/2018  or  the  appellant's
         earlier appeal, was not amplified. Save to state that  it  appeared
         that for all practical purposes that  when  determined  the  linked
         appeals  sole  focus  was  upon  the  substance  of  appeal  number
         HU/11272/2018 in  which  so  far  as  the  Immigration  Rules  were
         concerned there had been agreed inter partes that  the  sole  issue
         had been under Rule 320 (11)"

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox dismissed the appellant's appeals against
    the decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer  (supported  by  a  review
    conducted by the Entry Clearance Manager) to refuse leave to enter  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge dealt with the two appeals together  on  the
    assumption that appeal number HU/11272/2018 (the  later  decision)  was
    the only one needing a decision.  This was a decision made by the Entry
    Clearance Officer on 30 April 2018 by applying what he considered to be
    the terms of paragraph 320(11).  These are stated as follows  and  they
    are the reasons why a decision to refuse entry clearance may be made:-

         "(11) where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant
             way to frustrate the intention of the Rules by:

             (1)  overstaying; or

             (2)  breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

             (3)  being an illegal entrant; or

             (4)  using deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
                  leave to enter or remain or in order to  obtain  documents
                  from the Secretary of State or a third party  required  in
                  support of the application (whether successful or not);

             and  there  are  other  aggravating  circumstances   such   as
             absconding,   not   meeting   temporary    admission/reporting
             restrictions or bail conditions using an assumed  identity  or
             multiple identities, switching nationality,  making  frivolous
             applications  or  not  complying  with  the   re-documentation
             process".

    It is those final words and whether there are aggravating circumstances
    which were the subject of the  judge's  consideration.   Those  factors
    have been given further consideration in  the  case  of  PS  (paragraph
    320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT  440  where  Kenneth
    Parker J said at paragraph 14:-

         "The Entry Clearance Officer, in making the  decision  of  refusal,
         refers nowhere to the guidance  under  paragraph  320(11).   It  is
         therefore wholly unclear whether the Entry  Clearance  Officer  has
         addressed his mind to the relevant question, namely whether in  the
         circumstances of this case Mr S's breach of UK immigration law  was
         sufficiently aggravating so as to justify the refusal.  It seems to
         us that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  should  have  specifically
         recognised that Mr S had voluntarily left the United  Kingdom  more
         than twelve months ago with a view to regularising his  immigration
         status.  There was no question but that the marriage was a  genuine
         one.  If the aggravating circumstances are  not  truly  aggravating
         there is in this context a serious risk that those in the  position
         of Mr S will simply  continue  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
         unlawfully and will not seek to regularise their status as  he  has
         sought to do.  The effect then is likely to  be  counter-productive
         to  the  general  purposes  of  the  relevant  rules  and  to   the
         maintenance of a coherent system of immigration".

    Those were the principles that the judge was required to apply.

 4. In granting permission to pursue this appeal before the Upper  Tribunal
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge said permission is granted because:-

         "(i) there was materially arguable that the decision so far as  the
             judge's treatment  of  what  is  effectively  a  discretionary
             provision of the Rules, its discretionary nature barely  being
             acknowledged".

    The judge in granting permission then goes on to  point  out  that  the
    return to India of an  individual  to  apply  for  entry  clearance  to
    regularise his position is something which should be encouraged and  it
    was therefore because of the failure  to  acknowledge  a  discretionary
    element that the permission in this case was granted.

 5. There may be instances where the decision maker has a discretion.   The
    exercise of the discretion is informed by, not to say governed by,  the
    Immigration Rules as I have set  out  above.   When  the  discretionary
    element is articulated in the Immigration Rules, the discretion  is  to
    be considered in the context of the  words  of  the  Rules  themselves,
    since this is the method that the Secretary of State has himself chosen
    to direct the decision-making  process.  Hence  the  judicial  decision
    maker is entitled to follow and to focus  upon  whether  the  appellant
    meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It will  only  be  in
    very  rare  circumstances  that  a  person  who  fails  to   meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules that the decision maker is forced
    to look and see whether there are circumstances which might amount to a
    further, residual discretionary element outside  them.   In  this  case
    there was no allegation made that there were circumstances  -  personal
    circumstances pertaining to the  appellant  himself  -  which  had  the
    quality of a discretionary element which required consideration outside
    the Rules.  Indeed the case was argued on the basis that there were  no
    aggravating  circumstances  such  as  those  identified  in   paragraph
    320(11).

 6. The appeal therefore, in my judgment, is an appeal which  is  bound  to
    fail absent any evidence of there being a  discretionary  element  that
    required consideration outside the Immigration Rules.  None was  argued
    before the judge, none was argued before me; consequently, there is, in
    my judgment, no duty upon the judge of the First-tier Tribunal to refer
    to the residual discretionary element.

 7. The circumstances therefore in which the judge came to  deal  with  the
    case were that there were alleged by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  be
    aggravating circumstances.  In doing so the judge paid  regard  to  the
    fact that the appellant had returned to his country of  origin;  indeed
    he referred in paragraph 14 of his determination to the proportionality
    exercise which often has to be conducted in cases where  the  appellant
    remains in country as identified in such cases as R (on the application
    of Chen) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Appendix  FM  -
    Chikwamba - temporary separation -  proportionality)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT
    00189.   In  other  words,  it  is  acknowledged  that  there  will  be
    circumstances where it is  disproportionate  to  require  a  person  to
    return to his country of  origin  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance when the outcome of that application will be  obvious.   This
    is of a piece with the intention of paragraph 320(11) where  return  to
    the country of origin in order to regularise one's  stay  is  a  matter
    which should be encouraged.  But that does  not  mean  it  provides  an
    inevitable outcome in favour of the applicant when  an  application  is
    made from out of the country.  In this case the judge recorded that the
    appellant had in fact left the United Kingdom,  but  he  also  recorded
    what he considered to be aggravating circumstances.

 8. The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  and  relied  upon  a  false
    identity.  He claimed asylum but absconded.  His claim was refused  for
    non-compliance. He then left the United Kingdom without  informing  the
    Secretary of State.  Although it was said that he  did  not  use  false
    documents but only used a 'false identity', I cannot  understand  quite
    how that distinction assists the appellant.   The  Secretary  of  State
    also relied upon the appellant's immigration  history,  notwithstanding
    the  fact,  as  acknowledged  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  that  the
    respondent encourages overstayers  to  return  to  their  countries  of
    origin to regularise their status.  Importantly both the  Secretary  of
    State  and  the  judge  went  on  to  find  that  there  were,  in  the
    circumstances of this case, aggravating features which distinguish  the
    appellant from the usual profile of an overstayer.  The judge  said  in
    paragraph 36:-

         "The appellant's profile goes  far  beyond  that  of  the  ordinary
         overstayer.  He accepts that he deceived the  respondent  regarding
         his identity and pursued an asylum claim which he now  accepts  was
         false.  He absconded and remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
         significant period."

 9. The judge then went on to reject his exculpatory  explanation  that  he
    was vulnerable as a result of  the  influence  of  others.   The  judge
    recorded that he was 24 years old when he left India and  he  chose  to
    liquidate his assets to facilitate  his  illegal  migration.  In  other
    words, it was always his intention to settle unlawfully in  the  United
    Kingdom.

10. Consequently, the challenge to this determination on the basis that the
    judge failed to take into account the discretionary nature of paragraph
    320(11) is misconceived.   The  judge  was  expressly  considering  the
    aggravating circumstances as he makes clear  in  paragraph  39  relying
    upon  the  false  identity  and  the  frivolous  application  as  being
    aggravating circumstances.  The only challenge that could  properly  be
    made to this determination was, in my view, a challenge to  whether  or
    not those circumstances are aggravating ones.  But  that  challenge  is
    not made, nor could it reasonably be made.

11.  The  circumstances  identified  in  the  determination  were   plainly
    aggravating circumstances framed within the words of paragraph  320(11)
    and the judge reached a decision which was lawfully open  to  him.   In
    those circumstances  I  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.

12. No separate submissions were made under  appeal  number  HU/06632/2018.
    Insofar as it remains pending, I dismiss it for the same reasons  as  I
    have given above in relation to the later appeal.

13. No anonymity direction is made.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and his determination of the appeal shall stand.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                      Date 17 September 2019
