
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/06708/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 October 2019                    |On 29 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 fengqiu wu
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms T Murshed instructed by Caveat Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of China.  She appealed to a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  of
    26 March 2019 refusing to grant leave to remain on the basis of private
    and family life in the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant was aged 80 at the time of  the  judge's  decision.   She
    had most recently entered the United Kingdom on  8  April  2018  having
    been granted leave to enter as a visitor valid  from  7  December  2016
    until 7 December 2018.  She applied within time for leave to remain.

3.   The judge noted that the appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements
    pertaining to adult dependant relatives under the Rules because such an
    application can only be made out of country, but accepted  that  E-ECDR
    2.4 and 2.5 of Appendix FM were relevant insofar as they  could  inform
    the assessment of the proportionality of the respondent's decision.

4.   The evidence of the appellant (who  did  not  give  oral  evidence  but
    provided a statement) and of the sponsor was  that  the  appellant  was
    widowed in 2016 and since then has lived alone  and  was  being  looked
    after by a neighbour.  The evidence was that the neighbour told her  in
    March 2018 that she could no longer look after  the  appellant  due  to
    work commitments and the sponsor thereafter brought  the  appellant  to
    the United Kingdom.

5.   The appellant had previously visited the United Kingdom in  April  2017
    and returned to China.  She said in  her  statement  that  her  medical
    conditions were not so bad in 2017 but had  deteriorated  subsequently.
    She said that the sponsor had been taking care of her.  She suffered  a
    cerebral aneurism and underwent surgery in 2017 and continues  to  take
    medication for high blood pressure.   She  has  mobility  difficulties,
    blurred vision, headaches and ringing in her ears.  She stated that she
    will be at the mercy of care homes and would be  abused,  just  as  her
    late husband was abused in such a setting.  She  was  reluctant  to  be
    placed in a care home because of her late husband's  experiences.   The
    sponsor said she  could  not  live  independently,  and  had  no  close
    relatives nearby who could assist her and provide her with the care she
    requires.

6.   The judge took into account the medical evidence from  the  appellant's
    doctor in China.  The doctors  had  diagnosed  osteoarthritis  of  both
    knees, hypertension and coronary heart disease.  Whilst in  the  United
    Kingdom the appellant had been seen by a GP who diagnosed her as having
    headaches with an unknown cause, possible  depression  and  knee  pain.
    There was no mention of any issues with self-care in the  GP's  letter.
    The GP noted that the appellant was always worried about  the  risk  of
    abandonment and stays at home all day and sometimes  someone  is  there
    but not always.

7.   There was also a discharge  summary  from  a  hospital  in  the  United
    Kingdom following an elective admission of  coiling  of  an  unruptured
    aneurism in September 2017 and there were said to  be  no  issues  with
    mobility, washing, dressing, incontinence or eating and drinking.

8.   The judge also took into account a report from Dr  Balu,  a  consultant
    psychiatrist.  Dr Balu said that the appellant fulfils the criteria for
    depressive disorder, moderate to severe  depression  without  psychotic
    symptoms.  He considered that in his opinion the appellant was at  high
    risk of self-neglect, and her health would deteriorate rapidly  without
    the support  of  her  immediate  family,  her  only  daughter  and  her
    grandson.  He noted that according to her family her condition had been
    worsening over the last year and she had  become  frailer,  losing  her
    ability to care for herself.

9.   The judge commented that Dr Balu did not say in what way  he  had  come
    to the conclusion that the appellant was at high risk  of  self-neglect
    other than the assertions made by her daughter and her grandson.  Apart
    from that, the only specific help mentioned in the report was that  the
    appellant had to be supported to get to  appointments  with  healthcare
    providers due to her mobility issues.

10.  The judge concluded that Dr Balu's conclusion was  heavily  reliant  on
    the reports of the sponsor and the  appellant's  grandson.   There  had
    been no objective assessment of her ability to self-care either from  a
    physical or mental health perspective.  He concluded that  what  weight
    he could place on Dr Balu's report would depend on the  reliability  of
    the witnesses' evidence.

11.  He noted from  the  sponsor's  witness  statement  that  there  was  no
    mention of help with bathing and toileting but  she  did  mention  such
    needs in her examination-in-chief.  The judge found there was  no  good
    reason for that not being in the witness statement.  He found that  the
    medical evidence from the doctors in the United Kingdom and  China  did
    not discuss objectively the level of  personal  care  required  by  the
    appellant.  There was a contrast between the sponsor's  statement  that
    the appellant was not left alone and the GP's letter that she stayed at
    home all day and sometimes someone was  there  but  always.   He  found
    there was clearly  some  exaggeration  in  the  levels  of  care  needs
    claimed.

12.  The judge however proceeded on the assumption that  the  appellant  did
    require long term personal care to perform everyday tasks.

13.  No issue had  been  raised  as  to  affordability  of  the  care  being
    provided in China.  He found from the background material that care  is
    available in China through the provision of registered  nursing  homes.
    It was argued on the appellant's behalf that such homes  do  exist  but
    that the appellant had a subjective fear of residing  in  such  a  care
    home as a result of the experience of her late husband.   It  was  also
    arguable that there was a risk of abuse.

14.  The judge noted evidence of a campaign  of  improving  the  quality  of
    nursing institutions for the elderly in 2017 in China  and  noted  that
    the medical evidence did not  specifically  refer  to  the  appellant's
    subjective fear of residing in a residential care  setting.   He  found
    that in the alternative there had been no exploration of other types of
    care available such as home care or home health.  There was nothing  to
    suggest that a paid  carer  could  not  be  engaged  to  care  for  the
    appellant in her own home.  There was no  evidence  to  show  that  her
    health had deteriorated since her arrival in the United Kingdom in 2018
    and the judge felt the conditions from which she suffered were the same
    as those for which she had been receiving treatment in  China.   Having
    concluded that care was available in China in the form of nursing  care
    and paid in home carers he felt that she could reasonably  access  care
    to the required level in China.  As a consequence she did not meet  the
    requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM.

15.  The judge also found there were not very  significant  difficulties  to
    the appellant resuming life in China given that the family  in  the  UK
    could continue to support her on return and  that  she  had  previously
    accessed medical care in China and the difficulties she might encounter
    were unlikely to be very significant.

16.  As regards Article 8  outside  the  Rules,  the  judge  considered  the
    evidence and although he said at one point at  paragraph  35  that  any
    family life that the appellant has  with  her  daughter  and  grandson,
    given that they had lived apart for nearly a decade,  was  limited,  he
    went  on  to  find  that  there  was  not  family  life,  in  that  the
    relationship between the sponsor  and  the  appellant  was  simply  the
    ordinary  relationship  between  a  mother  and  adult  daughter.    He
    considered that there was nothing to indicate that the relationship was
    anything unusual although there were elements of dependency  that  made
    it untenable for them to live separate lives, maintaining communication
    through other means.  Hence he came to the conclusion at  paragraph  39
    that the appellant had not shown that she had established  family  life
    with the sponsor within the meaning of Article 8(1).   The  appeal  was
    accordingly dismissed.

17.  The appellant sought and was granted permission  to  appeal,  first  on
    the basis that the judge had erred with regard to the  expert  evidence
    and  had  failed  to  give  proper  reasons  for  rejecting  Dr  Balu's
    conclusions and secondly had erred in  finding  there  was  not  family
    life.

18.  In her submissions Ms Murshed  relied  on  her  skeleton  argument  and
    developed the points made there.  Dr Balu's report was relevant to  the
    question of the  appellant's  emotional  and  psychological  needs  and
    whether they were reasonable.  The judge had erred in his  approach  to
    the evidence.  He had concluded that the weight he would  give  to  the
    medical report was dependent on the credibility of the evidence of  the
    daughter and the grandson and this had failed to take into account that
    it was an independent  assessment.   Dr  Balu  had  clearly  given  his
    opinion and what he  had  to  say  was  clearly  not  wholly  based  on
    information from the daughter and the grandson.  He had  clearly  heard
    from the appellant and made his own assessment.  It could be seen  from
    her statement at paragraphs 8, 11  and  12  to  have  referred  to  her
    psychological vulnerabilities, but the judge had  focused  on  personal
    care and accepted that she needed that.  Clearly Dr Balu  had  assessed
    the appellant himself and his report  was  made  on  the  psychological
    aspects.

19.  With regard to ground 2,  the  judge  applied  too  high  a  threshold.
    There was a question of real committed effective support.  There was no
    requirement of exceptionality as held  in  Singh.   The  references  to
    "untenable" set a higher test than that required,  and  the  judge  was
    inconsistent as to whether or not there was family life.

20.  In his submissions Mr Lindsay argued that the  judge  was  entitled  to
    find there was no independent assessment  of  the  key  issues  in  the
    appeal.  There was a significant volume of medical evidence  about  the
    appellant's conditions and needs since she left China.  The  key  point
    was the appellant's and the sponsor's  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    conditions had worsened since she came to the United  Kingdom  but  the
    judge noted that there was no independent evidence of that.  The  judge
    was entitled to say that  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence  from,  for
    example, a GP which was very much notable by its absence.  Questions of
    weight were for the judge.  Dr Balu had not said why there was  a  high
    risk of self-neglect.  There was some limited direct assessment at page
    68 of his report but  the  key  points  were  that  her  condition  was
    worsening and a higher risk of neglect which lacked a basis: the  judge
    was entitled to find that that was the  case.   The  judge  had  fairly
    found that the care needs could be funded in  China.   Importantly  the
    judge also found the appellant had not shown why she could  not  access
    other forms of care such as residential care or in- home care and  that
    had not been shown not to be affordable.

21.  The judge had considered all the evidence.  He  was  entitled  to  note
    exaggeration, at paragraph 18 of the decision, and that was not  solely
    directed to the sponsor's evidence but had to  be  in  respect  of  the
    evidence of the appellant and the sponsor.  He was entitled not to make
    specific reference to what the appellant had said to Dr Balu as it  was
    not repeated to the judge and so it had no more weight than any of  the
    appellant's other unsupported claims.  The report had been  dealt  with
    properly.

22.  With regard to Article 8 outside the Rules and family life,  the  judge
    attached weight to the failure to meet the requirements  of  the  Rules
    and that was right.  The use of the word "untenable" simply meant  that
    it was unable to be maintained and that was with regard to whether  the
    decision of the Secretary of State was untenable.  The judge could  not
    properly be criticised for using plain English.  The correct  test  had
    been applied in substance and it was open to him to find that there was
    no family life,  on  the  evidence.   The  relevant  factors  had  been
    considered.  The exaggeration point was relevant here also.

23.  The judge had in effect made an alternative  finding  at  paragraph  35
    that if there were any family life it was limited.  It  was  precarious
    from the outset and  was  of  relatively  short  duration  and  in  the
    awareness that the appellant might have to leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    The alternative findings showed clearly that even if there were  family
    life it was so limited that the decision remained reasonable.   If  the
    Tribunal disagreed, the findings on the nature  and  extent  of  family
    life should be preserved and  it  should  be  decided  on  the  current
    evidence.

24.  By way of reply Ms Murshed argued that it was clear from  paragraph  37
    that the judge found there was not  family  life  when  addressing  the
    question of whether Article 8 was engaged.   Paragraph  35  showed  the
    decision was confused.  The  judge  had  accepted  that  the  appellant
    required long term physical care and the issue was  whether  there  had
    been a deterioration  or  not.   The  error  lay  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's  psychological  needs.   Her  physical  issues  were   less
    relevant given what was accepted in the evidence concerning her  needs.
    The judge had failed to consider  that  the  report  was  adduced  with
    regard to the appellant's psychological and  emotional  needs  and  had
    focused it on the physical needs which had been  accepted.   The  judge
    had failed to take  into  account  Dr  Balu's  own  assessment  of  the
    appellant's needs.  The sponsor had clearly  set  out  the  appellant's
    emotional and physical needs and the judge had focused on the latter.

25.  I reserved my decision.

26.  I consider that there is a difficulty with the judge's decision in  his
    conclusion that the only  way  he  could  place  on  Dr  Balu's  report
    depended on the reliability of the witnesses' evidence.  It  is  in  my
    view sufficiently clear from Dr Balu's report that he came to  his  own
    conclusions on the appellant's condition, rather than limiting  himself
    to what had been said  to  him  by  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant's
    grandson.  He came to a  professional  judgment  as  a  consequence  of
    observing her and speaking to her.  The  judge  was  required  to  give
    weight to that rather than simply limiting it to the  extent  to  which
    the witnesses' evidence was reliable.  In that latter regard  the  only
    issue arises in connection with some exaggeration as noted  as  to  the
    level of personal care needed.  That by itself, and it seems to be  the
    only adverse point, cannot render essentially redundant the report from
    Dr Balu.

27.  This point has to be  seen  however  in  the  context  of  the  judge's
    findings that the appellant could be funded to live in a care  home  or
    in the alternative have care in her own home.   The  appellant  clearly
    has concerns about the quality of  care  homes  in  the  light  of  her
    husband's experience, and to that extent the point made in the  grounds
    arising from the Britcits case [2017] EWCA Civ  368  has  force.   But,
    even if one takes the case at its highest in terms  of  the  very  high
    risk of self-neglect and the need for support of  immediate  family  as
    concluded by Dr Balu, this does not provide an  effective  response  to
    the judge's conclusion that the appellant could be cared for in her own
    home.  Dr Balu's report does not contain reasoning that could or should
    have led the judge to conclude that the appellant would not maintain  a
    reasonable quality of life in the absence of her  family  if  she  were
    benefiting from paid care in her own home, and the judge  was  entitled
    to find that that was the case. In particular, his report says  nothing
    to indicate that the appellant could not  be  properly  and  acceptably
    looked after in her own home by a paid carer. Her concerns, as noted by
    him, were in respect of being in a nursing home, bearing  in  mind  her
    late husband's experience, but that, as  the  judge  in  effect  found,
    would not be a concern if she were being cared for in her own home.  As
    a consequence, though I consider that the judge's approach to Dr Balu's
    evidence contains flaws, overall the  finding  that  he  came  to  with
    regard to the ability of paid care to provide  adequate  provision  for
    the appellant is sound.

28.  Nor do I consider that the point made as regards the Article 8  finding
    is made out.  I think Mr Lindsay is right to say that  the  finding  at
    paragraph 35 is essentially in the alternative and the finding  of  the
    judge was that there was not family life for the reasons given, bearing
    in mind that it has lasted for a relatively short period time,  it  has
    always been on a precarious basis and  with  the  likelihood  that  the
    appellant would be returning to China.  The use of the word "untenable"
    at paragraph 38 does not in my view indicate that too high a  test  was
    applied.  It was open to  the  judge  to  find  that  the  relationship
    between the appellant and the sponsor is no more than expected  between
    adult relatives and that there  was  no  evidence  to  show  dependency
    beyond normal emotional ties.  Accordingly I consider  that  the  judge
    was entitled to find as he did in respect of Article 8 and  the  appeal
    is dismissed in that regard also.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 18 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
