
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06694/2019
                                                               hu/07861/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th September 2020               |On 5th October 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               MR SETH YEBOAH
                           MISS AKUA ACHIAA ANTWI
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

   1. The first  appellant,  a  national  of  Ghana,  appealed  against  the
      respondent's decision of 15th February 2019 to refuse his  application
      for entry clearance to the UK under paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration
      Rules as the child of a parent settled in the United Kingdom.   First-
      tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Sweet dismissed the appeal for  the  reasons
      set out in a decision promulgated on 19th February 2020.  On 23rd June
      2020, I granted the first appellant permission to appeal to the  Upper
      Tribunal on one sole ground.  In doing so, I observed:


         "...It is arguable that the judge failed to adequately address  the
         Article 8 claim in the brief reference to  the  claim  outside  the
         rules set out at paragraph [35] of  the  decision.   The  grant  of
         permission is limited to this sole ground."


   2. There is a linked appeal (HU/07861/2019) by  the  appellant's  sister,
      the second appellant, that was also dismissed by FtT  Judge  Sweet  in
      the same decision.  In that appeal, permission to appeal to the  Upper
      Tribunal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge on  6th  May
      2020.  The second appellant made her application when she was a child.




   3. The only ground of appeal available to  the  appellant  was  that  the
      respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
      1998. The judgment of the Supreme Court in  Agyarko  -v-  SSHD  [2017]
      UKSC 11 confirms that the fact that the immigration  rules  cannot  be
      met, does not absolve decision makers from carrying out a full merits-
      based assessment outside the rules under Article 8, where the ultimate
      issue is whether a fair balance has been struck between the individual
      and public interest, giving  due  weight  to  the  provisions  of  the
      Rules.


   4. I issued directions to the parties having regard to the Pilot Practice
      Direction and the UTIAC Guidance Note No 1 of 2020.  I  expressed  the
      provisional view that the hearing in the appeals  can  and  should  be
      held remotely, by Skype for Business on a date to be fixed within  the
      period 27th July 2020 to 28th August 2020.


   5. In response to the directions issued by me, the respondent has filed a
      response to the grounds of appeal under Rule  24,  dated  20th  August
      2020.  In that response, the respondent confirms that  the  respondent
      does not oppose the appeal.  The respondent accepts  that  insofar  as
      the second appellant is concerned, the  reasoning  provided  by  Judge
      Sweet as to 'sole responsibility' is inadequate, and, insofar as  both
      appellants are concerned, the judge failed to adequately  address  the
      Article 8 claims  outside  the  rules.   The  respondent  invites  the
      Tribunal to set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Sweet
      and to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.
       A copy of the rule 24 response received from the respondent was  sent
      to the appellant's solicitors on 20th August 2020.  The  Tribunal  has
      received no further communication from the appellant's representatives
      and can only  assume  the  appellants  would  not  oppose  the  course
      proposed by the respondent.


   6. In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that it is in accordance with
      the overriding objective and the interests of justice for there to  be
      a timely determination of the question whether there is  an  error  of
      law in the decision of the FtT.   Taking  into  account  the  position
      adopted by the respondent, it is entirely appropriate for the error of
      law decision to be determined on the  papers,  to  secure  the  proper
      administration of justice.


   7. The respondent, rightly in my judgement, concedes the decision of
      Judge Sweet should be set aside, and in the circumstances I need say
      nothing more about the grounds of appeal.  The respondent accepts the
      errors are material to the outcome of the appeal.


   8. I accept that the decision of the FtT is infected by an error of law
      and that the appropriate course is for the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Sweet to be set aside.  As to disposal, I agree that
      the appropriate course is for the matter to be remitted to the FtT for
      hearing de novo with no findings preserved.  I have decided that it is
      appropriate to remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal,
      having considered paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice
      Statement of 25th September 2012.  In my view, in determining the
      appeal, the nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary
      will be extensive.


   9. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


  10. The appeals are allowed and the decision of FtT Judge Sweet
      promulgated on 19th February 2020 is set aside.


  11. The appeals are remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
      with no findings preserved.




Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date:         28th September 2020
             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


