
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06603/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19th October 2017                     |On 09th November 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            mrs Wilhemina Ansong
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Harding (Solicitor), Grange & Castle Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J Bartlett, promulgated on 27th October 2016, following a hearing
    at Taylor House on 18th October 2016.  In the determination, the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana, a female, and was born on 7th July
    1963.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated  16th
    September 2015, refusing her application to remain in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of her family and private life.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that, although she had entered  the  UK  as  a
    visitor initially on 26th November 2000, she had then gone on to  marry
    a British citizen by the name of Mr Francis Katey in 2012, and that  he
    was settled in the UK and  worked  as  a  builder.   Additionally,  the
    Appellant also claims that whilst in the UK, she has been looking after
    her sister who had been diagnosed with cancer, and she helped to  bring
    up her niece and nephew.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge found the Appellant to be a credible  witness.   He  accepted
    that she came to the UK in 2000 and intended  a  visit  for  one  month
    only.  Thereafter circumstances changed where her sister was  diagnosed
    with cancer.  She began to look after her  sister  and  her  niece  and
    nephew.  The judge noted how the Appellant's nephew attended  the  oral
    hearing in support of her (paragraph 12).  However, the judge  went  on
    to hold that the Appellant had a mother and siblings in Ghana with whom
    she was in contact (paragraph 13).

 5. As far as her husband was concerned, he was a British citizen  and  the
    judge observed that, "however he is originally from Ghana and  has,  on
    his own evidence, been in the United  Kingdom  for  ten  years"  having
    spent the first 40 years of his life in Ghana where he was educated and
    had a career (paragraph 14).  He also observed that Mr Katey would  not
    want to wish to return to Ghana, "however a preference is not the  same
    as there being insurmountable obstacles" (paragraph 15).

 6. In relation to the Appellant caring after her sister  and  her  family,
    the judge observed that, "there are no such compelling circumstances in
    this case", even though it was  the  case  that  the  circumstances  do
    "demonstrate that she has a caring nature and it is without doubt  that
    the care that she gave to her sister  and  her  niece  and  nephew  was
    invaluable".  Even so, the judge held that "those  circumstances,  even
    when combined with the  sixteen  years  she  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and her marriage to a British citizen are not such  to  create
    compelling circumstances ...." (paragraph 18).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge  did  not  give  proper
    weight to the fact that the Appellant's husband was a  British  citizen
    settled in the UK  when  in  the  same  breath  he  observed  that  the
    Appellant's husband was also from Ghana and  therefore  could  relocate
    there.  Such a conclusion fell foul of the statement by Sedley LJ in VW
    (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5 where it was held that,

         "If the Appellant's partner, for example, was familiar with Uganda,
         the consequences of removal might be that much less severe; but the
         impact on the rights attending  his  citizenship  of  this  country
         would still weigh heavily in the scales." (paragraph 31).

 9. Here the judge did not weigh heavily in the scales the  impact  of  the
    rights attending upon the Appellant's husband's citizenship upon him.

10.  Second,  the  judge  failed  to  recognise  that  in  considering  the
    Appellant's "exceptional circumstances" in relation to the way in which
    she  was  looking  after  her  sister  and  family,  that   the   words
    "exceptional" did not mean "unusual or unique" (see Agyarko [2017] UKSC
    1 at paragraph 60).

The Grant of Permission

11. Permission to appeal was granted on 16th August 2017 on  the  following
    basis.  First, that the judge had accepted (at paragraph 14)  that  the
    Appellant's husband was a British  citizen  but  continued  by  stating
    that, "however he is originally from Ghana  ...".   From  this  it  was
    unclear where the judge was qualifying the fact of British  citizenship
    held by the Appellant's husband.

12. Second, the judge created doubt as the weight to  be  attached  to  the
    marriage of the Appellant to a British citizen, given the reference  at
    the outset of paragraph 14, notwithstanding the fact that the Appellant
    had been living in the UK for sixteen years, was married to  a  British
    citizen, and had been  looking  after  her  sister  and  her  children.
    Accordingly, it was argued that compelling circumstances did  exist  in
    relation to Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules,  which  was  not
    considered by the judge.

13. On 11th  September  2017,  a  Rule  24  response  was  entered  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State.  It was said that there was  nothing  on
    the face of  the  determination  to  demonstrate  that  the  judge  was
    "devaluing" the British citizenship of the Appellant's partner.  He was
    merely acknowledging the fact that the  husband  has  a  connection  to
    Ghana.   This  was  relevant  to  whether  there  were   insurmountable
    obstacles in this case.  Further, the judge has  considered  Article  8
    outside of the Immigration Rules and he had referred to Section 117B of
    the NIAA 2002.  The Appellant's adverse immigration history would  have
    weighed heavily against her.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 19th October 2017, Mr Harding, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the judge had erred in law  for
    the following three reasons.

15. First, he should have considered the position outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, both in relation to the Appellant's British citizen husband, who
    did not wish to return to Ghana,  and  in  relation  to  the  Appellant
    herself, who had been looking after her sister and her children.

16. Second, the Supreme Court in Agyarko had established  that  "compelling
    circumstances" did not mean "unusual or unique" (at paragraph 60),  and
    the tenor of the judge's determination appeared to indicate  that  this
    was how he had interpreted exceptional circumstances.  Third, there was
    no proper consideration  given  to  the  Appellant's  circumstances  in
    relation to her care of her sister, which the judge  had  described  as
    "invaluable" (paragraph 18).

17. For his part, Mr Avery submitted that there was no error of law.  There
    was nothing to indicate that the judge  had  devalued  the  Appellant's
    husband's  citizenship.   The  judge  was   merely   looking   at   the
    consequences of relocation for the Appellant to Ghana.

18. Second, as far as Article 8  was  concerned,  the  judge  did  consider
    whether there were exceptional circumstances and no doubt had  in  mind
    the observation in Agyarko (at paragraph  67)  which  had  referred  to
    "precarious family life" which required very strong circumstances.  The
    judge did take into account the fact of the Appellant looking after her
    sister and children at paragraph 18.

19. In reply, Mr Harding submitted that there was nothing in  paragraph  18
    to show that the judge  had  applied  the  test  of  Agyarko  requiring
    exceptional circumstances not to be treated  as  something  unusual  or
    unique.

Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

21. First, the judge has recognised  that  the  Appellant  provided  caring
    services to her sister and niece and nephew, "and it is  without  doubt
    that the care that she gave to her sister and her niece and nephew  was
    invaluable" (paragraph 18).  As against that, the judge has  created  a
    doubt as to the weight to  be  attached  to  marriage  with  a  British
    citizen, Mr Francis Katey, and this is  significant  in  the  light  of
    Sedley LJ's observation in VW (Uganda) that "the impact of  the  rights
    attending his citizenship of this country would still weight heavily in
    the scales" (paragraph 31).

22. Second, this doubt is exacerbated  by  the  fact  that  the  judge  has
    observed of the Appellant's husband that,  "however  he  is  originally
    from Ghana ...", because although this may simply  just  have  been  an
    observation of a factual position before the judge,  it  is  not  clear
    whether in so stating, the judge was qualifying  the  fact  of  British
    citizenship held by the Appellant's husband.  What follows in paragraph
    14 does not  help  clarify  the  matter  in  this  respect.   This  was
    important given that the Appellant's husband had been in the UK for ten
    years.

23. Finally, the fact that the Appellant gave care to a sister  and   niece
    was a matter that should have been properly weighed in the  balance  in
    relation to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules because it does not
    find a proper location within the Immigration Rules itself.

24. Ultimately, the judge had to decide whether returning to Ghana for  the
    purposes of obtaining  entry  clearance  was  disproportionate  to  the
    Appellant's rights and this evaluation was not properly conducted.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge  other
    than Judge J Bartlett so that  a  proper  evaluation  can  be  made  on
    Article 8 considerations in the light of the facts found by the  judge.



26. No anonymity order is made.

27. The appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th November 2017








