
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06091/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                           |On 7 December 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               SANAZ FARAHBOD
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes, Counsel instructed by WTB Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Alis, which was promulgated on  14  May  2018,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse to grant  her  further
    leave to remain as a spouse under the 5-year route.   The  Judge  found
    that the appellant did not qualify for further leave  to  remain  under
    the Rules, as she had not provided specified evidence to show that  she
    had passed an English Language test in  speaking  and  listening  at  a
    minimum of level A2 of the Common European Framework of  Reference  for
    Languages with a provider approved by the Secretary of State.  Although
    a letter from the approved provider showed that the appellant had taken
    the test  and  passed  it,  the  result  was  provisional  (subject  to
    confirmation), and the Judge considered that it was  proportionate  for
    the appellant to leave the United Kingdom to lodge a fresh  application
    if she felt unable to lodge one here.

The Reasons of the Grant for Permission to Appeal

 2. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,  but  was
    granted on a new application to the Upper Tribunal.  On 30 August  2018
    Upper  Tribunal  Judge  King  granted  permission  to  appeal  for  the
    following reasons:

         The only issue was  the  requirement  that  the  appellant  pass  a
         language test to level A2.  By the time of  the  hearing,  she  had
         done so and the Judge was so notified.

         Technically, she did not meet the Immigration Rules as she had  not
         had that qualification when the application was made.   The  actual
         certificate was forwarded to the Judge on  10  May  2018  when  the
         determination was completed, but in any event there was evidence at
         the time of the hearing that she had passed indeed with level 3.

         It  is   arguable   whether   in   those   circumstances   it   was
         disproportionate for the appellant to return  to  Iran  to  make  a
         fresh application.

Discussion

 3. The hearing before Judge Alis took place at Manchester on 8  May  2018.
    The Judge was shown a  report  dated  5  May  2018  from  the  approved
    provider stating that the appellant had passed the test, but that  "the
    result on this exam report form is provisional and is confirmed by  the
    issue of a certificate (or otherwise)".

 4. Mr Holmes produced documentary evidence that at 14:15 on  10  May  2018
    his instructing solicitors had faxed to the Tribunal in Manchester, for
    the attention of Judge Alis, a covering letter together with a copy  of
    an email sent to the appellant on 9 May 2018 from the approved provider
    (Trinity College). They  confirmed  that  she  had  passed  her  graded
    examination in spoken English and they gave  her  a  Unique  Electronic
    Reference number to pass on to the Home Office so that they could carry
    out an online check to verify her result.

 5. The actual certificate confirming that the appellant had achieved grade
    3 in spoken English, and thus had achieved CEFR level  A2  with  merit,
    was forwarded to the Tribunal on 10 May 2018.

 6. Although the Judge signed off his decision on 10 May 2018, the decision
    was not promulgated until 14 May 2018.

 7. The error of law challenge is primarily a reasons challenge.  Mr Holmes
    presented a number of arguments, and he referred  me  to  a  number  of
    authorities, in support of the proposition that the  Judge  misdirected
    himself in law in holding that  it  was  proportionate  to  expect  the
    appellant to return to Iran to make a fresh application.

 8. However, a key consideration which I consider has  been  overlooked  is
    that the Judge did not hold that returning to Iran was the only  option
    available  to  the  appellant  in  her  particular  circumstances.   He
    indicated that it was open to the appellant to make a fresh application
    from within the UK, once she had obtained her language certificate.  In
    such circumstances, the threatened interference with family and private
    life, even on a temporary basis, would  not  arise,  and  Article  8(1)
    would not be engaged.

 9. However, it is unnecessary for me to rule on the reasons challenge,  as
    Mr Tan graciously conceded (a) that the permission application contains
    a procedural unfairness ground and (b)  that  he  had  difficulties  in
    opposing such a ground.

10. The certificate probably did not reach Judge Alis before he signed  off
    his decision.  But he was not functus officio until  his  decision  was
    promulgated, and  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  the  certificate
    reached the Tribunal in Manchester before  14  May  2018.   Through  no
    fault of the Judge, there was procedural unfairness in that  the  Judge
    disposed of the appeal on the mistaken factual basis that the appellant
    had not provided the specified evidence to show that she qualified  for
    further leave to remain under Appendix FM, when in fact she  had  done.
    In the circumstances, the decision is vitiated by a material  error  of
    law, such that it must be set aside and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

11. I have been shown a copy of the certificate issued to the appellant  by
    Trinity College on 9 May  2018.   The  certificate  confirms  that  the
    appellant obtained CEFR  level  A2  with  merit  in  her  speaking  and
    listening test.  This corresponds to Grade 3 in the ESOL  International
    Scale, which was the grade assigned to the appellant in the exam report
    of 5 May 2018 which was placed before the First-tier Tribunal.

12. As the only issue in the appeal is the appellant's compliance with  the
    English Language requirement, the appellant has shown that the decision
    to refuse her human rights claim is unlawful under  section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by a material  error  of
law on account of procedural unfairness which arose through no fault of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge. Accordingly the decision is set  aside,  and  the
following decision is substituted: this appeal  is  allowed  on  the  ground
that the decision appealed against is unlawful under section 6 of the  Human
Rights Act 1998.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 14 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed this appeal on remaking, I have given consideration as  to
whether to make a fee award in respect of any fee which has been paid or  is
payable, and I have decided to make no fee award, as  the  appellant  needed
to bring forward further evidence by way of appeal in order  to  succeed  in
her appeal.


Signed                              Date 14 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

