
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06355/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th December 2018                          |On 9th January 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                 Nadera [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss P Heidar of AA Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan,  appeals  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  dated  7th
    April 2017 refusing her application for entry  clearance  as  an  Adult
    Dependent Relative (ADR) under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mill  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 12th July 2018.   The  Appellant  now  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    16th October 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal  is  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    refused the Appellant's application for entry  clearance  as  an  Adult
    Dependant Relative on the basis that, although medical letters had been
    supplied in support of the medical condition, there was  no  indication
    as to how long the Appellant had suffered with the  medical  conditions
    identified and no prognosis of her condition  should  she  not  receive
    operative intervention.  The Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied
    that the Appellant was unable to obtain the required level of  care  in
    Afghanistan or elsewhere other than the UK and refused the  application
    under paragraph EC-DR1.1(d) of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    with reference to E-ECDR2.5.  The Entry Clearance Manager reviewed  the
    decision after the appeal and concluded  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    demonstrated that, as a result of illness, she requires long-term  care
    to perform everyday tasks as required by E-ECDR.2.4  or  that  she  had
    established that the care  needed  is  unavailable  to  her  even  with
    practical or financial assistance in accordance with  the  requirements
    of E-ECDR2.5.

 3. At paragraph 13 of his decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted
    that the Appellant's representative indicated in  submissions  that  it
    was now accepted that the Appellant meets the provisions of E-ECDR.2.4.
     It is contended in the Appellant's  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  by  Miss
    Heidar  at  the  hearing  that  this  should  read  that  it  was   the
    Respondent's representative who had conceded that the Appellant met the
    requirements of E-ECDR2.4.   This  approach  was  not  disputed  by  Mr
    Lindsay.

 4. Accordingly, it was for the judge to determine  whether  the  Appellant
    met the test in E-ECDR2.5.  The judge made a number of findings of fact
    set out at paragraph 14.  The  judge  found  it  established  that  the
    Appellant requires 24 hour  care  and  that  there  are  no  care  home
    facilities in Afghanistan [17].  The judge found that the Appellant  is
    being cared for as a matter of fact by her daughter-in-law.  The  judge
    considered  the  evidence  that  there  is  a   significant   emotional
    detachment between the Appellant and her daughter-in-law to the  extent
    that she is being emotionally abused and is not receiving  an  adequate
    level of care but did not accept this evidence [19 to 21].   The  judge
    reached his conclusions  in  relation  to  E-ECDR2.5  at  paragraph  22
    finding that it is possible to secure the services of hired carers  for
    parts of each day together with the continued care by  the  Appellant's
    daughter-in-law and was satisfied that the Appellant's needs can be met
    in this way and that she can receive the  required  level  of  care  in
    Afghanistan.  The judge went on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules
    but found that there was nothing disproportionate about the refusal  of
    the visa application.

 5. The Grounds of Appeal contend that the  judge  erred  in  reaching  the
    conclusion that the Appellant's daughter-in-law could look  after  her.
    It is contended that this is a matter which was not  mentioned  in  the
    refusal notice and that  the  parties  should  have  been  allowed  any
    appropriate adjournment in order to avoid injustice (Kwok  On  Tong  HC
    395 para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039.  It is contended that the judge
    had not given adequate reasons why he came to this conclusion.   It  is
    contended that the daughter-in-law has six children and that, prior  to
    her fall, the Appellant was able to care for herself and was  providing
    her daughter-in-law with assistance in running the family home and that
    the Appellant had given  detailed  evidence  explaining  that  she  was
    suffering from the emotional abuse that she was  subject  to  from  her
    daughter-in-law.

 6. It is further contended that the judge failed to consider  the  medical
    evidence and in particular the report at page  33  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle stating that the Appellant's son works in the military  and  her
    daughter-in-law has six children and cannot  look  after  her.   It  is
    therefore contended that the judge erred in  saying  that  the  medical
    evidence only said that there were no family members in Afghanistan  to
    look after her.  It is further contended in this context that the judge
    erred in that he gave weight to the Sponsor's evidence  but  failed  to
    give any weight to the Sponsor's husband's evidence  who  had  given  a
    statement and oral evidence at the hearing.  It is contended  that  the
    judge's finding that the Appellant can be cared for by her daughter-in-
    law is inadequate given the statements from the Appellant and  her  son
    who explained that, following her accident, her  needs  have  increased
    and as the daughter-in-law has six children she  cannot  cope.   It  is
    contended therefore that it  was  not  limited  to  the  abuse  he  was
    receiving but also the difficulties due to her care needs following her
    accident.  It is contended that the judge's  reasons  for  finding  the
    Sponsor not credible are inadequate and speculative.

Error of law

 7. The judge made a number of relevant findings going to the  requirements
    paragraph E-ECDR2.5.  At paragraph 14(iii) the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant is not independent and requires ongoing assistance, care  and
    medical treatment and that her primary  carer  is  her  daughter-in-law
    with whom she resides.  The judge found that the medical interventions,
    treatments  and  medications  for  the  Appellant  are  accessible   in
    Afghanistan and paid for by the Sponsor who lives in the  UK  with  her
    husband and five children and whose financial  circumstances  are  such
    that they are able to travel to Afghanistan at least twice  a  year  to
    visit the Appellant and that the Sponsor proposed to employ a carer  to
    look after her mother if she were to come to the UK.  The  judge  found
    at 14(vii) the Sponsor and her husband are in a position  to  afford  a
    full-time carer for the Appellant in Afghanistan. He found at  14(viii)
    that culturally it would  be  unacceptable  for  the  Appellant  to  be
    attended on and cared for by a male carer in Afghanistan and that it is
    impossible and at 14(ix);

         "Culturally it is impossible to hire the services  of  a  full-time
         female carer in Afghanistan due to  the  expectation  that  females
         will not stay overnight elsewhere other than with their family.  It
         is however possible to hire female carers for a part  or  parts  of
         each day".

 8. The judge found that there were no care home facilities in Afghanistan.
     The judge referred to the expert report from Dr  Giustozzi  but  found
    that the report was limited in  value  as  it  fails  to  recognise  or
    discuss the de facto availability of  the  Appellant's  own  family  in
    Afghanistan and in particular her daughter-in-law.  This was a  finding
    open to the judge on the evidence.

 9. The judge also considered a report by Dr Massouda Jalal but found  that
    this  did  not  address   someone   in   the   Appellant's   particular
    circumstances as someone who has family support available.

10. The judge made findings at paragraph 19 in relation to the daughter-in-
    law finding that he was  not  satisfied  with  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant is being emotionally abused and is not receiving an  adequate
    level of care saying that this was not  supported  by  any  independent
    form of evidence.  This is an important finding because in my view  the
    Appellant has not pointed to any evidence  on  the  Appellant's  behalf
    showing that the Appellant is being inadequately cared for at  present.



11. At paragraph 20 the judge said "there is no medical evidence to support
    the assertion that the Appellant is not de facto receiving  appropriate
    care currently."  This is a finding open to the judge on  the  evidence
    too.

12. In my view paragraph 21 is crucial to the assessment of the evidence on
    this matter.   There  the  judge  referred  to  the  Sponsor's  witness
    statement and oral evidence.  The judge found that the Sponsor was  not
    a credible or reliable witness saying;

         "I found that she was vague  and  evasive  at  times  in  her  oral
         evidence and sought  to  avoid  answering  simple,  straightforward
         questions about the extent to which enquiries  have  been  made  to
         seek to  employ  a  carer.   She  repeatedly  avoided  answering  a
         question put to her about the research carried out into who may  be
         employed and could  give  no  specification  as  to  who  had  been
         contacted other than stating that it was people in her  home  area.
         When asked whether it was possible to secure the services from  any
         private hospitals  or  establishments  she  avoided  answering  the
         question on more than  one  occasion.   She  was  vague  about  the
         provision of medical treatment and  how  her  mother  accesses  the
         necessary medical appointments currently.  When  asked  whether  it
         might be possible for someone to be employed for part of  the  day,
         she referred to the fact  that  her  sister-in-law  would  find  it
         difficult because of the responsibility of looking  after  her  own
         children.  This is incredible.  She  importantly  did  not  suggest
         that this would not be possible.  The inference in her evidence  is
         that part-time day carers are available."

13. I find that it was open to the judge to make the  credibility  findings
    made at paragraph 21.  The judge heard from the  Sponsor  and  made  an
    assessment of her oral evidence based  on  the  way  she  answered  the
    questions.  The credibility finding was absolutely open to the judge on
    the basis  of  oral  evidence.   In  my  view  it  is  clear  that  the
    Appellant's case was significantly undermined  by  the  judge's  doubts
    about the credibility of the Sponsor.  The judge clearly did not accept
    the Sponsor's  evidence  that  the  required  level  of  care  was  not
    available in Afghanistan.  In my view this goes to  the  heart  of  the
    matters to be determined by the judge.

14. In my view there are no inconsistencies between these findings and  the
    earlier findings of fact at paragraph 14.  The scenario  considered  by
    the judge was that the Appellant is currently being cared  for  by  her
    daughter-in-law, that there is no evidence of inadequate  care  at  the
    moment and that the Sponsor's evidence in relation to the  options  for
    care was not credible.  The judge did not accept that the  claims  that
    there was emotional detachment or emotional abuse between the daughter-
    in-law and the Appellant and the judge gave adequate reasons for all of
    these findings.  In these circumstances it was therefore  open  to  the
    judge to go on to make the findings at paragraph 22 that  the  services
    of a day-time carer could be secured, that the Sponsor and her  husband
    were able to fund such care, that hired carers could be brought in  for
    part or parts of each day together with continued care by the daughter-
    in-law, and the needs could be met and she could receive  the  required
    level of care in Afghanistan.  In my view these were findings  open  to
    the judge in light of the credibility findings and the findings made by
    the judge on the evidence.

15. I do not accept the submission  that  the  Appellant's  representatives
    were surprised by the issue of the existing provision of  care  by  the
    daughter-in-law.  This was specifically raised by the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager who referred  to  the  Sponsor's  declaration  that  the  carer
    perpetrates emotional abuse towards the Appellant.  The Entry Clearance
    Manager noted that  these  claims  are  unsupported  by  any  objective
    evidence and that little  weight  was  attached  to  them.   The  Entry
    Clearance Manager referred to Dr Giustozzi's report noting;

         "However,  Dr  Giustozzi  fails  to  discuss  whether  he  had  any
         knowledge of  the  current  care  arrangements  in  place  for  the
         Appellant - for instance crucially who is helping her to be able to
         use  the  bathroom,  and  the  doctor  fails  to  acknowledge  this
         limitation to his extremely brief report".

16. The Entry Clearance Manager said that he was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant has  provided  a  full  picture  of  who  currently  provides
    personal care  for  her  or  corroborative  evidence  as  to  why  that
    arrangement cannot continue.  These are the very issues the judge  went
    on to consider.

17. It has not  therefore  been  established  that  the  Appellant  or  her
    representatives were treated unfairly by consideration  of  this  issue
    given that it was very much  live  in  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    review.

18. In any event I accept the submission by the Respondent that  there  was
    no indication that  the  Appellant  or  her  representative  sought  an
    adjournment or sought any further time to make any further  submissions
    in relation to this issue given that it is clear from paragraph 21 that
    this issue was very much raised in the questions to the Sponsor.

19. The second ground put forward in the Grounds of Appeal  and  reiterated
    by Miss Heidar at the hearing is  that  the  judge's  conclusions  have
    influenced his assessment under Article 8.  However, as  I  have  found
    above, the judge made no error in his approach to the assessment of the
    Immigration  Rules.   In  these  circumstances  I  see   no   criticism
    established in relation to the Article 8 ground.

20. At the hearing both representatives relied on the decision of Ribeli  v
    Entry Clearance Officer (Pretoria) [2018]  EWCA  Civ  611.   There  the
    Court of Appeal emphasised that the burden of proof is on the appellant
    and discussed the evidence as to care available  in  South  Africa.  In
    Ribeli the Court of Appeal cited from the decision in BRITCITS  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 368 where Sir Terence Etherton MR  said  the  following
    about the ADR Rules:

         "59. Second, as is apparent from the Rules and  the  Guidance,  the
         focus is on whether the care required by the ADR applicant  can  be
         "reasonably" provided and to "the required  level"  in  their  home
         country. As Mr Sheldon  confirmed  in  his  oral  submissions,  the
         provision of care in the home country must be reasonable both  from
         the  perspective  of  the  provider  and  the  perspective  of  the
         applicant, and the standard of such care must be what  is  required
         for that particular applicant. It  is  possible  that  insufficient
         attention has been paid in the past to these considerations,  which
         focus on what  care  is  both  necessary  and  reasonable  for  the
         applicant to receive in their home  country.  Those  considerations
         include issues as to the accessibility and geographical location of
         the provision of care and the standard of care. They are capable of
         embracing emotional  and  psychological  requirements  verified  by
         expert medical evidence. What is reasonable is, of  course,  to  be
         objectively assessed."

21. The issue in this appeal is whether the Appellant has established  that
    she is unable, even with  the  practical  and  financial  help  of  the
    Sponsor to obtain the required level of care in Afghanistan because  it
    is not available and there  is  no  person  in  that  country  who  can
    reasonably provide it or it is not affordable.  The judge's  conclusion
    that the  Appellant  had  not  met  that  requirement  is  in  my  view
    sustainable as it is based on findings of fact which were open  to  him
    on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 18th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 18th December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
