
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals: HU/06341/2016
                                                               HU/06345/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 October 2019                    |On 10 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  V N & I N
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr R Gibb, of D Duheric & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Cameroon, both children.   Their  father
    and mother are also citizens  of  Cameroon,  who  came  to  the  UK  as
    students, with the appellants as their dependants.

 2. The appellant's father had leave as a student until  12  October  2015.
    On 12 October 2015 he and the  children  applied  for  leave  based  on
    family and private life.  The mother of the children then had leave  as
    a student (which appears to have  remained  valid  at  least  until  28
    September 2018).

 3. The respondent declined to grant leave for reasons set out in a  letter
    dated 22 February 2016, dealing with father and both appellants.   None
    of the applications met the requirements of the immigration rules.  The
    respondent  did  not  consider  that   the   circumstances,   including
    consideration of the best interests of the children, disclosed anything
    exceptional, such that leave was warranted outside the rules.

 4. All three appealed to the FtT, stating grounds under article 8  of  the
    ECHR.   (The  appeal  of   the   appellants'   father   had   reference
    HU/06337/16.)

 5. FtT Judge Debra Clapham dismissed  all  three  appeals  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 October 2017.  The appellants' father did  not  appear
    and was not represented  at  the  hearing  before  her.   The  position
    advanced through the appellants' mother was that he disappeared  around
    December 2016.  The Judge did not accept her evidence, or evidence from
    her sister; considered that the family knew where he was; and found  it
    reasonable to expect the  present  appellants  to  return  (with  their
    mother) to Cameroon.

 6. The two appellants sought permission to appeal from the FtT on  grounds
    headed as "errors regarding long residence  of  children"  and  "errors
    regarding assessment of credibility".  The FtT refused permission.  The
    appellants sought  permission  from  the  UT,  advancing  the  original
    grounds and four further grounds.  The UT refused  permission,  on  the
    view that the FtT had applied the correct test to whether it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK, and was entitled  to
    conclude as it did on credibility. The appellants petitioned the  Court
    of Session for judicial  review  of  the  UT's  refusal,  factoring  in
    reliance on KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] 1 WLR 5273.

 7. In a joint minute parties concurred that the UT "erred in  law  in  the
    way averred in [20] of the petition".

 8. That paragraph says:

         "The UT's decision states, "The family could therefore properly  be
         expected to return to Cameroon as a unit". That is an error of law.
          The Court is not engaged in what ought to happen  in  the  future,
         having weighed up the parents' circumstances.  The FtT should  have
         judged what is reasonable for the children in isolation but against
         the real world fact that the mother was lawfully in  the  UK.   The
         FtT therefore blended the  reasonableness  assessment  against  the
         family unit.  That approach is contrary to KO."

 9. On 12 August 2019 the Vice President of the UT granted permission:

         "... in the light of the interlocutor of the Lord Ordinary and  the
         agreed position set  out  in  the  joint  minute  ...  parties  are
         reminded that the UT's task is that set out in  s.12  of  the  2007
         Act."

10. The case was accordingly listed before me on 3 October 2019.

11. In light of KO, decided after the FtT made its decision, and of  change
    of circumstances since then, the respondent conceded that the UT should
    find error of law, set aside the decision of the  FtT,  and  allow  the
    appeals.  The children's mother has in the meantime been granted leave,
    based on the position of the children, so by one route or another,  the
    same outcome would be reached.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, and the  appeals,
    as brought to the FtT, are allowed.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      Dated 4 October 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
