
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06121/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd October 2018                          |On 22nd October 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE DAVIS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                    mr mg
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tinsley, Counsel instructed by CLP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   We shall refer to the appellant throughout as MG, there having been  an
    anonymity order made in this case.  MG is an Albanian national.  On  20
    May 2016 at Wood Green Crown Court he was convicted after trial  of  an
    offence of robbery.  It is appropriate, for reasons  that  will  become
    apparent shortly, to set out the circumstances  of  that  offence  very
    briefly.  It is an offence that occurred in  the  early  hours  of  the
    morning.  The victim was a taxi driver.  The taxi driver was taking  MG
    and two others home after an evening out and in the course of that late
    night journey MG robbed the taxi  driver.   He  was  sentenced  to  two
    years' imprisonment.  The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    notified MG that a deportation order would be made under Section 32 (5)
    of the UK Borders Act 2007 unless he demonstrated he could fall  within
    one of the exceptions.   MG  claimed  deportation  would  infringe  his
    Article 8 rights.  The Secretary of State  refused  that  claim  on  27
    March 2018 and made a deportation order on the same date.  MG  appealed
    against the refusal of his human rights claim as he was entitled to do.

2.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  promulgated  on  16  May
    2018, by which time MG was living either in Germany  or  Albania.   His
    claim was certified under s.94B of the 2002 Act and he did not have  an
    in-country right of appeal. The appeal was dismissed.  He  now  appeals
    to this Tribunal with leave of the First-tier Tribunal.  His appeal  is
    not opposed by the Secretary of State because the  Secretary  of  State
    accepts  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  cannot  be
    supported.  The Secretary of State, supported by the appellant,  points
    to a number of problems with the decision. We highlight the following:-

3.   First, some 23 paragraphs of a lengthy  decision  were  taken  up  with
    discussion of sentencing guidelines and whether MG  was  wise  to  have
    contested his trial.  Not only was this  discussion  wholly  irrelevant
    but also it was littered with errors of fact and principle.  This  ill-
    informed  and  irrelevant  exposition,  in  our  judgment,   inevitably
    vitiates the conclusions reached at the end of the decision.

4.    Second,  the  Judge  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal   considered   what
    compelling  reasons  there  might  be  to   justify   overturning   the
    deportation  order.   There  was  a  focus  on  a  description  of  the
    prevailing conditions and culture in  Albania.   This  description  was
    without any evidential foundation.  It was largely irrelevant  and  not
    remotely in accordance with current in country guidance in relation  to
    conditions in Albania.

5.   Third, there was an assessment of the appellant's risk  of  reoffending
    described as low.  There  was  no  evidence  at  all  to  support  that
    finding, not least because MG himself was not present  at  the  hearing
    and gave no evidence.

6.    However,  the  fundamental  problem,  notwithstanding  all  of   those
    matters, appears from paragraph 3  of  the  decision.   This  reads  as
    follows:-

         "The simultaneous human  rights  decision  of  27  March  2017  [we
         interpose,  that  is  a  reference  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision] (at page 19) makes it clear that there is simply no right
         of  appeal  against  that  deportation  order.   At  present   that
         deportation order stands.  The grounds  of  appeal  in  this  human
         rights case state that an application  to  revoke  the  deportation
         order is made but the grounds do not  explain  how  or  where  that
         revocation  application  is  being  made;  further,  that   is   an
         application, not an appeal.  The case put to me is purely  a  human
         rights appeal."

7.   The judge went on to consider a whole raft of issues relating to  human
    rights and then reverting back to that fundamental point  made  at  the
    outset of the decision, determined that the appeal had to be dismissed.
     It follows that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  proceeded  on  a  complete
    misapprehension.  With some diffidence on behalf of  the  appellant  it
    was suggested that we could remake the decision based  on  the  factual
    findings of the judge and cure that misapprehension.  We consider  that
    not to be a tenable proposition.  The findings of  the  judge  were  so
    infected by error, both of fact and law, that it is impossible for that
    to be done.  The only possible outcome of this appeal is  that  we  set
    aside the decision pursuant to section 12 (2) (b) (i) of the Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (the "2007 Act").  We  have  regard  to
    paragraph 7 of the Practice Statement of 25  September  2012.   In  our
    view the cumulative effect of the errors deprived the parties of a fair
    hearing.  We remit the case for rehearing before a different First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

8.   We say only this in terms of the findings of  fact  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  We do not, and indeed, cannot preserve them, but we do
    note that the appellant's wife gave evidence to the Tribunal from which
    this appeal lies, as indeed did the appellant's mother.  The  Judge  in
    the First-tier Tribunal below spoke of that evidence being truthful and
    straightforward.  It will be a matter for the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    as to the extent to which he or she takes account of that, but it is  a
    matter which in our judgement should play some part in  the  assessment
    of the judge who rehears this case.

9.       The FTT  and  the  parties  need  to  consider  whether  there  are
    fairness issues arising from the certification of the case.   In  doing
    so regard should be had to R (on  the  application  of  Watson)  v  (1)
    Secretary of State or the Home Department and (2)  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Extant appeal: s94B challenge: forum) [2018] UKUT 00165.  Other  cases
    on the issue are Nixon [2018] EWCA Civ 3 and AJ  (s  94B:  Kiairie  and
    Byndloss questions) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 115. It may  be  that  the  FTT
    will send directions to the parties to address the issues  relating  to
    this appellant giving evidence via video link  prior  to  the  date  of
    hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Mr Justice Davis                        12 October 2018
