
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/06669/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for business      |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                  |
|On the 9 December 2020                       |On the 17 December 2020      |
|                                             |                             |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     M R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                     AND
                                                                   Appellant

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E. Daykin, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant

For the Respondent:    Ms A.  Everett, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction:



      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Monaghan (hereinafter referred to as  the
         "FtTJ")  promulgated  on  the  25  September  2019,  in  which  the
         appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his human  rights
         application dated 4 March 2019 was dismissed.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  his  spouse  and  her
         mental health.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
         otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
         proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
         direction applies both to the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
         Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
         court proceedings.


      3. The hearing took place on 9 December 2020, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video  as  did
         the appellant who was able to see and hear  the  proceedings  being
         conducted. There were no issues regarding sound, and no substantial
         technical problems were encountered during the  hearing  and  I  am
         satisfied both advocates were able to make their  respective  cases
         by the chosen means.

      4. I am grateful to Ms Daykin and Ms  Everett  for  their  clear  oral
         submissions.


Background:

      5. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He entered the UK on 13 to
         2011 with leave to enter granted as a Tier 4 student valid from
         January 2011 until 19 January 2015.


      6. On 12 January 2015, the appellant applied for leave to remain as a
         tearful student and was granted leave until 31 December 2016.

      7. On 23rd December 2016 he applied for leave to remain performance to
         complete his studies. On 5 September 2017 he requested to vary his
         application so that he could attend his graduation ceremony and
         then return back to his home country. That application was refused
         on 8 November 2017.

      8. On 22 November 2017, the appellant applied for leave to remain on
         the basis of his family life and private life for six months to
         help secure a place for a doctorate study at university to then
         allow him to make a Tier 4 application.

      9. On 3 April 2018, the appellant varied his application on the basis
         of his relationship with SN which he claims started in October
         2013, but they were not living together. His application was
         refused on 27 July 2018 and the decision was certified to give an
         out of country right of appeal.

     10. Following that refusal, the appellant's representatives submitted
         pre-action protocol letters and responses were made in 2018 on
         behalf of the Secretary of State where it was agreed to reconsider
         the application.


     11. That reconsideration was undertaken and on 4 March 2019 his
         application was refused.

The decision letter:


     12. The reasons given for refusing the application can be summarised as
         follows. The respondent considered his application under paragraphs
         R-LTRP of Appendix FM but considered that he could not meet the
         eligibility immigration requirements (  E-LTRP 2.1 of Appendix FM)
         because he was in the UK in  breach of immigration laws and
         paragraph EX1 did not apply.

     13. The respondent considered whether the appellant would be exempt
         from meeting certain eligibility requirements of Appendix FM
         because paragraph EX1 applied. It was accepted that the appellant
         had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner who was
         a British national and it was noted that his partner was a carer
         for mother, she works in the UK, his partner's previous
         relationship has caused her to be dishonest to her parents and by
         his partner refusing to marry someone in Pakistan her family had
         arranged resulted in threats to kill. The appellant's partner also
         claimed that she could not settle in Pakistan and therefore could
         not leave the UK.  However there was no evidence provided from
         independent sources to corroborate the claims made by the
         appellant's partner. Therefore the respondent did not accept that
         there were any insurmountable obstacles in accordance with
         paragraph EX2 of Appendix FM which means a very significant
         difficulties which will be faced by the appellant or her partner in
         continuing their family life together outside of the UK, and which
         could not be overcome or entail very serious hardship for her and
         her partner.


     14. His application was considered under the private life rules under
         paragraph 276 ADE, where it was noted that the appellant was a
         national of Pakistan who had entered the UK in 2011; it was not
         accepted that he lived in the UK continuously for 20 years,  he was
         not between the ages of 18 and under 25 having lived in the UK for
         more than half his life and was over the age of 18 and therefore
         could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1 (iii)(iv)
         and (v). As to paragraph 276 ADE(1) (vi) the respondent did not
         accept that there would be very significant obstacles to his
         integration into Pakistan if required to leave the UK because  he
         resided there  for at least  19 years of his life. He has stated
         that he spoke Urdu which is widely spoken in Pakistan and would
         help him adapt to life, socially and culturally. Consequently, he
         failed to meet the requirements of that part of the rule.


     15. The respondent did not consider that there were any exceptional
         circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to remain and considered
         the issues that had been raised as to why it would be unjustifiably
         harsh for him to return to Pakistan. The respondent took into
         account the basis of the application and that the relationship with
         the sponsor started and developed in full knowledge that his
         immigration status was not permanent. He then married his sponsor
         on 9 July 2018, nearly 2 years after his lawful leave to remain
         expired. It was considered the appellant and the sponsor were fully
         aware of his immigration status and would have been aware that they
         may not be able to continue to live in the United Kingdom. No
         evidence had been provided to show that the appellant sponsor could
         not return to Pakistan lawfully live there.

     16. The decision noted that the appellant had previously  shown that he
         was able to adapt to a different culture when he entered the United
         Kingdom and it was considered that having previously done so he
         would be well equipped to do this again to a country where he had
         spent the majority of his life.

     17. Furthermore whilst a British citizen partner who has lived in the
         United Kingdom for all of their life and may only speak English and
         may not wish to uproot and relocate halfway across the world, a
         significant degree of hardship or inconvenience does not amount to
         an insurmountable obstacle.


     18. The decision letter also made reference to entry clearance and that
         it would be open to the appellant's partner to remain in the United
         Kingdom to support any application he could make from abroad.


     19. The respondent did not find that there was any evidence to
         demonstrate that there were any" exceptional circumstances"
         established in his case.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

     20. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         leave came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Monaghan)  on  the
         16 September 2019.

     21. In a determination promulgated on the 25 September 2019,  the  FtTJ
         dismissed the appeal on human  rights  grounds,  having  considered
         that issue in the light of  the  appellant's  compliance  with  the
         Immigration Rule in question and on Article 8 grounds.

     22. The First-tier Tribunal set out the issues at paragraph [19]:

         1) whether the appellant has established that he has a genuine  and
            subsisting relationship with a partner who  was  in  the  United
            Kingdom and is a British citizen and  there  are  insurmountable
            obstacles family life with that partner continuing  outside  the
            United Kingdom and therefore paragraph EX(1) (b) applies;

         2) whether there are very significant obstacles to the  appellant's
            integration to Pakistan if he is required to go there;

         3) whether the public interest (considered under  Article  8)  does
            not require the removal of the appellant,  as  the  decision  to
            remove it would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  and
            therefore be a disproportionate interference with his article  8
            rights.

     23. The FtTJ's assessment of the issues are set out  at  [20]-[97].  He
         considered a number of issues, including the care of the  sponsor's
         mother and between paragraphs [83-88] the claim that the  appellant
         and the sponsor would be at risk of harm in Pakistan. The judge did
         not accept that  there  were  any  insurmountable  obstacles  under
         appendix FM and that their relationship could continue in  Pakistan
         if the sponsor chose to  follow  a  husband  he  was  removed.  The
         reasons he gave are summarised at [91]-[93];

             . that he had rejected the claim that the sponsor is a carer
               for her mother to the extent claimed or any alternative the
               care can be provided from other sources.
             . He did not accept the extent of the sponsor's mental health
               problems and find that if they exist at all they are mild;
             . it had not been substantiated that she or the appellant are
               or will be subject to threats to harm or kill in Pakistan on
               account of their marriage.
             . He accepted that there would be a period of adjustment of the
               sponsor who has always lived in the United Kingdom, but she
               would have the support of the appellant and several close
               family members of his who are residing in Pakistan to do
               this.
             . The sponsor could remain in contact with their own family by
               modern means of communication and visits United Kingdom by
               her to them of visits made Pakistan by her family.
             . The appellant has the qualifications and experience gained in
               the United Kingdom to be able to find work and support them
               both in Pakistan.
             . The sponsor has purchased a house in United Kingdom, but this
               could be sold to help provide funds for accommodation
               Pakistan if required.
             . The sponsor can speak and understand Punjabi as she confesses
               in that language of her mother who does not speak English (at
               [89]).


     24. As to paragraph 276 ADE(1) (vi) the FtTJ found that there were no
         very significant obstacles to his integration into Pakistan. The
         judge found that he resided in Pakistan until the age of 19, he was
         familiar with the culture, customs, and language. He also had a
         wide circle of immediate family members living there who could help
         him adjust and support him until he could find employment there
         with his qualifications and experience gained the United Kingdom.
         He could remain in contact with the sponsor by email, Skype, or
         telephone and by visits made (at [94]).


     25. When undertaking an article 8 assessment and considering the issue
         of proportionality alongside the section 117B public interest
         considerations, the judge took into account those earlier findings
         and in addition set out the following at [97]
             . the marriage was entered into at a time when the appellant
               had no leave to remain. The judge therefore placed little
               weight on the relationship when considered under article 8 .
             . The appellant can speak English
             . the appellant has the qualifications and experience not to
               become a burden on the state should be granted leave to
               remain.


     26. He concluded at [98) that the public interest in maintaining a firm
         and fair immigration control together these findings at the
         immigration rules were not met tip the balance towards removing the
         appellant. The judge found that there was nothing disproportionate
         about the decision to remove and that it would not result in
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant or the sponsor
         for the reasons set out.


     27. The FtTJ dismissed the appeal.

     28. Permission to appeal was issued and on 4 March 2020, permission to
         appeal was refused by  FtTJ Osbourne. The application was renewed
         and on the 7 May 2020 Upper Tribunal judge Rintoul granted
         permission stating:-

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal made factual errors
         identified in ground 1 at [9] to [11]. It is also arguable that
         these are material as they are the apparent basis for the finding
         at [75] that the medical evidence, presumably including that from
         Dr Hussain (the expert) was not capable of bearing weight. In the
         circumstances, it is arguable that the finding at [91] as to the
         sponsor's mental health and difficulties she would have if
         compelled to relocate to Pakistan are unsustainable".

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     29. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 9 June 2020, inter alia, indicating that  it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined without a face to face hearing and that this could  take
         place on the papers. Following those initial directions the hearing
         was listed for a Skype hearing. Both parties  have  indicated  that
         they were content for  the  hearing  to  proceed  by  this  method.
         Therefore,  the  Tribunal  listed  the  hearing  to   enable   oral
         submissions to be given by each of the parties with the  assistance
         of their advocates.

     30. Ms Daykin on behalf  of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the  written
         grounds of  appeal  and  written  submissions  which  repeated  the
         matters set out in the written grounds.

     31. There was a Rule 24 response filed  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
         dated 16 June 2020.

     32. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and  their  clear  oral  submissions.  At  the
         conclusion of the submissions made by  Ms  Daykin,  Ms  Everett  on
         behalf of the respondent stated that having heard those submissions
         and considered them in the light of the evidence as  a  whole  that
         she accepted that the grounds were made out in the way advanced  by
         Ms Daykin. She submitted that the factual errors made could not  be
         "ringfenced" and that they plainly affected the  FtTJ's  assessment
         of the report of Dr Hussain and also the appellant's evidence which
         ultimately led to the overall decision reached that there  were  no
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  in  Pakistan.  It  was
         therefore conceded on behalf of the respondent that the errors were
         material and that the decision could not stand.

     33. Given the position of the parties, and the agreement  reached  that
         the decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error on a point
         of law it is only necessary for me to set out in  brief  terms  why
         the Tribunal agrees with that concession.

     34. The appellant appeals on three grounds:-

         1) Ground 1, the FtTJ made errors  of  fact  when  considering  the
            medical evidence at paragraph 69 - 75 of the decision.

         2) Ground 2, the judge failed to give proper consideration  to  the
            medicolegal report.

         3)  Ground  3,   the   judge   misapplied   the   public   interest
            considerations section 117B (4) (b) NIAA 2002.


     35. The issue under EX1 and whether there were insurmountable obstacles
         to family life outside of the UK was addressed by the FtTJ.




36. Paragraph EX.1. reads as follows (so far as relevant):

         " EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         (a) ...; or

         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2.  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which  would  be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their  family
         life together outside the UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  applicant  or  their
         partner."



     37. As the decision in Agyarko sets out, the test is to be understood
         in a "practical and realistic" sense rather than referring to
         obstacles which make it literally impossible for the family to live
         together. The "very significant difficulties" as set out in EX2
         means that the appellant's partner would face "very serious
         difficulties in continuing her family life outside the UK and which
         could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship".

     38. The decisions in Agyarko and Lal make it plain when addressing the
         question there is a need to have regard to the particular
         characteristics and circumstances of the individuals concerned.




     39. Dealing with ground 1, it is submitted that in arguing whether  the
         appellant  met  the   exception   in   EX1(b)   that   there   were
         insurmountable obstacles of  family  life  continuing  outside  the
         United Kingdom, the appellant relied upon the sponsors  for  mental
         health which was said  to  manifest  itself  in  PTSD,  depression,
         anxiety and panic attacks. In support of  the  claim  there  was  a
         report from Dr Hussain and her GP records.




     40. The FtTJ considered  the  medical  evidence  at  [69]-[75]  of  the
         decision  and  concluded  "that  the   medical   evidence   is   so
         inconsistent in core  details  relating  to  the  sponsor's  mental
         health" that he could  attach  "very  little  weight  to  it"  (see
         paragraph 75). The reason for  this  conclusion  was  that  the  GP
         records disclosed by the sponsor had not  mentioned  mental  health
         problems to her GP until 3 July 2019, after  the  refusal  decision
         was made and that the sleeping medication the  sponsor  stated  she
         had been prescribed and the  counselling  to  which  she  had  been
         referred to  had  not  been  recorded  in  the  GP's  records  (see
         paragraph 72 and 74).



     41. It is submitted that when reaching that conclusion the judge made 2
         errors of fact. It is accepted on behalf of the respondent that the
         FtTJ did make factual errors when addressing the medical evidence.


     42. The first error of fact is set out at paragraph 74 and that "the GP
         does not record the issue of sleeping tablets". That is an error of
         fact as the GP records disclosed that the sponsor's  GP  prescribed
         the medication which is in fact used for insomnia (see page  35  in
         the context of the footnote  in  the  grounds).  There  is  also  a
         reference to amitriptyline at page 35 which is also prescribed  for
         issues  for  anxiety  and  sleep.   Consequently,   this   was   an
         uncontentious factual error and when looking at the entry  for  the
         sponsor's visit  to  her  GP  on  3  July  2019,  the  sponsor  was
         prescribed tablets which she was  to  take  at  night.  This  is  a
         medicine that can be prescribed for  purposes  to  help  sleep  and
         prescribed for those suffering with insomnia.



     43. The second error is set out  at  paragraphs  [71]  and  [73].  This
         relates to the finding made that the GPs records disclosed that the
         appellant did not raise a mental health problem to the GP until she
         attended the clinic on 3 July 2019. The GP records  disclosed  that
         the first time she sought medical assistance for her mental  health
         problems, specifically having difficulties with her panic  disorder
         was 9 December 2016 (  see  (AB  30),  which  records  the  sponsor
         attended A&E as a result of her panic disorder. This may  not  have
         been clear to the FtTJ from those records, but  there  is  such  an
         entry and that it is support for the claim made by the sponsor  and
         the evidence in the report of Dr Hussain that the sponsor had  been
         suffering from mental health problems prior to 2019.


     44. Those errors are material in the context of the  evidence  and  the
         decision reached and in  particular,  the  report  of  Dr  Hussain,
         because the FtTJ relied on what he perceived to be  inconsistencies
         between the GP records and Dr Hussain's report which justified  his
         finding that very little weight could be attached the report.  This
         is demonstrated at paragraph  [73]  where  the  judge  specifically
         cited her failure to seek  medical  assistance  for  mental  health
         problems until July 2019, after the date of the refusal decision as
         a ground  for  placing  "adverse  weight"  on  the  sponsor's  late
         disclosure of her mental health problems.



     45. Dealing with ground 2, this also made reference to the  medicolegal
         report of Dr Hussain. It is submitted that the doctor explained the
         method by which examined the sponsor and outlined his diagnosis  of
         the state of mental health with reference  to  the  tools  used  to
         reach that diagnosis and in particular the Istanbul Protocol.

     46. He summarised the report from Dr Hussain, consultant psychiatrist
         (report dated 26 July 2019) between paragraphs [64]-[70].

     47. Dr Hussain stated that in his opinion the sponsor was suffering
         from PTSD arising from the traumatic experience the sponsor
         suffered as a result of her brother's death when she herself was a
         young child. She also suffers from depressive episodes. She had
         been diagnosed with acute anxiety state. She has been prescribed
         sleeping tablets and referred for counselling (at [68]).

     48. The doctor stated that the sponsor should receive psychological
         treatment such as CBT or EMD are for PTSD. CBT is not available in
         Pakistan. The sponsor's risk of suicide is high. In his opinion she
         would be at greater risk of attempting suicide if she lost all hope
         of being allowed to stay in United Kingdom with the appellant.

     49. In the doctor's opinion the sponsor has a marked emotional
         insecurity in her personality and high dependency needs to her
         close attachment figure which is the appellant. He stated that the
         psychological risk of further deterioration in the sponsor's mental
         health would be highly significant if the appellant was removed. He
         did not consider that the sponsor would be able cope in her current
         psychological condition and with an emotionally insecure
         personality with resettlement in Pakistan which is significantly
         culturally different.

     50.  Whilst  the  judge  gave  some  consideration  to  the  report  at
         paragraphs [68 - 70] of the determination, the judge  confined  his
         assessment of the evidence by summarising it and then comparing the
         instructions stated therein with the  judge's  own  review  of  the
         sponsor's GP records. However as the FtTJ had made  factual  errors
         in relation to the records that led to him attaching no  weight  to
         that report. This also led to a failure to evaluate the reliability
         of Dr Hussain's report with reference to his expertise and the  way
         he reached his diagnosis.


     51. Both advocates agree that the factual errors  and  the  failure  to
         consider the contents of the report in the light  of  the  expert's
         expertise and diagnosis led to a material error in  the  assessment
         of the evidence on what was a central issue of whether  there  were
         insurmountable obstacles to family life in Pakistan and the overall
         Article 8 assessment.


     52. For those reasons, the parties agree that the decision reached was
         undermined by those errors and that the decision should be set
         aside. In those circumstances, it is not necessary to consider
         ground 3. However, I would observe that even if the relationship
         and/or marriage had taken place when the appellant had no leave, to
         ensure consistency with the HRA 1998 and the ECHR, section 117B
         must, however, have injected into it a limited degree of
         flexibility so that the application of the statutory provisions
         would always lead to an end result consistent with Article 8:
         Rhuppiah (ibid) paragraphs [36] and [49].

     53. Drawing together those matters, I am satisfied that the FtTJ fell
         into error in his overall assessment for the reasons that I have
         given and as accepted on behalf of the respondent.

     54. I have therefore considered whether it should be remade in the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. In
         reaching that decision I have given careful consideration to the
         Joint Practice Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

          "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied
         that:-
         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier
         Tribunal; or
         (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

     55. Both advocates submit that the venue for hearing the appeal should
         be the FtT. I have considered their submissions in the light of the
         practice statement recited above. As it  will be necessary for the
         appellant and his spouse to give evidence and  to deal with the
         evidential issues, further fact-finding will be necessary alongside
         and in the light of the relevant documentary evidence and in my
         judgement the best course and consistent with the overriding
         objective is for it to be remitted to the FtT for a further
         hearing. The Tribunal will be seized of the task of undertaking a
         credibility assessment and will be required to do so on the basis
         of the evidence as at the date of the hearing.


     56. I also preserve as findings of fact paragraphs [83]- [88] where the
         FtTJ found that the appellant and sponsor are not at risk of harm
         in Pakistan. Those findings were not challenged in the grounds and
         are not affected by the error of law as accepted by Ms Daykin.


     57. I also note the matters set out in Dr Hussain's report at
         paragraphs 28-29 and therefore at the remitted hearing
         consideration should be given to the guidance given in AM
         (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 in the light of the
         measures suggested by Dr Hussain. Consideration should also be
         given as to whether it is necessary for the anonymity direction to
         continue.


Notice of Decision

     58. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error on a point of law and therefore the decision is set aside;
         it shall be remitted to the FtT for a hearing.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated   9 December 2020

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email

