


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06332/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5th December 2016                   |On 3rd January 2017                   |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                GURPREET KAUR
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Turnbull, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant was born on 1st May 1983 and is a citizen of India.   The
    Respondent refused her application for leave to remain on the basis  of
    her family life as a partner of  a  British  citizen  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom.  That refusal  was  dated  10th  September  2015.   The
    Appellant was required to leave the United  Kingdom.   Her  partner  is
    Barinder Singh who is a British citizen.  Their son Tegvir is a British
    citizen and was born on 27th February 2016.

 2. The appeal was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sangha  ("the
    judge") following a hearing on 4th April 2016.

The Grant of Permission

 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted permission to appeal (20th October
    2016).  He said it is arguable that it is unlawful  for  the  judge  to
    have made a finding that it is reasonable to expect a British child  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  He said that all grounds could be argued.

The Respondent's Position

 4. There was no Rule 24 notice.  It was submitted orally that the decision
    was well-reasoned.  The Appellant could either leave the United Kingdom
    and apply for entry clearance in the usual way and take Tegvir with her
    or  leave  Tegvir  here  whilst  she  left  and  made  the  appropriate
    application.  The judge was aware of the age  of  Tegvir  and  that  Mr
    Singh had family in India.  The judge was entitled to find  that  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in  India.
    The Appellant did not have leave to be here when  her  application  was
    made and was an overstayer.  Mr Singh was aware of it when they married
    and started a family.  Reliance in particular was placed upon the  case
    of MA (Pakistan) and Others v Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) and the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
    Civ  705.   It  was  particularly  submitted  that  [114]  of  MA   was
    determinative as the application of the  reasonableness  test  required
    the judge to have regard to the  wide  public  interests  and  required
    consideration of the immigration history and  status  of  the  parents.
    There was  no  evidence  that  Tegvir  could  not  go  to  India.   The
    Immigration Rules were a complete code and the relevant cases of Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 and Chen v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC) was considered.

The Appellant's Position

 5. The grounds seeking permission to appeal in essence say that the  judge
    made a material of law in saying that the Appellant was  an  overstayer
    whereas in fact she was not as she had the benefit of leave pursuant to
    Section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971  at  the  time  of  making  her
    application.  The judge also  materially  erred  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant and Mr Singh can both go to India because Mr  Singh  had  not
    been there for some 17 years and only holds a British passport.  He  is
    in full-time employment, lives in his own house, and is  settled  here.
    The appeal should have been allowed because Tegvir is under the age  of
    18, is British,  is  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him  to  leave.   There  would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to continuing family life abroad and there would  be  serious
    hardships that would flow from that.  The  judge  materially  erred  in
    finding that there would only be a temporary  separation  as  that  may
    take longer than a brief period.  The judge  materially  erred  in  not
    applying the two stage approach identified in MF (Nigeria) [2012]  UKUT
    00393 (IAC) and must consider the claim both under Article 8 under  the
    Rules and Article 8 outside of  the  Rules.   Tegvir  is  British  with
    family ties  here,  had  preliminary  vaccinations,  and  it  would  be
    disproportionate and not in his best  interests  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

 6. It was submitted  orally  that  in  accordance  with  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4,  this  appeal
    should have been allowed as Tegvir was not going to be able to exercise
    the right it was entitled to as a British citizen and  his  nationality
    had not been properly borne in mind.

The Judge's Determination

 7. It was found in the determination that:

    [15]   The Appellant was born on 1st May  1983  and  is  a  citizen  of
         India.  She arrived here on 7th October 2009 and leave was extended
         on various dates until 30th August 2014.  Her application that  was
         submitted in time for leave to remain was refused on 23rd May 2014.
          Her then solicitors accepted (on 17th June 2015) that  she  is  an
         overstayer.

    [16]   The Appellant married Mr Singh on 28th February 2015.

    [17]   Mr Singh is a British citizen and settled in the United  Kingdom
         and in full-time employment.  When she  submitted  her  application
         for leave to remain she was pregnant.   Tegvir  was  born  on  27th
         February 2016 and is a British citizen.

    [18]   The Respondent accepted that the Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with Mr Singh.

    [22]   They can maintain their family life if she  returns  temporarily
         to India to make an application  for  entry  clearance.   The  visa
         application processing times suggests that an application for entry
         clearance would be determined within  some  30  days.   They  could
         continue to maintain contact with one another by  modern  means  of
         communication.    There   would   not   be   any   disproportionate
         interference with their private and family life by their  temporary
         separation.  The circumstances are not so exceptional to warrant  a
         grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.

    [23]   The public interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration
         control is engaged.  There  is  no  infringement  of  the  "English
         speaking" public interest as the Appellant speaks  English  and  is
         well qualified with two degrees at Masters'  level.   Mr  Singh  is
         economically self-sufficient as he is in full-time employment.  The
         Appellant is an overstayer and any private life  established  since
         her last application for leave was refused is to  be  given  little
         weight. Tegvir is a "qualifying child".  He is some 5 weeks of  age
         and could travel with the Appellant and Mr Singh to India to enable
         her to apply for entry clearance in the proper manner.   They  have
         family members in India who would be  able  to  provide  them  with
         support for  a  temporary  period  whilst  she  applies  for  entry
         clearance.  Alternatively, Tegvir could remain with Mr  Singh  here
         whilst she returned to India to apply  for  entry  clearance.   She
         could continue to maintain contact with Mr Singh should they decide
         to take this option as the evidence shows that the visa  processing
         time is around 30 days.

Discussion

 8. MA explains that if Parliament had wanted the child's best interests to
    dictate the outcome of the leave application  it  would  have  said  so
    [47].  The court can have regard to the wider public interest including
    the immigration history [101].

 9. I am not satisfied that the judge adequately considered  the  intrinsic
    importance of citizenship to Tegvir who had rights which he  would  not
    be able to exercise if he moved to India.  There has been  no  adequate
    consideration to the fact that he would lose the advantages of  growing
    up and be educated here, in his own culture and language.  As an infant
    of some 5 weeks old, he of course spoke no  English  and  was  entirely
    reliant upon his parents.  There was no assessment as to whether or not
    he was being breastfed because if he was, it would be  unreasonable  to
    separate him from the Appellant.  That evidence was not sought and  was
    relevant to the assessment as to  whether  they  should  be  separated.
    There was no assessment as to what support Tegvir was  receiving  under
    the National Health  Service  as  a  British  citizen  in  relation  to
    immunisations and any  other  ante-natal  care  that  was  required  or
    available.  There was no assessment as to what would  be  available  in
    India and whether any vaccinations or ante-natal care could be provided
    and if so how.  There was no assessment as to whether he was an  Indian
    citizen and being denied his right  to  be  brought  up  as  an  Indian
    citizen.  Whilst his level of integration here  is  limited  given  his
    tender years,  and  nationality  is  not  "a  trump  card",  it  is  of
    particular importance in assessing  his  best  interests.   It  is  not
    enough to say that he can be temporarily separated from  the  Appellant
    or that M Singh could leave the United Kingdom with him.  Whilst it  is
    right that Mr Singh is not being required to leave the United  Kingdom,
    there has been no assessment as to what would happen  to  his  job  and
    consequent  ability  to  meet  the  financial   requirements   of   the
    immigration rules if the Appellant had to leave and he was required  to
    stay with Tegvir.  Nor was there any assessment as to how long he could
    leave his job for if he went to India with the Appellant and Tegvir.

10. In all these circumstances I am satisfied that  there  was  a  material
    error  of  law  by  the  judge  in  not  assessing  the  importance  of
    citizenship  to  the  child  and  the  impact  upon  the  wider  family
    relationships of either separating him from the Appellant or  requiring
    them to all leave the United Kingdom to remain as a family.

11. In relation to the other Grounds of Appeal there was have  no  evidence
    that either Mr Singh or Tegvir would be admitted to  India.   The  fact
    that Tegvir may have  some  support  in  India  of  family  members  is
    something the judge properly took into account but having excluded  the
    matters to which I have already referred, the  judge's  assessment  was
    inadequate to such an extent that I am satisfied that it is appropriate
    to set aside the decision.

12. I agree with both representatives that in light of the core findings  I
    have made the matter would  need  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and be heard by a Judge other than Judge  Sangha.   Given  the
    inadequacy of the findings, I set aside the  findings  in  this  matter
    with the exception of those which I have  extracted  above  in  my  [7]
    being the underlined extracts from the judge's determination  from  his
    [15-18 and 23].

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing before  a  judge
other than Judge Sangha.


Signed                                       Dated:  23rd December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer

