
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06384/2016
                                                               HU/06387/2016
                                                               HU/06391/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 4th December 2018                  |On 21st December 2018                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                        Mr S.S.A.Z. (FIRST appellant)
                     MASTER S.M.S.Z. (SECOND appellant)
                         Mrs A.S. (THIRD appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by me on 8th August 2018.  That direction
continues.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision notified on 30th August 2018, I set aside the decision of
    FtTJ O'Malley promulgated on 7th March 2018 dismissing the  appeals  of
    the  Appellants  against  the  decision  of  the  SSHD  refusing  their
    applications for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of
    their private/family life.  The SSHD's original decision was dated 17th
    February 2016.

 2. I noted that the issue before me centred on a claim that to remove  the
    Appellants, who are all citizens of Pakistan, would constitute a breach
    of the second Appellant's private life in that he is a  minor  and  his
    best interests lay in remaining in the UK.

 3. The Appellants are a family of three.  They are husband  and  wife  and
    the second Appellant is their minor son.  The second Appellant was born
    in the UK, has lived here for ten years, and has now  acquired  British
    citizenship.

 4. The Respondent's decision to refuse the applications was on  the  basis
    that neither the first nor third Appellant could meet  the  Immigration
    Rules and that despite the second Appellant, at the date  of  decision,
    being a qualifying child within the meaning of the Rules,  nevertheless
    it was deemed that he should return to Pakistan  with  his  parents  as
    part of an intact family unit.

 5. I made a finding that the FtTJ had taken the wrong approach to the test
    in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  I concluded that this had led to
    a failure to properly consider  and  to  evaluate  whether  the  second
    Appellant would be able to enter the  educational  system  in  Pakistan
    without significant disruption, and whether the second Appellant's life
    in  the  wider  community  had  been   properly   factored   into   the
    proportionality assessment relating to the whole family.

 6. Following those findings I concluded I was not in a position to re-make
    the decision without a further hearing and  decided  that  the  further
    hearing should be made in the Upper Tribunal.

Resumed Hearing

 7. At the resumed hearing  before  me  on  4th  December  2018,  Mr  Kotas
    appeared for the Respondent.  For reasons which will become clear,  no-
    one attended on behalf of the Appellants.  Prior to the hearing  before
    me on 4th December 2018, the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal by way of
    email dated 3rd December.  The terms  of  the  correspondence  were  as
    follows:

         "Appeal Reference: HU/06384/2016 + 2

         Date of Hearing: 04.12.18

         Further to the error of law decision and directions  in  the  above
         appeals, in light of  the  second  appellant's  registration  as  a
         British citizen on 6th August 2018, the SSHD does  not  oppose  the
         appeals being re-made in favour of all the appellants.

         The SSHD's position  in  this  regard  has  been  conveyed  to  the
         appellants' instructing solicitors."

    Mr Kotas, who appeared before me, confirmed  that  this  correspondence
    reflects the position.

 8. I find I am satisfied in view of Mr Kotas' concession, that in light of
    the second Appellant being registered as a British  citizen,  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.  Accordingly,  I  find
    that his parents must also be given leave to  remain  as  part  of  his
    family unit.

Notice of Decision

The appeals of Mr S.S.A.Z.,  Master  S.M.S.Z.  and  Mrs  A.S.,  against  the
Respondent's decision of 17th February 2016 refusing them  leave  to  remain
in the United Kingdom on the basis of their private  and  family  life,  are
allowed.

Appeals allowed.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     15 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




