
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06482/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 November 2020                |On 17 November 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                    N A M

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation    (by way of written submissions

For the appellant:     None received

For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

1.   This appeal comes before  me  following  the  grant  of  permission  to
appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 7 January 2020 (served on  15
January  2020)  against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
O'Brien, promulgated on 30 October 2019 following a  hearing  at  Birmingham
on 15 October 2019.

2.   The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 25 February 1981. He  was
a police officer in Pakistan and married the sponsor,  whom  he  had  met  a
week previously, in  Pakistan  in  November  2008.  He  entered  the  UK  in
November  2010  with  leave  as  a  spouse  until  26  January   2013.   The
relationship broke down, his applications for  leave  as  a  settled  person
were refused and he overstayed. On 9 October 2014, he was  arrested  for  an
assault on his wife. He was served with an IS151A and required to report  to
an Immigration Officer but did not do so and was recorded as  an  absconder.
On 21 April 2016, he was  once  again  arrested  for  assault,  served  with
enforcement papers and released with directions to  report  to  Immigration.
On 22 July 2016,  he  made  a  private/family  life  application.  This  was
rejected on 19 August 2016. On  6  September  2016,  he  was  remanded  into
custody. On 8 February 2017, he was convicted  of  causing  grievous  bodily
harm with intent for which he received a 6 year  prison  sentence  in  March
2017 with a concurrent 12 month sentence for the possession of an  offensive
weapon. On 29 November 2017, the respondent made a decision  to  deport  the
appellant under s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007. The  appellant's  former
representatives  made  representations  on  his  behalf   relying   on   his
relationship with his daughter and on the fact that  he  and  his  wife  had
reconciled. A deportation order was, nevertheless, signed and served  on  27
March 2019. That is the decision under appeal.

3.   A family friend was  the  victim  of  the  attack  at  which  time  the
appellant and his wife were not cohabiting. It  is  now  claimed  that  they
have reconciled and that the appellant has family life with  her  and  their
daughter born in November 2009; both are British  citizens.  His  wife  also
has an adult son from a previous relationship who himself has  two  children
who are presently in care.  He has the right to see them for an hour  and  a
half once a week. He was previously arrested for an assault upon his  former
partner who had been seven months pregnant at the time.

4.   The appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Brien  who  heard
oral evidence  from  the  appellant  and  his  wife.  The  judge  noted  the
discrepant evidence of the appellant and his wife and  found  there  was  no
ongoing subsisting relationship between them.  He  accepted,  however,  that
the appellant had a subsisting parental relationship with his  daughter.  He
noted that although he may have taken a different view, the  respondent  had
conceded that it would not be reasonable for the child to leave the  UK  for
Pakistan but he found that there were no very  compelling  circumstances  to
render deportation disproportionate and dismissed the appeal.

5.   The appellant sought permission to appeal.  This  was  granted  on  the
basis that it was considered arguable that the judge  had  gone  behind  the
concession made by the respondent that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
appellant's ten year old child to go to  Pakistan  and  that  this  impacted
upon his assessment of proportionality and the child's best interests.

Covid-19 crisis

6.   Normally, the matter would have  been  listed  for  hearing  after  the
grant of permission, but due to the  Covid-19  pandemic  and  need  to  take
precautions against its spread, this did  not  happen.  Instead,  directions
were sent to the parties on 17 June 2020. They were  asked  to  present  any
objections to the matter being dealt with on the  papers  and  to  make  any
further submissions on the error of law issue within certain time limits.

7.   The respondent's submissions were received on 3  July  2020  but  there
was no reply from the appellant. On 18 August 2020 further  directions  were
sent to the appellant directing him to comply but to date  there  has  still
been no reply.  His  representatives  withdrew  themselves  from  the  court
records on  2  September  2020  due  their  inability,  despite  their  best
efforts, to obtain instructions. I note that the  directions  of  18  August
were sent by first class post to the appellant at his Smethwick address  and
to his then representatives. I  note  that  the  representatives  have  been
trying to contact the appellant with a view to  obtaining  his  instructions
but without success. In the circumstances, I am  satisfied  that  there  has
been proper service of both sets of directions.

8.   I now consider whether it is appropriate to determine  this  matter  on
the papers. In doing so I have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of  Osborn  v  The  Parole
Board  [2013]  UKSC  61,  the  Presidential  Guidance  Note   No   1   2020:
Arrangements during the Covid-19 pandemic (PGN) and the  Senior  President's
Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to  the  overriding  objective
which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
2008 as being "to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with  cases  fairly  and
justly". To this end I have considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and
justly includes: dealing with it in  ways  that  are  proportionate  to  the
importance of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  etc;  avoiding
unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings;  ensuring,
so far as practicable, that the parties are able  to  participate  fully  in
the  proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper   Tribunal
effectively;  and  avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible   with   proper
consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

9.   I have had careful regard  to  the  evidence,  the  determination,  the
grounds, the grant  of  permission  and  the  respondent's  submissions.   I
consider that a full account of the facts are set out in the  papers  before
the Tribunal, that the arguments for and against  the  appellant  have  been
clearly  set  out  therein  and  that  the  issues   to   be   decided   are
straightforward. There are no matters arising from the  papers  which  would
require clarification and so an oral hearing would not be  needed  for  that
purpose. I am satisfied that I am able to fairly and justly deal  with  this
matter without a hearing and now proceed to do so.



Respondent's Submissions

10.  For the respondent, Mr Tan opposes the appeal.   He  submits  that  the
judge properly directed himself and that there are  no  material  errors  of
law.  The  appellant's  sentence  required  him  to  show  very   compelling
circumstances over and above the  exceptions  set  out  in  the  Immigration
Rules and s.117C. The judge  was  entitled  to  place  less  weight  on  the
evidence of the sponsor's son who provided a statement but  did  not  attend
the hearing. However, the judge's findings  on  that  evidence  only  formed
part of his assessment as a whole.  It  is  submitted  that  the  judge  was
entitled to take account of the history of domestic violence, the fact  that
the appellant had denied the charge until just before the  trial,  the  lack
of credibility in his evidence and the different explanations given  by  the
appellant and the sponsor for why a baseball bat was kept in the  house.  On
the evidence, the judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant posed  a
moderate risk but he also found  that  deportation  would  be  proportionate
even if the appellant had presented a low risk of harm. It  is  pointed  out
that no challenge was made to that finding.

11.  Mr Tan submits that the  judge  did  not  go  behind  the  respondent's
concession as he clearly found that he did not have to  make  a  finding  on
whether the child could accompany the appellant to Pakistan. He  found  that
there were no very compelling circumstances and that  the  appellant's  wife
and child could remain in the  UK  following  the  appellant's  deportation.
Reference is made to Imran (Section 117C(5); children, unduly harsh)  [2020]
UKUT 00083 (IAC). Although that decision was promulgated after the  hearing,
it is submitted that the principle of how the unduly harsh  test  should  be
applied is relevant. Mr Tan argues that  the  child  could  continue  to  be
cared for by her mother who is her primary carer and who  looked  after  her
whilst the appellant was in prison. Nothing  in  the  evidence  suggested  a
particular importance of, or dependence on, the appellant that could not  be
mitigated by the presence of the mother. The respondent maintains  that  the
judge was entitled to conclude that the circumstances and  evidence  neither
demonstrated  a  situation   of   undue   harshness   or   very   compelling
circumstances over and above  the  exceptions.  The  issues  raised  by  the
appellant did not come  close  to  the  threshold  required  to  succeed  to
establish a case above the commonplace as per PG (Jamaica) [2019]  EWCA  Civ
1213 and bearing in mind the appellant had to meet an  even  more  stringent
test. The Tribunal is  asked  to  uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge.

12.  The respondent's Rule 24 reply served on  29  January  2020  makes  the
same points but in a more succinct manner.

13.  No submissions have been received from the appellant.

Discussion and conclusions

14.  I have taken account of the evidence, the determination,  the  grounds,
the grant of permission and the submissions in reaching a decision.

15.  Permission was granted because it was considered  that  the  judge  had
arguably gone behind the respondent's concession that  it  would  be  unduly
harsh for the appellant's child to go  to  Pakistan  if  the  appellant  was
deported there (ground 4). There was no restriction placed  on  arguing  the
other  grounds, however, which were (1) that  the  judge  erred  in  placing
weight on the statement of the absent witness; (2) that in the absence of  a
probation report the judge was wrong to find  that  the  appellant  posed  a
moderate risk of serious harm to the public; (3) that  the  judge  erred  in
finding that the assistance the sponsor received  from  another  during  the
appellant's imprisonment would continue if the appellant  was  deported  and
(5) that the judge gave no reasons as to why he concluded  that  there  were
no very compelling circumstances and  failing  to  take  the  balance  sheet
approach of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60. I deal with each ground in turn.

16.  The absent witness was the sponsor's  adult  son.  He  had  provided  a
statement. The judge was told that he was visiting his children  as  he  did
every Tuesday between 12.30 - 2. The judge noted there was no evidence  that
he had attempted to alter his visitation time or day and there had  been  no
request to facilitate the taking of his evidence avoiding  those  hours.  He
noted that the appeal had been previously adjourned to avoid dates when  the
sponsor attended hospital for dialysis and considered  that  Tuesdays  could
also have been included as a day to avoid. The judge was not satisfied  that
there was a good reason for the sponsor's son's absence and found that,  due
to the fact that his evidence could not be tested, he was  not  prepared  to
place "much weight" upon Upper Tribunal.   That  was  an  approach  entirely
open to him. The apportioning of weight is  a  matter  for  each  judge  and
Judge O'Brien explained why he did not accept the claim that  the  sponsor's
son would no longer assist her if the appellant was to be deported  when  he
plainly had been doing so when the appellant was in prison.  The  judge  had
regard to the fact that the man was unemployed, had been helping his  mother
for a prolonged period previously and continued to live in the family  home.
Notwithstanding his claim in his witness statement that he wants to  be  rid
of his responsibilities towards his mother in order to pursue his own  life,
it was open to the judge to reject the contention that he would  not  assist
her. There is no error of law in that conclusion.

17.  It was for the appellant to provide evidence to show that he was not  a
risk to the public. There is no evidence of any steps taken to  address  the
offending behaviour  and  the  appellant's  violence.  No  evidence  of  any
rehabilitative programmes was  adduced.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  have
regard to the nature  of  the  attack  and  the  long  history  of  domestic
violence. He took account of the sentencing remarks of the  trial  judge  at
Wolverhampton Crown Court. He noted  that  the  appellant  had  pursued  the
victim out of the family home with a baseball bat and  inflicted  a  violent
attack upon him which resulted in 50 days  of  hospitalisation  and  serious
life changing injuries. He noted that the appellant had denied  the  charges
until just before the commencement of the trial. He  was  also  entitled  to
take account of the long history of domestic incidents logged by the  police
between 2011 and 2014  (as  set  out  in  the  decision  letter)  and  local
authority records of abuse. He had  regard  to  the  entirely  contradictory
explanations given by the appellant and his  wife  for  the  presence  of  a
baseball bat in the house and noted the severity of the  injuries  inflicted
on the victim by the appellant  (at  50).  He  concluded  that  despite  the
absence of a probation report, the appellant continued to  pose  a  moderate
risk to the public (at 50 and 67). The judge did, however, also  proceed  to
consider the situation as it would be if the appellant presented a low  risk
to the public. He considered DS (India) [2009] EWCA Civ 544 and  found  that
the public interest in deportation of criminals went  beyond  depriving  the
offender of the chance to re-offend; it also extended to the deterrence  and
prevention of crime and to the upholding of the public  abhorrence  of  such
offending (at 68). He thus found that deportation was justified even if  the
appellant was at low risk of re-offending. That was a position open  to  him
on the evidence.

18.  The grounds also complain that the judge was wrong  to  find  that  the
family friend who assisted the appellant's wife, along with her son,  during
the appellant's incarceration would no longer be willing to help out if  the
appellant was deported. The judge considered  the  appellant  and  sponsor's
evidence that the friend would no longer help but found  that  she  and  the
appellant had sought to downplay his ability to help by claiming he  was  in
Pakistan and that he had moved away.  The  judge  noted  that  in  fact  his
visit to Pakistan was temporary and that he had only moved a short  distance
away from the appellant and sponsor (at 54). It was  open  to  him  to  find
that the evidence did not support the claims made and  to  take  account  of
the fact that the appellant and sponsor had both been found  to  have  given
unreliable evidence in other aspects of their accounts. The grounds fail  to
identify any error of law; they  simply  express  a  disagreement  with  the
judge's findings.

19.  Ground 4 is the complaint that the judge went behind  the  respondent's
concession that it would be unduly harsh for the child to  go  to  Pakistan.
There is no substance to  this  argument.  Firstly,  as  the  appellant  was
sentenced to six years in prison, the  test  was  whether  there  were  very
compelling circumstances over and above the  exceptions.  Secondly,   it  is
quite plain from the judge's determination that he was fully  aware  of  the
respondent's position (as set out in the decision letter) and that  although
he did not agree with it, he proceeded  on  the  basis  that  her  departure
would be unduly harsh. This is confirmed by his consideration (at  paragraph
66) of the impact upon the child of a separation from  her  father.  He  had
already noted that the appellant regularly collected the child  from  school
and accepted that they  had  a  subsisting  relationship.  Nevertheless,  he
considered that the child would be cared for by her mother as she  had  been
during the appellant's  incarceration,  that  they  could  still  visit  the
appellant albeit not easily, that there was  no  cogent  evidence  that  her
welfare had suffered from the recent lengthy separation from  the  appellant
and that the separation would, therefore, not be unduly harsh  (at  66).  No
evidence was presented as to any particularly harsh impact  upon  the  child
to set her apart from any other child who would be separated from  a  parent
by deportation.  The judge did not go behind the respondent's  position  and
the grounds are wrong to maintain that he did. Even if he set  out  his  own
view on the respondent's stance, he  clearly  assessed  the  matter  on  the
latter basis.

20.  The fifth and final ground argues that  the  judge  did  not  give  any
reasons for why he found there were no very compelling circumstances in  the
appellant's case.  The  judge  has  satisfactorily  addressed  this  in  his
determination. He  weighed  the  family  circumstances  against  the  public
interest which is extremely strong in a case such as  this.  He  found  that
there was nothing in the evidence which suggested  a  particular  dependency
upon the appellant, that the  sponsor  would  be  assisted  by  others,  and
indeed would be able to look to social services for help if  required,  that
the evidence given with respect to the  appellant's  alleged  assistance  in
taking his wife for her medical appointments had been conflicting, that  the
sponsor had coped during the appellant's imprisonment and that visits  could
take  place  after  deportation.  Balancing  up   the   appellant's   family
circumstances against the public interest,  it  was  entirely  open  to  the
judge to conclude that deportation was appropriate and proportionate in  the
present circumstances.

21.  I, therefore, conclude that the judge  did  not  err  in  law  and  the
decision to dismiss the appeal is upheld.



Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors of  law
and it is upheld.

Anonymity

23.  The First-tier Tribunal judge did not make an anonymity  order  but  to
protect the identity of the appellant's child, and pursuant to  Rule  14  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  I  make  an  anonymity
order.

24.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no  reports  of
these proceedings of any form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  the  appellant.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

R. Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge   Date: 10 November 2020

