
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06235/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2019                              |On 26 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 GM (ZAMBIA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Shreshtra, Counsel instructed by Susan Paul
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge MA Khan sitting at Hatton Cross on 25 September 2018) dismissing
    her appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department ("the Department") to refuse her human rights claim in which
    she maintained that her removal would breach her rights under  Articles
    3 and/or 8 ECHR, due to the absence of family and  appropriate  medical
    treatment in the country of return.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    make  an  anonymity  direction.  But  as  the  central  issue  is   the
    appellant's state of health, I consider that an anonymity direction for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal is appropriate.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of  Zambia,  whose  date  of  birth  is  15
    January 1968.  She entered the United Kingdom on 11 September 2004 with
    valid entry clearance as a student.  She was granted leave to remain as
    a student on two occasions, with her last grant of leave to remain as a
    student expiring on 28 June 2012.  She made an in-time application  for
    further leave to remain as a student, but this was refused on 20 August
    2012 with a right of appeal.  Her appeal was dismissed  on  16  January
    2013, and the appellant became appeal  rights  exhausted  on  13  March
    2013.  On 12 June 2015  the  appellant  was  served  with  an  RED.0001
    notice, notifying her of her liability to detention and removal  as  an
    overstayer.

 3. On 3 July 2015 the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  on  private
    life grounds.  In support of the  application,  her  former  solicitors
    served a letter from the appellant's GP, dated 10  November  2015.   Dr
    Chand said the appellant had been registered with their practice  since
    2010 and had been attending  the  surgery  regularly  for  her  medical
    conditions.  Dr Chand continued: "She had a stroke because of a rupture
    of aneurysm causing a subarchnoid haemorage (sic) followed by emergency
    surgery.  She has great difficulty in walking now and is  not  able  to
    cope by herself.   She  also  had  uterine  fibroids  which  have  been
    operated on very recently."

 4. On 6 January 2016 the Department gave their reasons  for  refusing  her
    application for leave to remain on the grounds that her  removal  would
    not place the UK in breach of its obligations under  the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998. It was accepted that on 14 November 2013, following  a  fall,
    the appellant had suffered a stroke, requiring her emergency  admission
    to hospital.  She had successfully undergone an operation, but she  was
    left with speech problems and  muscular  weakness  resulting  from  her
    stroke.  In July 2014 the Department of  Neurosurgery  at  St  George's
    Hospital, Tooting, had confirmed that she had walked  into  the  clinic
    with a stick.  She could communicate well.  There was hardly any speech
    disturbance and mobility,  and  she  was  doing  really  well  and  had
    obviously  worked  very  hard  for  her  recovery.   Although  it   was
    recommended that she would need yearly scans for the next  five  years,
    she was discharged into the care of the local authority (Royal  Borough
    of Greenwich) which was currently supporting  her  as  an  adult  under
    section 21 of the National Assistance Act 1948.   The  Local  Authority
    Injury and Emergency Care Plan showed that she continued to receive  an
    hour-long visit twice per day from a  care  worker  to  help  her  with
    washing, dressing and meal preparation.   She  had  undergone  separate
    surgery for the removal of uterine fibroids in April 2015.  Her current
    medical treatment was confined to the prescription  of  medication  for
    persistent headache.

 5. Based on this information, it was not considered that her case met  the
    threshold of D -v- The United Kingdom [1997] 24 EHRR 423 or  of  N  -v-
    SSHD [2015] UKHL 31.  The evidence submitted  did  not  show  that  the
    appellant was in the terminal stages of a life-threatening  disease  or
    condition.  The medication she was being prescribed did not  fall  into
    the category of specialist medication, and "such  general  drugs"  were
    widely available in Zambia.  According to the  MedCoi  Database,  there
    were also neurosurgeons in Zambia who could carry out neurosurgery  for
    people who needed it, and they could also  provide  post-surgical  care
    and monitoring.

 6. It was not accepted that she was entirely  without  family  members  in
    Zambia who might reasonably be  counted  upon  to  provide  the  direct
    support that she was currently receiving, in order to be able to assist
    her in accessing appropriate care services in Zambia from a third-party
    provider.  In her application for leave to remain made on 14  September
    2005 she had included a letter from her uncle confirming  that  he  was
    Managing Director of an investment company in Zambia; that he would  be
    acting  as  her  financial  sponsor;  and  that  he  would  take   full
    responsibility for her.

 7. The appeal was originally listed to be heard on 31 July 2017.   At  the
    request of her legal representatives, the appeal was put back until  12
    noon on account of her medical condition.  The appeal was called on  at
    1pm.  The Judge adjourned the hearing because  he  was  told  that  the
    appellant had had a seizure that morning.

 8. The appeal was re-listed for 12  January  2018.   On  the  day  of  the
    hearing, Counsel applied for a further  adjournment.   As  recorded  in
    Judge Hussain's record of proceedings, she said that she  had  met  the
    appellant this morning, and had found her confused and forgetful.   She
    had contacted one of her nieces  who  had  said  that  she  had  become
    forgetful.  In her view, the appellant was not medically  fit  to  give
    evidence, but she recognised that she needed an expert  medical  report
    to confirm this.  If she was not fit to give evidence, then the  matter
    would have to proceed without her giving oral evidence.  Judge  Hussain
    granted an adjournment, and directed that the appellant should file  an
    expert medical report on her  cognitive  state,  and/or  on  any  other
    issue, at least 28 days before the resumed hearing.

 9. The appeal was re-listed for 25 September 2018.  On 30 August 2018  her
    solicitors applied to the Tribunal for an adjournment.  They said  that
    the appellant could not attend the hearing due to  her  health  issues.
    Her neurological assessment was due to take place on 14  January  2019.
    The Tribunal was asked to note that on the last occasion the  appellant
    had lost her way home because of memory loss, stroke and other  medical
    complications, and had gone missing.  So the police had to be called to
    find her.

10. On 3 September 2018, the First-tier Tribunal informed the appellant and
    her solicitors that the adjournment request was being refused,  as  the
    appellant had not provided any police reference or medical evidence  to
    substantiate the claims made in the letter of 30 August 2018.

11. Her solicitors renewed the adjournment request on  11  September  2018.
    On  12  September  2012,  the  First-tier   Tribunal   re-refused   the
    adjournment application as the medical letter relied upon did not state
    that the appellant was not fit to attend the hearing; and it was not in
    the appellant's interests for the appeal to be delayed.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

12. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Khan.  Mr Rasheed of
    Counsel appeared on behalf of the appellant.

13. As recorded in paragraphs [6]-[8] of the subsequent  decision,  at  the
    outset of the hearing Mr Rasheed applied  for  an  adjournment  on  the
    grounds that the appellant was not in attendance at the hearing due  to
    her ill-health.  He acknowledged that there was no medical evidence  to
    say that she was unable to attend the hearing and give  evidence.   But
    he had been informed by his instructing solicitors that  the  appellant
    was unwell.  The application was opposed by the Presenting Officer.

14. The Judge refused an adjournment on the grounds that the appellant  had
    failed to provide any medical evidence to show that she  was  unfit  to
    attend the hearing and to give evidence before the Tribunal.  He  noted
    the procedural  history.   He  also  noted  that  the  request  for  an
    adjournment made on 11 September 2018 had been supported  by  a  letter
    from Dr Asra Saddiqi, Consultant Neurologist, dated 16 April 2018:

         "Dr Saddiqi states that he suggested to the appellant that she take
         Paracetamol instead of Co-codamol for her  headaches.   The  letter
         sets out the medical history but does not state that she is  unable
         to attend Court and not able to give evidence."

15. The Judge went on to hear the appeal on a submissions only  basis.   In
    addition to the two bundles of documents previously filed on  12  April
    and 9 June 2017 respectively, he was provided with a  third  bundle  of
    documents by Mr Rasheed, the contents of which are listed at  paragraph
    [9] of his decision.

16. The Judge set out his findings at paragraphs [17]-[31].   At  paragraph
    [21], he found that the appellant had  failed  to  establish  her  case
    under Article 3 ECHR, which under the case law of D and N established a
    very high threshold.  The appellant had to be in a state  of  dying  to
    succeed under this test, and that was not the case here.

17. Considering her case under Article 8 ECHR, there was little evidence to
    suggest that due to her medical condition she would not be able to live
    on her own.  She would be able to access medical care in Zambia,  which
    might not be to UK standards, but was available.  The appellant  stated
    that she had no other family in Zambia, as her sponsor had  died  in  a
    car accident.  But there was no evidence of the sponsor's death in  the
    form of a death certificate.  So he did not accept that  she  would  be
    without any family in Zambia.  On  return,  she  could  access  medical
    treatment and seek assistance from her  family  members,  for  whatever
    little care she might need.

The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

18. The appellant formulated her application for permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal with the assistance of her niece, "N".

19. The first ground was that Judge Khan had been wrongly advised that  the
    appellant could not be present at the appeal due to her ill-health.  In
    fact, she had attended the offices of her solicitors the day before the
    hearing, and was advised not to attend the  hearing.   The  advice  was
    given by the solicitor on the ground that they  were  awaiting  further
    medical evidence.  It was not the case that she could not attend  Court
    due to her ill-health.  That was not the  reason  given  to  her.   The
    appellant had not attended due to the "conflicting advice" given to her
    by her solicitors, and thus she was deprived of the opportunity to give
    oral evidence.  In addition, her family,  friends  and  church  members
    were also advised not to come to the Tribunal  on  25  September  2018.
    So, the adjournment was refused on "false pretences".  Secondly,  there
    was an inadequate assessment of the appellant's family life established
    in the UK. Thirdly, the Judge had failed to give adequate consideration
    as to whether there would be significant obstacles to her reintegration
    into Zambia, given her medical condition.

The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission to Appeal

20.  On  30  November  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert   refused
    permission to appeal for the following  reasons:  "There  was  here  no
    arguable  procedural  error  or  error  of  law  by  the  Judge.    The
    adjournment request was properly refused; the appellant's evidence  was
    properly considered in her absence.  Whether her contentions may amount
    to a valid claim against her then solicitor is  a  matter  for  her  to
    pursue elsewhere as she sees fit."

The Renewed Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

21. The renewed application for permission to appeal was settled  by  Susan
    Paul Solicitors.   They  pleaded  that  the  Judge  had  erred  by  not
    considering the evidence that was before him when making his  decision.
    He ought to have considered the  various  pieces  of  medical  evidence
    before him and to have adjourned the hearing.  The appellant was not  a
    person who was fit to give evidence. It was accepted that she  did  not
    meet the requirements of Appendix FM or Rule 276ADE.  But the  Tribunal
    was requested to allow the appeal outside the Rules on medical grounds.

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

22. On  1  February  2019  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Roberts  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:  (a)  it  was  arguable
    that the Judge hearing the initial appeal had failed to give clear  and
    proper reasons in his conclusions when assessing the  medical  evidence
    presented on the appellant's behalf; (b) he had arguably failed to take
    into account that the  appellant  was  currently  under  treatment  and
    ongoing consultant review for her condition; and (c)  his  analysis  at
    paragraph 22 appeared contradictory.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

23. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Shreshtra applied for  an  adjournment  as  he  had  only  been
    briefed the day before by Susan Paul Solicitors.  His  explanation  for
    this was that they had not received the notice of hearing directly from
    the Upper Tribunal, but had instead only received it via the appellant.
     Mr Tarlow opposed the adjournment.  I ascertained from  the  appellant
    that she had not  left  it  to  the  last  moment  to  inform  her  new
    solicitors of the hearing date.  In addition, I did not  consider  that
    the late delivery of a brief to Counsel meant that the appellant's case
    could not effectively be presented by him. Accordingly, I ruled against
    the adjournment request on the ground that procedural fairness did  not
    require an adjournment.

24. Mr Shreshtra took me through the evidence that was  before  the  Judge.
    He submitted that the Judge ought to have granted an adjournment as the
    appellant was unwell.  Alternatively, he  submitted  that  the  Judge's
    disposal of the Article 3 medical claim  was  flawed,  as  he  had  not
    engaged with the argument that it should succeed on the basis  outlined
    in AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64.

25. In reply,  Mr  Tarlow  adopted  the  reasoning  of  Judge  Lambert.  He
    submitted that the conclusions reached by the  Judge  were  sustainable
    and adequately reasoned.

Discussion

26. The most up-to-date medical evidence is the report of Dr Siddiqi  which
    was made on 23 May 2018, following an examination of the  appellant  at
    her clinic on 16 April 2018 when she was accompanied by her  aunt  (who
    also accompanied the appellant to the hearing before me).

27. It was open to the Judge to hold that this  report  did  not  establish
    that the appellant was unfit to attend the hearing  scheduled  to  take
    place on 25 September 2018.  It was also open to the Judge to find that
    neither this report, nor any of the medical evidence which preceded it,
    established that the appellant was unable to give evidence.

28. Dr Siddiqi recorded the  appellant's  aunt  as  telling  her  that  the
    appellant had remained well until January 2018 when she  had  seizures,
    which had come on after she had been cross-examined in  court.   It  is
    apparent from the Record of Proceedings that this  is  not  true.   The
    hearing did not go ahead, and so the appellant did not  give  evidence.
    In addition, there was (and is) no medical evidence that  there  was  a
    risk of the appellant  having  seizures  if  called  as  a  witness  in
    September 2018.  Further,  when  making  the  adjournment  request,  Mr
    Rasheed did not assert that the medical evidence before the Judge  made
    out a case that the appellant was unable to attend  a  hearing  and  to
    give evidence.  He simply relied  on  the  fact  that  these  were  the
    instructions he had received from his Instructing Solicitors.

29. In her application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  the
    appellant accepted that she  was  fit  to  attend  the  hearing  on  25
    September 2018.   Accordingly,  the  Judge's  decision  to  refuse  the
    adjournment request has been vindicated by subsequent information  made
    available to the Upper Tribunal.  By the same token, the appellant  has
    not made out a case that it was procedurally unfair for  the  Judge  to
    hear her appeal in her absence.

30. As the Judge noted at paragraph [14], Mr Rasheed  relied  on  paragraph
    183 of Paposhvili -v- Belgium (Application  number  41738/10)  for  the
    proposition that the appellant's situation was one of those "other very
    exceptional cases" within the mean of the judgment in N -v- The  United
    Kingdom, where, in considering Article 3 ECHR, the  Judge  should  find
    that the appellant's removal would mean that, although she was  not  at
    imminent risk of dying, she would be exposed to a  serious,  rapid  and
    irreversible decline in her  health,  which  would  result  in  intense
    suffering or a significant reduction in her life expectancy.

31. In AM (Zimbabwe) Sales LJ, giving the leading judgment  of  the  Court,
    held at paragraph [40] as follows:

         "It is impossible to infer that the formula used in para. [183]  of
         Paposhvili the ECcHR intended to reverse the effect of  N  -v-  The
         United Kingdom.  Moreover, the Grand Chamber's formulation in para.
         183 requires there to be a "serious" and "rapid" decline in  health
         resulting in intense suffering to  the  Article  3  standard  where
         death is not expected, and it makes no sense to say in the  context
         of analysis under Article 3 that a serious  and  rapid  decline  in
         health is  not  a  requirement  where  death  rather  than  intense
         suffering is the harm expected.   In  my  view,  the  only  tenable
         interpretation of para. [183], read in context, is  the  one  given
         above."

32. In the light of the above ruling by the Court of Appeal, it was not  an
    error of law on the part of the  Judge  to  follow  N  -v-  The  United
    Kingdom.  In addition, on the medical evidence provided, the  appellant
    fell very far short of showing that there were substantial grounds  for
    believing that she faced a real risk of a serious and rapid decline  in
    her health resulting either in  intense  suffering  to  the  Article  3
    standard, or death in the near future, if removed to Zambia.

33. Turning to the Article 8 claim, I do  not  consider  that  the  Judge's
    analysis at paragraph [22] was contradictory.  It was open to the Judge
    to find that the appellant would be able to live on her own in  Zambia,
    given that she was living on her own  in  the  UK.   Although  a  carer
    attended at her home in the morning and the evening, "it  appears  that
    she manages on her own for the rest of the time."  While  it  would  be
    desirable for the appellant to enjoy a similar level of care in Zambia,
    it did not follow that the absence of such care provided by  the  State
    would violate her rights under Article 8 ECHR.   It  was  open  to  the
    Judge to find that the appellant would not be without family support in
    Zambia, and hence would not be bereft of  care  and  support,  for  the
    reason which he gave.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

