
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06988/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 January 2020                             |On 17 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                             Pwavi Lamu Michelle
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Farrell instructed by Adriana Immigration
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Birrell promulgated on  7  August  2019  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  1  April
    2019 to refuse his application made on 10  August  2018  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on family and private life human rights grounds  based
    on his relationship with a British citizen partner since June 2016.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted permission to  appeal  on  12
    November 2019.

Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below I do not find a material error of law  in
    the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require it to be set aside.

 4. In granting permission to appeal Judge Simpson considered  it  arguable
    that the decision disclosed:

      i) a failure to engage in any real way beyond the superficial with the
         country information when addressing the material  question  arising
         in the appeal, where the  appellant  and  his  sponsor  wife  faced
         insurmountable obstacles to their family  life  continuing  outside
         the UK in Haiti;

     ii) in tandem failed to furnish an overall  adequacy  of  reasoning  on
         material matters, more especially, with reference to the  threshold
         of proof, "very significant  difficulties"  under  EX.2  concerning
         family life continuing in Haiti"; and

    iii) "the judge erring  when  addressing  the  proportionality  question
         under  Article  8  and  the  requisite  public  interest  question,
         specifically with reference to financial independence under Section
         117B(3) and that this relates to absence of financial  independence
         upon the state in the light of Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58  (55,
         56)."

 5. The according of weight to evidence is  a  matter  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  It is not an arguable error of law for a judge to give
    too little or too much weight to a relevant factor unless the  exercise
    is irrational nor is it an error of law for a judge  to  fail  to  deal
    with every factual issue of argument.  Disagreement  with  the  judge's
    factual conclusions, the appraisal of the evidence, or  the  assessment
    of credibility, or the evaluation of risk does  not  give  rise  to  an
    error of law. Unless  the  judge's  assessment  of  proportionality  is
    arguably completely wrong there is no error of law in that  assessment.



 6. It is clear from paragraph 26  of  the  decision  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was fully conscious of the correct test under  EX.1  and
    EX.2 of insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the
    UK.  It is also clear that the judge took into account the evidence and
    submissions that because of the prevailing situation in Haiti following
    the earthquake circumstances would be difficult  for  this  couple  and
    that relocating there would significantly interfere with the  partner's
    relationship with her daughter living in France. The judge was entitled
    to take into account that the appellant had not taken  the  advice  and
    opportunity to claim humanitarian protection.  I recognise  that  there
    is evidence that a correspondence has been opened with the Home  Office
    on the appellant's behalf by a charitable  organisation.  However,  the
    judge noted that he has had since 2011, when he was legally represented
    and first claimed asylum, and could have made  his  claim  before  now.
    The judge was entitled to take into account that he had not  taken  the
    advice  and  invitation  of  the  respondent  to   claim   humanitarian
    protection to avoid return to Haiti.  The judge also noted the reliance
    on and took into account the Foreign Office reports advising caution in
    all but essential travel to Haiti.  In her submissions before  me  Miss
    Farrell took me to both the Amnesty International Report at page  5  of
    the supplementary bundle and the Foreign Office advice at page 8.   The
    Amnesty International Report is, as the judge stated, quite limited  in
    nature.  It speaks of cases of suspected cholera in 2018 with 70 deaths
    but points out that this was a decrease of more 60% in comparison  with
    the same period in 2016.  However, since the 2010  outbreak  more  than
    800,000 people had been  infected  of  which  nearly  10,000  had  died
    according to the authorities.  It was also pointed out in  the  Amnesty
    Report that the UN's approach to cholera in Haiti, presented  in  2016,
    was severely underfunded and that according to  the  government  almost
    70% of the Haitian population did not have access to  health  services.
    In relation to the Foreign Office advice from June 2019, the advice  to
    UK nationals was against all but essential travel to Haiti due  to  the
    current unstable and dangerous security situation.  It warns that there
    are various risks of unrest and that the general security situation  is
    unpredictable with high crime levels.  There are particular  risks  for
    foreign nationals including missionaries and workers and  children  who
    have been kidnapped and it is pointed out that UK government  officials
    use an armoured vehicle and close  protection  when  travelling  within
    Haiti at the current time.  If one visits low income or slum areas  one
    may attract unwelcome attention and foreigners are  viewed  as  wealthy
    and may give rise to envy.

 7. I accept that the above advice is quite detailed, but all of  this  was
    considered by the  judge.   It  is  not  necessary  for  the  judge  to
    summarise or to set out the evidence relied upon provided it  is  clear
    that all the  relevant  evidence  has  been  taken  into  account.   At
    paragraph  16  of  the  decision  the  judge  confirmed  that  she  had
    considered all of the evidence in the round before making  any  of  her
    findings.

 8. Having assessed this evidence, the judge was entitled  in  my  view  to
    reach the conclusion that the country  situation,  whilst  challenging,
    did not meet the high threshold  of  insurmountable  obstacles  in  the
    sense  intended  by  EX.1  of  the  Rules,  namely,  very   significant
    difficulties which would be faced by the appellant or  his  partner  in
    continuing family life together outside the UK and which could  not  be
    overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the appellant or his
    partner.

 9. I am satisfied, as was the judge, that the evidence relied upon by  the
    appellant was limited and even taken as a whole,  was  insufficient  to
    reach this high threshold.  However, it is not my assessment  which  is
    relevant.  The question is whether the judge was entitled to reach that
    conclusion  or  whether  the  judge's  conclusion   was   perverse   or
    irrational.  I cannot find a way to see that the decision of the  judge
    was irrational or perverse or otherwise unlawful. Merely because  there
    are challenges and difficulties is insufficient to reach the  necessary
    threshold.  The implicit premise of the grounds is that no-one could or
    should  be  returned  to   Haiti   irrespective   of   their   personal
    circumstances.  However, that  submission  is  not  borne  out  by  the
    evidence.  Whilst the appellant had expressed a fear of return  to  the
    current situation and arrest in  Haiti  he  declined  the  respondent's
    offer  to  make  a  claim  for  international   protection.    In   the
    circumstances the judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  Rules  and
    particularly EX.1 and EX.2 could not be met.   The  judge  nevertheless
    accepted at paragraph 26 of the decision and again at paragraph  29  of
    the decision that the country situation  was  "challenging"  but  found
    that there was no reason why they could not continue their family  life
    there. I can find no error in the judge's assessment of the evidence.

10.  At  paragraph  27  the  judge  also  took  into  account  the  alleged
    difficulties of maintaining the relationship between the appellant  and
    her adult daughter, resident in France.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude on the evidence that the appellant's visits  to  her  daughter
    were not as frequent as alleged and that even though  the  daughter  is
    blind it remained open to the daughter to visit her mother  in  the  UK
    but had not done so.  In respect of return to Haiti  by  the  appellant
    accompanied by his British citizen partner of Cameroon origin the judge
    was entitled to bear in mind that they had good health  and  that  they
    had work experience to help them settle in Haiti.

11. I accept that at paragraph 31 of the judge may have erred in concluding
    that the appellant was not financially independent when stating that he
    was not because he was supported by his partner since they  have  lived
    together.  Following  the  decision  in  Rhuppiah,  independence  means
    independence  from  the  state.   However,  this  factor  of  financial
    independence under Section 117B of the 2002 Act is  only  a  relatively
    small part of the assessment  of  the  public  interest.   As  Mr  Tann
    pointed out financial independence is not a positive  factor  that  the
    appellant can rely upon.  It is only relevant in the negative.   Whilst
    I accept the judge may have erred I am not satisfied that the error  in
    this regard is material in that I am satisfied that the outcome of  the
    appeal, namely dismissal, was on the facts of this case inevitable.  In
    Anoliefo (permission to appeal) [2013] UKUT 00345 (IAC),  at  paragraph
    16, the president said that:

         "Where there is no  reasonable  prospect  that  any  error  of  law
         alleged in the grounds of appeal could have made  a  difference  to
         the outcome, permission to appeal should not normally be granted in
         the absence of some point of public importance that it is otherwise
         in the public interest to determine."

12. In all the circumstances of this case, whilst another  judge  may  have
    reached a different  conclusion  in  relation  to  whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to continuing family life in Haiti or  outside
    the Rules  or  whether  the  decision  refusing  leave  to  remain  was
    proportionate, it was open to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  reach
    the conclusion that she did and it is  clear  from  the  decision  that
    cogent reasons have been provided for that conclusion.  No error of law
    is disclosed that is material to the outcome of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

13. The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

    No anonymity direction is made.

     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 15 January 2020




To the Respondent
Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 15 January 2020
