
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06538/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 November 2020                 |On 11 November 2020                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                 YEGANA [H}
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Linkworths Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Alain Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The appellant is appealing against a decision of Judge of the First-
       tier Tribunal Malcolm ("the judge") promulgated on 17 October 2019
       dismissing her human rights claim. Permission to appeal was granted
       on 19 May 2020.

    2. On 14 August 2020 directions were issued by the Upper Tribunal
       expressing the preliminary view that the error of law issue in this
       appeal could be determined without a hearing. On 25 August 2020 the
       appellant's solicitors emailed the Upper Tribunal stating that their
       client was agreeable to the matter been determined without a hearing.
       The respondent has not expressed a view on this. Having regard to
       rules 2 and 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules, the
       nature and extent of issues to be resolved, and the wishes of the
       parties, I am satisfied that it is appropriate in this case to
       address, without a hearing, (a) whether the making of the judge's
       decision involved the making of an error of law; and (b) if so,
       whether the decision should be set aside.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    3. The appellant is a citizen of Azerbaijan who entered the UK in
       November 2017 on a visit visa. In February 2018, whilst still a
       visitor in the UK, she married a British citizen. On 14 April 2018,
       shortly before the expiry of her visit visa, she made a human rights
       application on the basis of her relationship with her husband.
       Following the refusal of her application she appealed to the First-
       tier Tribunal.

    4. At the time of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant
       was pregnant, with a due date of 22 February 2020. She had previously
       suffered a miscarriage.

    5. The appellant claimed that it would not be safe for her to return to
       Azerbaijan as her brother, who is her only immediate family (her
       parents having died) disapproves of her marriage and has threatened
       her and her husband.

    6. The appellant's husband is a British national of Turkish origin. He
       has never lived in, and has no connection to, Azerbaijan.

    7. The judge accepted that the appellant and her husband are in a
       genuine and subsisting relationship. The judge, applying para. EX.1
       of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules, considered whether there
       were insurmountable obstacles to the relationship continuing outside
       the UK. The judge found that (a) the appellant's husband does not
       have a connection to, or speak the language of, Azerbaijan, and would
       need to be the sole breadwinner given the appellant's pregnancy; and
       (b) as a protection claim had not been made the claimed threats from
       the appellant's brother should not be taken into account, but in any
       event she and her husband could live in a different part of the
       country to avoid any risk of harm from him.

    8. The judge concluded that the appellant and her husband would face
       some difficulties but not to such an extent that the "insurmountable
       obstacles" threshold was met.

    9. The judge also considered, with reference to para. 276 ADE (1)(vi) of
       the Immigration Rules, whether the appellant would face very
       significant obstacles integrating into Azerbaijan. The judge found
       that she would not, even if she relocated to another part of the
       country, given that she had spent nearly all of her life in, and was
       familiar with the lifestyle and customs of, Azerbaijan.

   10. The judge also considered whether removal of the appellant from the
       UK would be disproportionate under article 8 ECHR outside the Rules
       and concluded that it would not.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

   11. The grounds of appeal make three arguments.

        a. First, it is argued that the judge erred by failing to give any
           consideration to the rights of the appellant's unborn child. It
           is argued that this should have been considered as part of the
           proportionality assessment.

        b. Second, it is argued that the judge fell into error by not
           taking into consideration the appellant's fear of her brother
           and the potential harm that she would face from him.

        c. Third, it is submitted that the fact that the appellant and her
           husband would have to support themselves, find somewhere to live
           and find employment in a country (and language) that is
           unfamiliar to the appellant's husband, whilst the appellant is
           expecting her first child, means that there are insurmountable
           obstacles to family life. It is not clear, from the way this
           ground is drafted, what the claimed error of law is. It is not,
           for example, submitted that the judge failed to have regard to
           any evidence or gave inadequate reasons. It appears that this is
           a rationality/perversity challenge; that is, it is being argued
           that it was not open to the judge to conclude otherwise than
           that there would be insurmountable obstacles to family life
           continuing in Azerbaijan.

   12. The directions of the Upper Tribunal issued on 14 August 2020 invited
       the appellant to submit further submissions. Despite being
       represented, the appellant did not make further submissions and
       instead submitted new evidence, but without an application as
       required by para. 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure Rules. The new
       evidence consists of documents showing the appellant had the child
       she was pregnant with at the First-tier Tribunal hearing and a
       statement which states that she is expecting a second child and which
       repeats evidence given in the First-tier Tribunal. This new evidence
       has no relevance to whether the judge made an error of law.
       Therefore, even if an application had been made, I would not have
       admitted it.

   13. In accordance with the Upper Tribunal's directions, the respondent
       made written submissions. These argue that:

        a. There is no requirement for a judge to consider the best
           interests of an unborn child;

        b. The insurmountable obstacles test under paragraph EX.1 was not
           applicable as the application was made whilst the appellant was
           a visitor and therefore the conditions of paragraph E-LTRP2.1
           were not met.  It is argued that as the test of insurmountable
           obstacles was not applicable, any error in this regard would not
           be material;

        c. The judge was entitled, in any event, to find that there were
           not insurmountable obstacles;

        d. The judge took into consideration all relevant considerations in
           respect of proportionality; and

        e. Any issues or concerns the appellant had with respect to her
           home area could be avoided by relocating to another part of
           Azerbaijan.

Ground 1:  failure to consider the best interests/rights of an unborn child

   14. It is well established that a judge must, when a child will be
       affected by a person's removal from the UK, consider the best
       interests of that child and treat them as a primary consideration in
       the assessment of proportionality under article 8(2) ECHR. However,
       neither party has drawn my attention to (and I am not aware of) any
       legislation, Immigration Rule, policy or authority to support the
       proposition that the best interests of an unborn child should be
       given distinct consideration or that the human rights of an unborn
       child should be considered separately from those of the pregnant
       mother. This ground therefore has no merit.

Ground 2: failure to consider risk from the appellant's brother

   15. The threat posed by the appellant's brother is relevant to whether,
       and the extent to which, the appellant (and her husband) will face
       obstacles integrating (and maintaining their family life) in
       Azerbaijan. It was therefore necessary for the judge to consider this
       as part of the article 8 assessment even though a protection claim
       had not been brought. Accordingly, the judge erred by failing to
       consider the risk posed by the appellant's brother solely because a
       protection claim had not been brought.

   16. However, this error is not material because the unchallenged finding
       of the judge (which is not undermined by any evidence that was before
       the Tribunal) was that the appellant and her husband could avoid any
       threat from the appellant's brother by living in a different part of
       Azerbaijan.

Ground 3: perversity/irrationality of finding that there are not
"insurmountable obstacles" under para. EX.1 of Appendix FM of the
Immigration Rules

   17. As observed by the respondent, because the appellant's application
       was made when she was in the UK as a visitor, even if it were
       established that there were insurmountable obstacles to the
       relationship continuing in Azerbaijan, she would still not meet the
       conditions of the Immigration Rules: see R-LTRP 1.1(d) and E-LTRP 2.1
       of Appendix FM, and the explanation in Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not
       free standing) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC).

   18. However, even though a finding of insurmountable obstacles would not
       be determinative of the appeal, it would weigh very heavily in the
       appellant's favour given that the insurmountable obstacles test is
       intended to reflect the duty of the UK under the ECHR to act
       compatibly with article 8. See Lal v The Secretary of State for the
       Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1925 at [10].  It follows that
       although the judge fell into error by proceeding on the basis that
       the appellant would succeed under Appendix FM if she were able to
       show that there were insurmountable obstacles to family life
       continuing in Azerbaijan, the judge's finding on insurmountable
       obstacles was material to the proportionality assessment under
       Article 8(2). I therefore do not accept the respondent's argument
       that an error by the judge in the assessment of insurmountable
       obstacles would be immaterial.

   19. The grounds of appeal assert that the following "set of facts
       represent insurmountable obstacles to family life":

        a. lack of family support;

        b. the need for the appellant and her husband to support
           themselves, find somewhere to live and find employment;

        c. the appellant's pregnancy; and

        d. Azerbaijan is unfamiliar to the appellant's husband who does not
           understand the language and culture.

   20. Although not mentioned in the grounds, I would add to this list of
       obstacles/challenges that the appellant and her husband would need to
       live in a part of Azerbaijan that is unfamiliar to the appellant, in
       order to avoid her brother.

   21. "Insurmountable obstacles" under para. EX.1 of Appendix FM is a high
       threshold. To meet it, the appellant has to show that there are very
       serious difficulties in continuing family life with her husband which
       could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for her
       and her partner: see para. EX.2 of Appendix FM and Agyarko and Ikuga,
       R (on the applications of) v Secretary of State for the Home
       Department [2017] UKSC 11.

   22. Some judges might have reached the view that the factors identified
       above in paragraphs 17 and 18, considered cumulatively, meet the
       insurmountable obstacles threshold because of the hardship that the
       appellant and her husband would face. However, it was not irrational
       or perverse to find that although the appellant and her husband will
       face significant challenges, those challenges can be overcome and
       would not entail "very serious hardship". It was therefore open to
       the judge, for the reasons given, to conclude that there were not
       insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Azerbaijan.

Conclusion

   23. For the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the decision does
       not contain a material error of law.

   24. Plainly, circumstances have materially changed since the decision of
       the First-Tier Tribunal was promulgated, as the appellant now has a
       child, born on 22 February 2020, who is a British citizen. The best
       interests of this child would need to be considered by the respondent
       in the event that a further human rights claim is made and a judge
       considering the refusal of such a claim would be required to have
       regard, inter alia, to section 117B(6) of the Nationality Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002.

Notice of Decision

 a. The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did
    not involve the making of a material error of law and stands.

|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 5 November 2020             |


