
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06721/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 October 2018                    |On 21 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    F H B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Warren, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  respondent
    (also "claimant"). Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt
    of court. We make this order because the case  touches  on  the  mental
    health of children who might be harmed if their  details  were  in  the
    public domain.

 2. The respondent, hereinafter "the claimant", is a  citizen  of  Jamaica.
    He was born in 1977.  He has been  deported  from  the  United  Kingdom
    following his conviction at the Crown Court sitting at  Nottingham  for
    possession of a controlled drug of class A (in his  case  heroin)  with
    intent to supply and possession of crack cocaine with intent to supply.
     In June 2004 he was sentenced to four years' imprisonment and  ordered
    to pay �156,882.00 under a confiscation order or serve a further twenty
    months imprisonment.  He was deported on 5 December 2005.

 3. He married in May 2008 and in April 2009 applied for entry clearance as
    the spouse of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom.   The
    application was refused.

 4. On 10 August 2009 he applied for the deportation order to  be  revoked.
    That application  was  refused.   In  April  2012  he  made  a  further
    application for the deportation order to be revoked.  On  3  July  2013
    the respondent decided it would not be revoked.  On 10 May 2016 by  his
    present solicitors he made further representations for  the  revocation
    of the deportation order.  This application was refused on 6  May  2017
    and he appealed that decision on human rights grounds.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal mainly because of  his
    statutory obligation  to  make  the  best  interests  of  the  children
    involved a prime consideration. For the  reasons  that  follow  we  had
    decided that he was wrong.

 6. We begin by considering the Secretary of State's reasons  for  refusing
    to revoke the order and to refuse him leave to enter  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 7. This notes that the claimant entered the United Kingdom in  March  2000
    with leave to enter as a visitor for six months.  He  married  and  was
    given leave to remain as the husband of a person present and settled in
    the United Kingdom and in November 2001 he was given  indefinite  leave
    to remain.

 8. He then committed the serious criminal offences. The  sentencing  judge
    took a very  dim  view  of  the  claimant's  conduct.   The  judge  was
    particularly concerned that drug trafficking seemed uncontrollable  and
    people such as the claimant, who was described as "a street  retailer",
    were an essential part of the supply chain and it was  the  conduct  of
    the claimant and people like him  that  made  life  difficult  for  law
    abiding citizens.

 9. On 12 September 2005 he was served with a notice of decision to deport.
     He lodged an appeal but then withdrew it.  The deportation  order  was
    signed in November 2005 and that brought to an end his indefinite leave
    to remain.  He was deported on 5 December 2005.

10. On 24 May 2008 he married  again.   His  wife  is  the  mother  of  his
    children and is a British citizen.  The marriage took place in Jamaica.
     In April 2009 he applied for entry clearance  as  a  husband  and  the
    application was refused.  In August 2009 he applied for the  revocation
    of the deportation order.  That application was  refused.   On  10  May
    2016 he applied for the deportation order to be revoked.

11. His application particularly  relied  on  his  relationship  with  five
    children who all live in the United Kingdom.  They are identified as CB
    born in March 2001, RuBB born in June 2001, RoBB born in February 2004,
    TABB born in June 2004, and FTBB born in March 2007.

12. The Secretary of State did not accept that there was  any  family  life
    with the children CB, RuBB and RoBB. He declined even to  concede  that
    they existed because so little evidence had been produced about them.,

13. The Secretary of State was satisfied that the children  TABB  and  FTBB
    are British  citizens  and  live  with  their  mother  Mrs  ELBB.   The
    Secretary of State accepted  that  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
    children to be raised by both parents but noted that it was open to the
    claimant's wife to relocate to Jamaica with the children and  establish
    a family there if that is what they wanted to do.

14. There is an independent social worker report in this  case.   That  was
    considered by the Secretary of State who accepted the competency of the
    author but found nothing that suggested the absence of the claimant  to
    be "having any exceptional negative effect".

15. The Secretary of State's decision dealt explicitly with the  claimant's
    family life with his wife but  this  adds  little  or  nothing  to  the
    consideration of the family life with  his  children  except  that  the
    contention that she could go to Jamaica and establish her  family  life
    with him there is, probably, more cogent.  She chose to marry a man who
    was subject to deportation and chose to have his children.

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out in detail  in  his  decision  and
    reasons a summary of the evidence called and of his reasoning.

17. The claimant's wife gave evidence.   She  said  that  she  was  in  the
    "second  stage  of  counselling".   The  oldest  daughter  was   having
    counselling at school.  Her mother  had  been  diagnosed  as  a  cancer
    patient.  The youngest daughter  was  being  tested  for  autism.   The
    children were finding life difficult.  The claimant's wife was  finding
    her role as a mother difficult.  The judge noted her evidence that "she
    was just in control by the skin of her teeth".   In  her  opinion  life
    would be a lot easier if the claimant was  allowed  to  return  to  the
    United Kingdom.  The claimant's wife was cross-examined but  the  judge
    found nothing that undermined her evidence.

18. The claimant's father-in-law gave evidence.  Perhaps rather startlingly
    he described the claimant as "a highly moral man with  high  standards"
    but this has to be set in the context of evidence that he believed  the
    claimant had acknowledged  his  former  wrongdoing  and  was  genuinely
    remorseful.  Broadly, his evidence supported  that  of  the  claimant's
    wife about the involvement of the claimant in the lives of the children
    and how it would be improved if he were able to live with them  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He did not  see  any  prospect  of  his  grandchildren
    establishing themselves in Jamaica.  From his  own  knowledge  he  knew
    that the standard of living would be very different.  The kind of  home
    they would have would be "more  like  sheds"  and  there  would  be  no
    internal plumbing.  The only water supply was a tap stuck in a wall and
    the sink overflowed into the street.

19. The Judge also summarised the evidence of JT who is  a  friend  of  the
    claimant's wife.  She gave evidence that  chimed  with  other  evidence
    about the mixed effect of trips to Jamaica because although  the  girls
    enjoyed seeing their father the conflicting  emotions  of  reunion  and
    separation were wearing.

20. The judge considered carefully two reports from Mr Raymond  Tansey,  an
    independent social worker.  The reports were dated 19 April 2016 and  7
    December 2017.  The First-tier Tribunal considered the reports and gave
    a helpful summary at paragraph 19 and 20 of his Decision  and  Reasons.
    He said:

         "19. I have been provided with two reports from Mr Raymond  Tansey,
         independent social worker.  The first is dated 19  April  2016.   I
         accept that the author is an expert given  his  qualifications  and
         experience.   The  author  considered  that  the  [claimant]  could
         attempt to support his wife via Skype and telephone calls but  such
         could in no way compensate for his day-to-day absence.  I find that
         this observation has accurately adumbrated the  evidence  given  by
         the [claimant's] wife which I have set out above in  this  context.
         The author states  that  the  [claimant's]  wife  was  finding  her
         circumstances increasingly difficult.  She had  sought  counselling
         support earlier in the year and she had  identified  that  she  was
         struggling to manage.  The [claimant's]  wife  considered  her  own
         circumstances to have deteriorated significantly since the  initial
         report in April 2016.   The  behaviour  of  both  children  was  of
         increasing concern to her.  The support which she had received from
         her parents had diminished due to her mother's ill health  and  the
         ongoing work commitments of her father.  The author refers to  TABB
         being reviewed medically.  Her mother had spoken of how this review
         given the syndrome which it was considered  that  TABB  may  suffer
         from was a factor in the panic attacks which TABB had recently been
         experiencing.  Her mother described TABB as a 'closed child'.  TABB
         was reluctant to talk openly about her emotions  and  feelings  and
         was increasingly unwilling to engage directly with the  [claimant].
         FTBB had been referred to CAMHS [Child and Adolescent Mental Health
         Services] and the Behavioural and  Emotional  Health  Team.   Their
         mother had reported that FTBB had difficulty managing her  emotions
         and could quickly become angry and frustrated.  FTBB is reported to
         have difficulties in  sustaining  friendships  at  school  and  her
         behaviour can also be disruptive.   Due  to  her  presentation  and
         behaviour FTBB was undergoing further assessment  to  determine  if
         she could  be  on  the  autistic  spectrum.   This  was  a  further
         uncertainty presently being faced by their mother.  TABB  and  FTBB
         had not now seen their father for almost two years.  Mrs ELBB could
         not afford to take the two girls regularly to Jamaica to  see  [the
         claimant].  TABB  and  FTBB  attend  different  schools  and  their
         schools' respective holidays do not always coincide.  Mrs ELBB, the
         author states, wishes the [claimant] to  have  a  more  significant
         role in the lives of their two children but her  options  for  this
         would at present appear limited.  The [claimant's] wife is  herself
         in daily contact with the [claimant].  They Skype each other  three
         or four times a day.   The  [claimant's]  wife  believes  that  the
         children are becoming increasingly  reluctant  to  speak  to  their
         father over social medium.  The [claimant's] wife is concerned that
         the relationship between their two children and their father is  in
         danger of 'drifting away'

         20.  The author states in the analysis at  the  conclusion  of  the
         second report that the circumstances of this family would appear to
         be of increasing concern.  The [claimant's] wife has had to acquire
         recent psychological therapeutical interventions because of her own
         issues of loss and anxiety.  TABB was receiving counselling and had
         further potential issues with her physical health.  FTBB  had  been
         signposted to CAMHS and  BEHT  [Behavioural  and  Emotional  Health
         Team].  The author states that the [claimant's] wife is  having  to
         cope in what appears to be very challenging  circumstances.   While
         they remain supportive of  the  [claimant's]  wife  the  assistance
         which her parents are now available to provide  to  their  daughter
         has been compromised because of the unfortunate ill health  of  the
         [claimant's]  wife's  mother  and  the  work  commitments  of   the
         [claimant's]  wife's  father.   The  support   available   to   the
         [claimant's] wife has thereby been  diminished.   The  relationship
         between the [claimant] and  his  two  daughters  is  in  danger  of
         drifting.  The [claimant] has now been absent  from  the  lives  of
         TABB and FTBB for twelve years.  He had been convicted and received
         a custodial sentence and then deported.  The author states that the
         circumstances of the family would appear to have deteriorated since
         the initial report in April 2016.  The difficulties experienced  by
         TABB and FTBB have become more evident.  The [claimant's] wife  had
         herself had to seek the support from Psychological  Services.   The
         support which the [claimant's] wife had received  from  her  family
         had been reduced because of the  circumstances  referred  to.   The
         [claimant's] wife believes that the absence of the  [claimant]  has
         impacted only negatively upon the two girls and  their  self-esteem
         as they do not understand why their father cannot  live  with  them
         and be a real part of their lives.  The lack of  support  from  the
         [claimant] has affected the capacity of the  [claimant's]  wife  to
         parent TABB and FTBB as she is  now  functioning  very  much  as  a
         single parent to these children.  The conclusion of the author  was
         this.  The author believed that it could only be in  the  interests
         of the two girls to have their father  more  actively  involved  in
         their lives and that they be given the  opportunity  to  develop  a
         much more significant relationship with him".

21. The judge noted that the claimant has  not  reoffended  and  the  judge
    found that he had achieved rehabilitation.  He was earning  his  living
    as a carpenter in Jamaica and keeping in touch with his family as  best
    he could.  Although subject to a Deportation  Order  he  had  left  the
    United  Kingdom  voluntarily.   The  judge  clearly  saw  that  as   an
    indication of responsibility on the claimant's behalf.  The judge  went
    on to find it unduly harsh for the children to leave the United Kingdom
    where they were settled to  re-establish  themselves  in  Jamaica.   At
    paragraph 33 of his decision the  judge  directed  himself,  correctly,
    that as the claimant  had  been  sentenced  to  at  least  four  years'
    imprisonment the public interest required deportation unless there were
    "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exception 2".  This is clearly  a  reference  to  the  requirements  of
    Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

22. The difficulty we have is that although the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    has directed himself to the appropriate statutory test and has  clearly
    found the test to be satisfied,  we  are  not  able  to  ascertain  his
    reasons.  He says at paragraph 34 having confirmed that  he  has  found
    "undue harshness" that there are additional  reasons  for  finding  the
    consequences to include  very  compelling  compassionate  circumstances
    over and above that due harshness.  He says that the claimant's  wife's
    mother has  been  diagnosed  with  cancer  and  therefore  the  support
    available to the claimant's wife has been diminished.  He says that the
    claimant's wife's father has had to reduce the support he has been able
    to offer because of his circumstances and:

         "The [claimant's] wife has now reached the point of being  in  that
         knife edge situation which she has described  in  contradistinction
         to approaching it for the reasons which I have explained  above  in
         reaching the conclusion that the Immigration Rules are met  at  the
         date of decision".

23. He continues that:

         "The fundamental irony which has developed is that the very success
         of the [claimant's] wife in achieving the maintenance of her family
         unit has entailed such expenditure of  emotional  energy  that  the
         fate of her family now rests  upon  the  same  knife  edge  as  the
         wellbeing of the [claimant's] wife  herself.   I  find  that  these
         factors are the essence of the very compelling circumstances  which
         have now arisen as at the date of the hearing before me in terms of
         the nature of them as I described them at the date of  the  hearing
         before me having found that they had already come into existence at
         the date of decision for the reasons which I have set out above".

24. We have reflected carefully on these things but we  cannot  agree  with
    the judge.  Breaking up a nuclear family or, in this  case,  preventing
    it reuniting, is a serious sanction  that  can  be  expected  to  cause
    considerable distress to those most directly  affected  by  it.   This,
    presumably, is why the legislation emphasises  that  deportation  of  a
    foreign  criminal  is  in  the  public  interest,  subject  to  certain
    qualifications, unless the consequences would be "unduly harsh".  It is
    expected to be harsh.  It is only if  that  harshness  becomes  "undue"
    that the harm to the individuals outweighs the benefit  to  the  public
    interest in foreign criminals being deported and not allowed to  return
    to the United Kingdom.  We do not have  to  decide  the  point  but  we
    incline to the view that the judge was  entitled  to  regard  the  high
    degree of harshness that can be anticipated  as  a  result  of  further
    separation to be the kind of  harshness  that  might  be  described  as
    "undue" although that is by no means necessarily the only conclusion on
    the facts.  However, as the judge well recognised that is not  relevant
    here.  Before the appeal can be allowed lawfully the  evidence  has  to
    support a conclusion that "there  are  very  compelling  circumstances,
    over and above" those that would support a finding of undue  harshness.
    They are simply not here.  It is a very high threshold and it cannot be
    discharged on these facts.

25. We have considerable sympathy for the judge who was  clearly  motivated
    by his statutory obligation to make the best interests of the  children
    a primary consideration but they are not a determinative consideration.
     If that were the test it would be difficult to deport a family man.

26. We have reminded ourselves of Ms Warren's submissions.  We do not agree
    with her that this is a "knife edge" case.  The fact  is  the  children
    are already losing interest in their father  and  his  place  in  their
    lives is diminishing.  In many ways that is very sad to read  but  that
    is what happens when a person is required to leave  United  Kingdom  in
    circumstances where his is very unlikely to return.

27. Ms Warren did not argue the point but for the sake of  completeness  we
    have reminded ourselves of the decision of this  Tribunal  in  Williams
    (scope of "liable to deportation") [2018]  UKUT  00116  (IAC)  and  are
    satisfied that the fact the claimant has been deported from the  United
    Kingdom and is seeking to return does not  prevent  him  from  being  a
    "foreign criminal" and a person  "liable  to  deportation"  within  the
    meaning of Section 117B of the 2002 Act and therefore able to avoid the
    stringent requirements of Section 117C.

28. We have reminded ourselves of the decision of the Court of Appeal in BL
    (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 357.  There, the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    allowed an appeal against deportation by a person who had a sentence of
    four years for the sake of the  children  of  the  family.   The  Upper
    Tribunal was applying a test under the Rules which required deportation
    unless there were "exceptional circumstances".  It is not  an  entirely
    similar test.  It is nevertheless we find illustrative of  the  correct
    approach.  The Court of Appeal noted at paragraph  55  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had said:

         "The best interests of the affected  children  will  undeniably  be
         served and fortified if [BL] is not deported.  [W]e  conclude  that
         there are particularly compelling reasons  sufficient  to  outweigh
         the public interest in deportation ...  [w]e  are  mindful  of  the
         central importance of the family in British  society.   Strong  and
         stable families make important contributions to the maintenance  of
         a prosperous and law abiding society ... The  effect  of  our  main
         conclusion is that the family unit under scrutiny in this case will
         be fortified and  stabilised.   The  alternative  conclusion  would
         result in the family unit being severely weakened and  destabilised
         ...".

29. These findings which were not criticised in  a  decision  described  as
    "detailed and no doubt conscientious" were not  sufficient  to  justify
    the decision to allow the appeal and the decision of the Upper Tribunal
    was overturned.

30. Although this is an agonising decision  for  the  people  most  closely
    involved it is in reality a short point.  The very high test imposed by
    statute cannot be satisfied on these facts.  The  decision  has  to  be
    wrong.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  We substitute a decision
    dismissing the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.

    Notice of Decision

31. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. We set  aside  its  decision  and
    substitute it with a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 20 May 2019                    |



