
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06731/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 January 2019                    |On 15 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                               Appellant
                                     and
                                     MEA
                      (ANONYMITY ORDER PREVIOUSLY MADE)

                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents:   Mr. F. Mahfuz of counsel, instructed by Hamlet
Solicitors LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a national  of  Bangladesh.  He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as his mother's dependent on her spouse visa in  June  1994  at
    the age of one and has remained here ever since.

2.   His father and all but one of his siblings  were  British  citizens  by
    birth and his mother  subsequently  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on 24 January 2011. The Respondent was not entitled  to  British
    citizenship as he had been born in Bangladesh to a father who, although
    a British citizen himself, had also been born in Bangladesh and was not
    able to pass his British citizenship on to a child who was born abroad.
    The  Respondent's  father  was  wrongly  advised  by   previous   legal
    representatives that the Respondent was a British citizen by reason  of
    his birth  and,  therefore,  no  alternative  application  for  British
    citizenship or leave to remain in the United Kingdom was made when  the
    Respondent's initial expired on 12 June 1995. As a consequence, he  has
    been an overstayer since that date.

3.   Between 12 March 2008 and 6 February 2017 the Respondent was  convicted
    of three public order offences, nine counts of failing to  comply  with
    community service and supervision orders, two counts of possession of a
    Class B drug, five driving offences, such as driving whilst  under  the
    influence of alcohol and driving without a licence  or  insurance,  one
    count  of  being  drunk  and  disorderly  and  one  count  of  racially
    aggravated harassment, one  of  sexual  assault  and  one  of  criminal
    damage. He was never sentenced to any term of  imprisonment  which  was
    not suspended.

4.   On 24 September  2016  the  Respondent  was  arrested  for  an  alleged
    offence of affray and served with notice as an overstayer.  His  father
    made submissions on his behalf on 3 November 2016 but on 14 March 2017,
    the Appellant made a decision to deport the Respondent from the  United
    Kingdom on the basis that his presence in the United  Kingdom  was  not
    conducive to the public good, as he was a persistent offender.   On  20
    March 2017 the Respondent made submissions in response relying  on  his
    rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  but
    this human rights claim was refused on 23 May 2017.

5.   The Respondent appealed on 7 June  2017  and  his  appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan who allowed his appeal on human rights
    grounds in a decision  promulgated  on  26  June  2018.  The  Appellant
    appealed and First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes refused him permission to
    appeal on 8 August 2018. However, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  granted
    the Appellant permission to appeal on 5 November 2018






ERROR OF LAW HEARING

6.   The Home Office Presenting Officer submitted that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Morgan had given too much weight to speculation on  the  part  of
    the Respondent that if his father had applied on his behalf for British
    citizenship or leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  at  any  earlier
    stage, one or both of these applications would have succeeded.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

7.   As the Respondent had not been sentenced to any term  of  imprisonment,
    which was for at least 12  months,  he  was  not  liable  to  automatic
    deportation under section 32  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  but  the
    Respondent did find that his presence in the  United  Kingdom  was  not
    conducive to the public good for the purposes of section 3(5)(a) of the
    Immigration Act 1971.

8.   The Respondent had relied upon  his  rights  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights when challenging  the  decision  to
    deport him from the  United  Kingdom.  Therefore,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Morgan was obliged to take into account  section  117A-C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and paragraphs 398 -  399A
    of the Immigration Rules when considering whether his deportation would
    breach his human rights.  In addition, he had to  follow  the  guidance
    provided by the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60. In paragraph 32 of  that  case,
    Lord Justice Reed found that:

         "Whether the situation is analysed in terms of positive or negative
         obligations is, however, unlikely to be of substantial  importance.
         Whether the person concerned enjoys private or family life  in  the
         UK depends on the facts relating to his relationships with  others:
         whether, for example, he is married or has children. Where he  does
         enjoy private or family life in  the  UK,  he  has  a  right  under
         article 8 to respect for that life, whatever his immigration status
         may be (although that status may greatly affect the  weight  to  be
         given to his article 8 right, as Jeunesse makes clear). Whether one
         poses the question whether, striking a  fair  balance  between  the
         interests of the individual in his private or family life  and  the
         competing interests of the community  as  a  whole,  his  right  to
         respect for his private and family life entails  an  obligation  on
         the part of the state to  permit  him  to  remain  in  the  UK;  or
         whether,  striking  a  fair  balance  between  the  same  competing
         interests,   his   deportation   would   be   a    disproportionate
         interference, one is asking essentially the same  question.  It  is
         true, as counsel pointed out, that the onus  is  on  the  state  to
         justify an interference, whereas there is no such onus on the state
         to demonstrate the absence of a positive obligation, but  questions
         of onus are unlikely to be important where the relevant facts  have
         been established. Ultimately, whether the  case  is  considered  to
         concern a positive  or  a  negative  obligation,  the  question  is
         whether a fair balance has been struck".

9.   He went on to note in paragraph 26 that:

         "In Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 50,  para  48,  the  court
         said that it would  consider the  nature  and  seriousness  of  the
         offence committed by the applicant; the length of  the  applicant's
         stay in the country from which he or she is  to  be  expelled;  the
         time elapsed since the offence was committed  and  the  applicant's
         conduct during  that  period;  the  nationalities  of  the  various
         persons concerned; the applicant's family situation,  such  as  the
         length  of  the  marriage,  and  other   factors   expressing   the
         effectiveness of a couple's family life; whether  the  spouse  knew
         about the offence at the time when he or she entered into a  family
         relationship; whether there are children of the  marriage,  and  if
         so, their age; and the seriousness of the  difficulties  which  the
         spouse is likely to encounter in the country to which the applicant
         is to be expelled"

10.  However, in this case Boultif had been settled in Switzerland and  Lord
    Justice Reed went on to find that:

         "27. As the Grand Chamber noted in Jeunesse v Netherlands (2014) 60
         EHRR  17,  para  105,   these   criteria   cannot   be   transposed
         automatically to the situation of a person who  is  not  a  settled
         migrant but an  alien  seeking  admission  to  a  host  country:  a
         category which includes, as the facts of that case  demonstrate,  a
         person who has been unlawfully resident in  the  host  country  for
         many years. The court analysed the  situation  of  such  a  person,
         facing expulsion for reasons of  immigration  control  rather  than
         deportation on  account  of  criminal  behaviour,  as  raising  the
         question whether the authorities of the host country were  under  a
         duty, pursuant to article 8, to  grant  the  person  the  necessary
         permission to enable her to exercise her right to  family  life  on
         their territory. The situation was thus  analysed  not  as  one  in
         which the host country was interfering with the person's  right  to
         respect for her private  and  family  life,  raising  the  question
         whether the interference was justified under article 8(2). Instead,
         the  situation  was  analysed  as  one  in  which  the  person  was
         effectively asserting that her right to respect for her private and
         family life, under article 8(1), imposed on  the  host  country  an
         obligation to permit her to  continue  to  reside  there,  and  the
         question was whether such an obligation was indeed imposed.


         28.  In addition to identifying the issue in Jeunesse as concerning
         a positive obligation under article 8(1)  rather  than  a  negative
         obligation under article 8(2), the court also identified  a  number
         of factors as being relevant: factors which overlapped  with  those
         mentioned in the Boultif line of cases but were also  different  in
         some respects. Factors to  be  taken  into  account  were  said  in
         Jeunesse  to  include  the  extent  to  which  family  life   would
         effectively be ruptured, the extent of the ties in the  contracting
         state, whether there were insurmountable obstacles (or, as  it  has
         been put in some other cases, major impediments: see, for  example,
         Tuquabo-Tekle v Netherlands [2006] 1 FLR 798, para 48,  and  IAA  v
         United Kingdom (2016) 62 EHRR SE 19, paras 40 and 44) in the way of
         the family living in the country of origin of the alien  concerned,
         and whether there were factors of immigration control (for example,
         a history of breaches of  immigration  law)  or  considerations  of
         public order weighing in favour of exclusion  (para  107).  Another
         important consideration was said to  be  whether  family  life  was
         created at a time when the persons involved  were  aware  that  the
         immigration status of one of them was such that the persistence  of
         that family life within the host state would  from  the  outset  be
         precarious. Where this is the case, the court has said that  it  is
         likely only to be in exceptional circumstances that the removal  of
         the non-national family  member  will  constitute  a  violation  of
         article 8 (Jeunesse, para 108). The court has  found  there  to  be
         exceptional circumstances in situations where, notwithstanding  the
         importance of that consideration, removal failed to strike  a  fair
         balance between the competing interests involved. In  the  Jeunesse
         case, for example, a prolonged delay in removing the applicant from
         the host country, during which time she had developed strong family
         and  social  ties  there,  constituted  exceptional   circumstances
         leading to the conclusion that a fair balance had not  been  struck
         (paras 121-122)".

11.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan did not explicitly give any weight  to
    the fact that the Respondent had not had settled status in  the  United
    Kingdom. At most he found in paragraph 22of his decision he found  that
    there were insurmountable obstacle to him returning to  Bangladesh  and
    that this  "weighs  in  the  [Respondent's]  favour  in  the  balancing
    exercise albeit that given his residence had been unlawful it does  not
    carry the weight it otherwise would". First-tier Tribunal Judge  Morgan
    also did not give weight to the fact that his leave to remain had  been
    precarious for a short period of time and had then been unlawful.

12.  Section 117C (1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states that "the deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
    interest" and in paragraph 17 of his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Morgan took this into account. However, he did not explicitly take into
    account that section 117C(2) also states that  "the  more  serious  the
    offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the  greater  is  the  public
    interest in deportation of the  criminal",  which  could  have  been  a
    factor which assisted the Respondent within any balance sheet.

13.  It was accepted by both parties that the exceptions in section  117C(4)
    and (5) did not apply to the Respondent.

14.  Paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules also states that:

         "Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary  to
         the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the   Human   Rights
         Convention, and


         (c)  the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the public interests because, in the view of the
         Secretary of State, ...they are a persistent offender  who  show  a
         particular disregard for the law


         ...the public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by
         other factors where they are other  very  compelling  circumstances
         over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A".

15.  The factors referred to in paragraph 399 do not apply to the  Appellant
    as he did not have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
    a child who was under 18 who is in the United  Kingdom  and  who  is  a
    British citizen  or  has  lived  here  continuously  for  the  7  years
    immediately preceding the deportation decision and the  effect  to  his
    deportation would be unduly harsh on him. It also does not apply as  he
    is not in a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner  who  is
    in the UK and is a British citizen or settled here.

16.  Paragraph 399A does not apply as he has not been lawfully  resident  in
    the UK for most of his life; having only been lawfully present here for
    a year. Therefore, the public  interest  in  deporting  the  Respondent
    could only  be  outweighed  by  other  factors  where  there  are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
    399 and 399A.

17.  In paragraph 22 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan  gave
    weight  to  the  very  significant  obstacles  which  would  face   the
    Respondent in establishing a private life  in  Bangladesh  on  his  own
    given his diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia. He also gave  weight  to
    the length of time he had lived here with his family even  though  this
    was not a factor which was over and  above  the  factors  contained  in
    paragraph 399A.

18.   He  also  failed  to  consider  how  the  particular  factors  in  the
    Respondent's case were exceptional even though  he  had  not  made  any
    explicit findings as the extent of his social and cultural  integration
    in the United Kingdom.

19.  This was a case where the contents of  the  expert  psychiatric  report
    were supported by medical notes compiled by his GP and  other  treating
    clinicians but First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan did  little  more  than
    summarise the findings made by the consultant psychiatrist in paragraph
    16 of his decision. He did not attempt to analyse how  the  seriousness
    of the chronic mental illness he now suffered from  may  give  rise  to
    very compelling circumstances which outweighed his previous  persistent
    offending and lack of social and cultural  integration  in  the  United
    Kingdom or consider whether he may have been suffering from  some  form
    of mental illness before he was actually diagnosed and whether this may
    have explained some of his behaviour.

20.  There was also a lack  of  detailed  evidence  of  the  extent  of  his
    dependence upon his parents even though he is a young adult.

21.  As a consequence, there were  errors  of  law  in  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Morgan's decision.

Decision

(1)  The appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morgan is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor  House  to
    be heard de novo before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Morgan or Parkes.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 7 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


