
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/06886/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th August 2016                           |On 24th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE T KAMARA
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 Mr PIUS [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 14th  November  1967.   The
    Appellant arrived in the UK on 16th October 1990  using  his  brother's
    British passport.  He remained in the UK using his  brother's  identity
    and travelled back and forth  between  the  UK  and  Ghana  using  this
    identity.  To the best of the  Secretary  of  State's  knowledge,  this
    identity document was last used on 17th December  2000.   In  1994  the
    Appellant met [LA], a British national born in Ghana who had a  son  by
    her previous relationship.   On  [  ]  1997  [LA]  gave  birth  to  the
    Appellant's son in the UK.  The Appellant married [LA]  on  31st  March
    2000.  On 16th June 2000, in his own identity, he applied for a spousal
    entry visa  and  was  granted  this  valid  until  26th  October  2001.
    However, he did not use this opportunity to regularise his stay in  the
    UK, instead he allowed a friend to use his  Ghanaian  passport  bearing
    the entry clearance visa with a substituted  photograph  to  facilitate
    his admission into the UK.  The Appellant returned to the UK  with  his
    friend on 17th December 2000 using his brother's British passport.   On
    6th April 2001 the Appellant was arrested by the police in his  attempt
    to export stolen vehicles  to  Nigeria.   During  his  interview  under
    caution, he admitted to his true identity and his immigration  history.



 2. On [ ] 2007 [LA] gave birth to the Appellant's  daughter.   In  between
    19th September 2001 and 23rd January 2013 the  Appellant  accrued  five
    convictions from eight offences and he had used the identity of Vincent
    [T] (i.e. his brother) in four convictions.  On 6th  May  2015  at  the
    Inner London Crown Court, the Appellant  was  convicted  of  committing
    acts/series of acts with intent to pervert the course of public justice
    on two counts for which he was sentenced to  two  concurrent  terms  of
    twelve month imprisonment.  On 6th July 2015 the Appellant  was  served
    with a notice of  deportation  decision.   That  decision  advised  the
    Appellant that Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 required that a
    deportation order  be  made  against  the  Appellant  unless  he  could
    demonstrate that he fell within any of the specified exceptions set out
    in Section 33 of that Act.

 3. On 18th and 25th August 2015 the Appellant's instructed solicitors made
    written representations setting out why the  Appellant  should  not  be
    deported.  Those representations were considered by  the  Secretary  of
    State and were responded to in a decision to deport  and  to  refuse  a
    human rights claim set out in detail on 22nd September 2015.

 4. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Page sitting at Newport  on  21st  January  2016.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 1st February 2016, the judge  found
    that the Appellant had discharged the burden of proof to show  that  he
    was entitled to come within the exception under Section 33  of  the  UK
    Borders  Act  2007  because  his  deportation   would   amount   to   a
    disproportionate interference with his protected rights to family  life
    and those of his family, in particular his two children.  On that basis
    the appeal was allowed.

 5. On 4th February 2016 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State  considered  that  in
    conducting the undue harshness assessment in paragraph  33,  the  judge
    had mischaracterised the nature of the Appellant's offending and failed
    to take into account the Appellant's poor immigration history,  thereby
    rendering his findings unsafe.

 6. On 27th June 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted  permission
    to appeal.  Judge Simpson notes  that  having  considered  the  judge's
    comments in paragraphs 23 to 31 of  the  First-tier  decision,  it  was
    arguable that the judge had given  too  much  weight  to  the  evidence
    regarding the  younger  child's  autism.   Further,  as  to  the  older
    "child", given that his date of birth was [ ] 1997, he was 18 years old
    at the date of hearing and thus no longer a child.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  us  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the purpose  of  continuity  throughout
    the appeal process, albeit that this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of
    State, the Secretary of State is referred to herein as  the  Respondent
    and Mr [T] as the Appellant.   The  Appellant  is  represented  by  his
    instructed Counsel Mr Jaisri.  The Secretary of State  appears  by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Jarvis.

Submissions/Discussion

 8. Mr Jarvis indicates that the main thrust of the Secretary of State is a
    challenge to the assessment of proportionality carried out by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and the analysis of the phrase "unduly harsh".   Mr
    Jarvis points out that at all times the judge had to do justice to  the
    public interest.  He sets out to us again the factual  matrix  of  this
    case and the criminality carried out by the Appellant.  He submits that
    balancing the public interest, the judge  should  have  looked  at  the
    broader context as  to  why  the  Appellant  was  using  his  brother's
    passport and reminds us that the  public  interest  in  deportation  of
    those who commit serious crimes goes well beyond depriving the offender
    in question from the chance to re-offend in this country: it extends to
    deterring and preventing  serious  crime  generally  and  to  upholding
    public abhorrence of such offending (DS (India) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 544 at paragraph 37).

 9. He contends that despite paragraph 33 of the decision, Judge  Page  has
    not engaged with the public interest and that the judge has underplayed
    the seriousness of the misuse of passports,  and  that  the  judge  has
    mischaracterised the offence.  He points out that the Immigration Court
    is not the Criminal Court and that there has been no proper  engagement
    with Section 117B of the 2002 Act and that the balancing  interest  has
    not been properly carried out.

10. Mr Jaisri contends that the Secretary of State's submissions amount  to
    no more than a mere disagreement.  He points out that  the  history  of
    this matter is fully set out at paragraphs 3, 5, 6 and 9 of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision, and at paragraph 9 the judge  has  made
    an assessment of the Appellant's claim noting the complete disregard of
    the United Kingdom's immigration laws.

11. Mr Jaisri indicates that there is no element stressed in the Notice  of
    Refusal  of  particular  weight  being  given  to  any  expression   of
    particular revulsion  at  the  Appellant's  conduct,  and  in  fact  he
    contends that the Immigration Judge has done a very  good  job  in  the
    manner  in  which  he  has  considered  the  Appellant's  offences  and
    summarised  them  particularly  in  paragraph  24.   He  contends   the
    Appellant's immigration history is  fully  acknowledged  and  that  the
    elements therefore are highlighted sufficiently to have discharged  the
    burden under Section 399 of the Immigration Rules.

12. So far as the "unduly harsh test" is concerned, he notes that these are
    applicable  to  each  child  individually  and  he  accepts  that   the
    Immigration Rules would not apply to the elder child as he was aged  18
    at the time of the  hearing  but  they  do  apply  to  the  Appellant's
    daughter, [K].

13. In brief response, Mr Jarvis refers us to paragraphs N5 to  N8  of  the
    Home Office bundle which he submits does not limit or essentialise  the
    Secretary of State's assessment of the  law  and  that  twelve  months'
    detention is enough to be deported unless there is an  exception  found
    under Section 33.  He submits that there is nothing in  the  Notice  of
    Refusal to obviate the approach adopted by the Tribunal  and  that  the
    judge has  not  given  sufficient  weight  to  the  view  expressed  by
    Parliament  and  that  the  public  interest  has  not  been   properly
    considered.  He does however accept that he  is  sympathetic  with  the
    position in which the children find themselves.

Findings on Error of Law

14. The approach to be adopted by a  judge  when  considering  whether  the
    automatic deportation order made under Section 32(5) of  the  2007  Act
    comes into play under Section 33 are fully  considered  by  the  judge.
    One of those, he quite rightly notes,  are  the  Appellant's  protected
    rights under the European Convention of Human Rights and in  this  case
    concentrate entirely on the rights  of  maintaining  contact  with  his
    daughter [K] who is a UK citizen born in the UK and aged 8 at  date  of
    hearing and 9 at date of this appeal.  The judge has, we  consider,  as
    Mr Jaisri has submitted, carried out a very thorough analysis.  He  has
    given full, due and proper  consideration  to  the  statutory  guidance
    given under paragraphs 398 and 399 of the  Immigration  Rules  and  has
    gone on  to  give  further  consideration  to  paragraph  117C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act referring to the  consideration
    in cases involving foreign criminals.  The  judge  has  considered  the
    leading authority of KMO (Section 117 - unduly harsh) [2015] UKUT 543.

15. Thereafter, the judge has given full consideration to the facts of  the
    Appellant's immigration history and the sentencing remarks of the trial
    judge.  The judge has specifically noted that he does not minimise  the
    seriousness of the offence of committing an act to pervert  the  course
    of justice, and has  considered  fully  at  paragraphs  24  to  26  the
    Appellant's immigration history and the  Appellant's  involvement  with
    [K]'s life.  The judge has noted that the Appellant has had a  "genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship" which has been  "significant  and
    meaningful  positive  involvement  in  the  children's  life   with   a
    significant degree of responsibility for  the  children's  welfare"  as
    acknowledged by the Secretary of State in the notice of  decision.   He
    has further gone on to consider that [K] has been diagnosed as being on
    the autistic spectrum since she was 3  years  old  and  has  considered
    fully the medical evidence.  The judge  has  further  acknowledged  the
    importance  of  the  balancing  exercise  to  be  undertaken,  and  the
    importance of the public interest and has made conclusions at paragraph
    33 that he was not satisfied the offences the Appellant  had  committed
    are such that the public interest in  deporting  the  Appellant  is  so
    great to outweigh the best  interests  of  the  children  having  their
    father in the United Kingdom.

16. In such circumstances, we agree with the contentions made by Mr  Jaisri
    that the submissions made by the Secretary of State,  which  are  of  a
    general nature, contending that  the  judge  has  mischaracterised  the
    nature of the Appellant's offending and failed to take into account the
    Appellant's immigration history, are in fact wrong in  that  the  judge
    has done so and that the submissions made by  the  Secretary  of  State
    amount to no more than disagreement with the finding of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  Each case turns on  its  own  individual  facts.   The
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  followed  a  logical  and  consistent
    approach in setting out the facts  of  this  matter  and  the  relevant
    considerations to be undertaken as to whether or not the Appellant can,
    or cannot, take advantage of the exceptions of Section  33  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.  In such circumstances,  his  decision  discloses  no
    material error of law and the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 21st August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 21st August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
