

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/06468/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 11 January 2019                            |On 24 January 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     S P
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has permission to appeal against a decision by FtT  Judge
    Doyle, dated 25 June 2018.

 2. The grounds are as follows:

         "The  judge  has  erred  in  finding  the  appellant  to  not  have
         established private life in the UK.  It  was  not  argued  for  the
         appellant that her relationship with her adult sibling  constituted
         family life but the distinction between family and private life can
         be arid and academic when both engage article 8; Singh [2015]  EWCA
         Civ 630 at [25].

         The judge in an otherwise thorough decision gives no reason for his
         conclusion at [20] that "The  fact  that  the  appellant  has  been
         present in the UK for several years and enjoyed the support of  her
         sister is not enough to establish article  8  private  life".  That
         conclusion called for an explanation standing  the  finding-in-fact
         at 10 (i).

         Once granted  there  is  private  life  in  the  UK,  questions  of
         proportionality become  pressing.  On  the  judge's  findings,  the
         appellant was in the UK for over 12 years before she realised  that
         her abuser's actings had denied her immigration status.  The  judge
         left unresolved, understandably on his approach to the private life
         issue, the question whether the marriage had  irretrievably  broken
         down by the date of expiry of the  appellant's  initial  period  of
         leave. Were that question to be resolved in the appellant's favour,
         and there was evidence before the tribunal to allow that, then  the
         appellant would only be deprived of leave to remain  under  section
         DV of appendix FM by  the  chance  operation  of  the  transitional
         provision  A208B.   A  "near  miss"  would  be  relevant   to   the
         proportionality assessment; SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at [56].

         The appeal should be reconsidered on the footing that private  life
         is established and the only issue is proportionality."

 3. The finding at 10 (i) is this:

         "The appellant's brother and sister are both settled in the UK. The
         appellant relies heavily on her sister,  with  whom  she  lives  in
         Glasgow. The appellant does not  like  to  leave  her  home  unless
         accompanied by her sister. The appellant is tormented by the stigma
         of divorce."

 4. Singh at [25] says:

         "... the debate as to whether an applicant has or has not a  family
         life for the purposes of  Article  8  is  liable  to  be  arid  and
         academic. In the present case ... the issue is indeed academic, and
         clearly so. As the European Court of Human Rights pointed out in AA
         ... the factors to be examined in order to  assess  proportionality
         are the same regardless  of  whether  family  or  private  life  is
         engaged. The question for the Secretary of State, the Tribunal  and
         the Court is whether those factors lead to the conclusion  that  it
         would be disproportionate to remove the applicant from  the  United
         Kingdom. ..."

 5. Mr Govan argued that the decision at [18, 20 and  23]  was  not  to  be
    taken literally as holding that the appellant had no  private  life  in
    the UK, and that the language used was a form of  "judicial  shorthand"
    for a finding that although there was private  life,  the  respondent's
    decision did not interfere disproportionately with it.  On that  basis,
    he said that the decision could stand.

 6. I was not persuaded by that argument.  The appellant  conceded  in  the
    FtT that her relationship with her sister  did  not  constitute  family
    life within the meaning of article 8.  That concession, correctly made,
    seems to have misled the judge into thinking that he had to exclude the
    appellant's domestic life and look elsewhere to find any private  life.
    Realistically, even if the appellant's focus  is  within  her  sister's
    household, her history in the UK since 2001 cannot be said to  be  such
    that she has no private life here.  The judge treated the finding of no
    private  life  as  the  end  of  the  case,   and   did   not   mention
    proportionality.  The decision cannot be read as Mr Govan contended.

 7. Having reached that stage, I next considered whether the presumption in
    favour of remaking decisions in the UT applied.

 8. Section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act provides for little weight to be  given
    to private life established at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
    status was precarious.  The appellant's status  has  changed  over  the
    years, and it may be relevant to consider whether private life, much as
    it has existed for several years, was  established  before  her  status
    became precarious.  Limitations of her knowledge and  understanding  of
    her status may be relevant.  Mr Bryce suggested that the benefit of the
    respondent's domestic violence  policy  might  not  be  "time-limited",
    under reference to JL [2006] UKAIT 00058.

 9. It became common ground that once the decision was set aside,  a  fresh
    hearing in the FtT was required.

10. The appellant is directed to  file  with  the  FtT,  and  copy  to  the
    respondent, not less than 7 days before the next hearing  in  the  FtT,
    (i) a note of the specific findings of  fact,  with  dates,  which  she
    seeks, and (ii) an outline of her submissions on how such findings  may
    demonstrate a right to remain in the UK.  In absence of compliance with
    this direction, an adverse inference may be drawn.

11. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  It is appropriate under  section
    12 of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit  to  the
    FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.  The member(s) of the FtT chosen  to
    consider the case are not to include Judge Doyle.

12. It is doubtful whether an anonymity direction is  appropriate;  but  as
    the matter was not addressed in the UT, the order made by  the  FtT  is
    maintained at this stage.

      [pic]

      11 January 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




