
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06199/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2019                    |On 11 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     JSP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, counsel instructed by Connaught Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  G
    Mitchell, promulgated on 11 July 2019. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge G Wilson on 2 September 2019.



Anonymity

 2. No such direction was made previously, however owing to the appellant's
    mental health issues there is reason for one now.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom with leave to enter as a  Tier
    4 migrant on 4 October 2009. Her leave was extended until 31 May  2014.
    Her leave to remain was curtailed to expire on 17 May 2012. On  30  May
    2014, the appellant applied for leave to remain as a  Tier  4  migrant.
    That application was refused with no right  of  appeal  on  13  January
    2015. That decision was reconsidered and "voided" because the appellant
    had also applied for a  residence  card  as  the  family  member  of  a
    European  Economic  Area  (EEA)  national  on  11  October  2015.  That
    application was refused, as were four  further  EEA  applications  made
    between 5 February 2016 and  21  March  2017.  On  31  July  2017,  the
    appellant applied for leave to  remain  as  a  stateless  person,  that
    application being refused on 13 October 2018. Lastly,  on  31  December
    2018, the appellant made a human rights' claim  based  on  her  private
    life. It is the refusal of this application which  is  the  subject  of
    this appeal. The appellant's claim  was  based  on  her  mental  health
    problems as well as her claim that her family and friends in India  had
    ostracised her following her failed marriage.

 4. The appellant's human rights claim was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State by way of a letter dated 11 March 2019. It was not accepted  that
    the appellant could meet any aspect of  paragraph  276ADE  (1)  of  the
    Rules nor  that  her  mental  health  issues  amounted  to  exceptional
    circumstances warranting a grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant did not attend the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    and nor was she represented. There was an indication that the appellant
    may have been unwell on the day before the hearing. The judge  declined
    to adjourn the appeal either during  the  hearing  or  afterwards  when
    medical evidence sent by the appellant became available.  He  concluded
    that the reason for her non-attendance was to cause delay.  As  to  the
    substance of the appeal, the judge did not accept that  Article  8  was
    engaged and found that even if it was, the decision to remove her would
    not breach her human rights.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal mainly criticised the judge's failure to  adjourn
    the hearing which took no account of the appellant being a litigant  in
    person. It was argued that the judge's reasoning that  the  appellant's
    oral evidence would have no material impact was irrational  given  that
    the appellant would have been  able  to  address  the  judge's  adverse
    findings. The appellant had been deprived of a fair hearing.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it  was  "at  least
    arguable that the appellant should have been afforded an opportunity to
    respond to (the adverse findings)"  and  that  the  failure  to  do  so
    deprived the appellant of a fair hearing.

 8. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

The hearing

 9. Mr Iqbal advised me that he had spoken to Mr Singh and that  they  were
    agreed that this appeal raised procedural issues rather than  those  of
    merit. They were further in agreement that the failure to  adjourn  the
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal judge when  documentary  evidence
    appeared to be an error of law and that the matter should  be  remitted
    for de novo hearing.

10. Mr Singh agreed that fairness was the main issue.  He  emphasised  that
    the appellant had produced an A&E discharge summary which supported her
    claim to have been too unwell to attend the hearing. Furthermore,  this
    was the first adjournment application made by the appellant.

Decision on error of law

11. In advance of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant
    provided, by email, medical evidence showing that she had been admitted
    to hospital overnight where she was diagnosed with suspected gastritis.
    In addition, as she was expressing suicidal ideation, she was  referred
    to the psychiatry team. That evidence was not placed before  the  judge
    who proceeded to hear the appeal in the absence of the appellant  or  a
    representative. In view of the appellant's  status  as  a  litigant  in
    person,  the  explanation  provided  which  was  supported  by  medical
    evidence as well as the negative findings the judge went  on  to  make,
    the matter ought  to  have  been  adjourned  out  of  fairness  to  the
    appellant. As Mr Singh pointed out, the appeal had never been adjourned
    previously. Furthermore, the judge's comment that the real  reason  for
    her non-attendance was to cause delay was unnecessary  and  unsupported
    by evidence.  The effect of the judge proceeding with  the  hearing  in
    these  circumstances  was  that  the  appellant  was  deprived  of  the
    opportunity to address the  issues  which  the  judge  found  were  not
    established, including whether Article 8 was engaged at all. The  error
    in this case is, therefore, manifestly material.

12. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of her human rights appeal at the
    First-tier Tribunal and it would be  unfair  to  deprive  her  of  such
    consideration.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of three hours  by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge G Mitchell.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 9 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



