
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06471/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 September 2019                          |On 12 September 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                 RAYMOND [M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal from  the  decision
    of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Powell who, in a decision  promulgated  on
    21 June 2019, dismissed the appellant's "digital case"  appeal  against
    the decision to refuse to grant him leave to remain on the  grounds  of
    family and private life established in the UK.

 2. One of the issues in the appeal was whether the appellant  had  entered
    into a genuine and  subsisting  same-sex  marriage  in  the  UK  on  19
    December 2017 with  the  consequence  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to married life with his same-sex partner  being  carried  on
    his home country of Uganda.

 3. The Judge held at [27] that the appellant had not provided any evidence
    in support of his appeal. Permission to appeal has been granted on  the
    ground that it is arguable that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  "the
    letter of 1 November  2017  at  p37  of  the  appellant's  bundle  when
    concluding that the marriage was one of convenience, particularly given
    the fact that the  decision  letter  indicated  that  the  relationship
    eligibility requirements had been met."

 4. The complaint advanced by the appellant goes wider than this. He pleads
    that the Judge has failed to consider the entirety  of  the  bundle  of
    documents that he says was delivered to the Tribunal on 11 June 2019.

 5. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Jones conceded that the appellant's  bundle  of  documents  had
    been filed with the Tribunal on 11 June 2019. There is a  copy  of  the
    bundle in my file with a receipt date of 11 June  2019,  and  Ms  Jones
    also had a copy of the bundle with the same receipt date.

 6. I infer from the Judge's line of reasoning that when he sat at  Newport
    on 14 June 2019 he did not have in either digital or hard copy form the
    appellant's  bundle.   Therefore   he   proceeded   on   the   mistaken
    understanding that the appellant had failed to  file  any  evidence  in
    support of his appeal.

 7. Accordingly, I am satisfied that  the  proceedings  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were procedurally irregular. Through no fault  of  the  Judge,
    the evidence filed by the appellant was not taken  into  consideration.
    Therefore the decision is vitiated by a material error of law, and must
    be set aside. As the appellant did not have a fair hearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal, his appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    complete rehearing.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  of  law  on
    procedural fairness grounds and accordingly the decision is set aside.

Directions

 9. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Newport for  a  de
    novo hearing (Judge Powell not compatible)



Signed                              Date 10 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
