
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06931/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31 October 2018                    |On 04 December 2018                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Larysa [V]
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal on human  rights
    grounds for the reasons set out in particular at [30]-[35] in the First-
    tier Tribunal decision.

Background

 2. The claimant is an Ukrainian citizen who entered the United Kingdom  on
    a visit visa in December 2010.  When it expired on 15  June  2011,  she
    did not embark.   She is now 65 years old and seeks to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom to help care for her grandson, who lives with his father
    (the claimant's son) and who is 15 years old.  The claimant was  served
    with notice as an overstayer on 19 June 2013.

The 2011 First-tier Tribunal decision

 3. An application for leave to remain as a dependent parent, made in  2011
    was refused and the claimant appealed.  She was appeal rights exhausted
    in relation to that application on 20 August 2013.

 4. That  decision  is  the  Devaseelan  starting  point  for  any  further
    consideration of the claimant's family and private life in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 5. The First-tier Judge found that when her son's wife left him  in  2008,
    he struggled to cope with his 5 year old son.   The  divorce  was  made
    absolute in 2009.  In 2011, in the light of  her  son's  difficulty  in
    coping with his parental responsibilities, the claimant decided to come
    and look after her grandson and her son. Her son was working long hours
    and studying for his Masters' degree and  using  out  of  hours  school
    clubs and the parents of friends to help him, in  the  absence  of  his
    wife.

 6. The First-tier Judge in October 2011 found that the claimant had always
    intended to try to settle here and that her use  of  a  visit  visa  to
    enter the United Kingdom was 'clearly deceitful'.  The Judge found that
    she never intended to return to her country of origin at the end of her
    visit.

 7. The Judge found that the claimant before coming to the  United  Kingdom
    had a teaching post, savings, and a house in the Ukraine.   She gave up
    the job, transferred E8000 to her son to buy a house  of  his  own  (in
    their joint names), and transferred ownership of her  property  in  the
    Ukraine to her son  before  coming  here.   The  effect  was  that  the
    claimant had divested herself of all assets in  the  Ukraine.   At  the
    date of hearing in 2011, the claimant was partially deaf  but  had  not
    needed any medical treatment in the United Kingdom nor did she take any
    regular prescription drugs.  She was a healthy 65-year old woman.

 8. The  appeal  was  dismissed  and  the  claimant  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 20 August 2013.

The 2013 application

 9. On 25 November 2013, the claimant made a  further  family  and  private
    life application for leave  to  remain  which  was  unsuccessful.   The
    application was refused with no right of appeal on 6 January 2014.  The
    claimant was served with a form RED00003 in 2015 not removed.

10. Following a judicial review challenge, the respondent agreed to  remake
    the decision and did so, on 30 May 2017, with an  in-country  right  of
    appeal. That is the decision under appeal.

11. The Secretary of State refused leave to remain on the  basis  that  the
    claimant did not meet the family life criteria in the Immigration Rules
    HC 395 (as amended); that she had not been in the United Kingdom for 20
    years; that she had lived in Ukraine until she was 57 and  would  still
    have ties to that country; that there were no significant obstacles  to
    her reintegration into the Ukraine; and that although  it  was  in  the
    child's  best  interests  to  remain  in  the   United   Kingdom,   his
    relationship with his father had improved and  at  15  (rather  than  8
    years old when the claimant first arrived) he  did  not  need  parental
    support on a daily basis and there were  no  exceptional  circumstances
    for the grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.

First-tier Tribunal decision

12. The First-tier Tribunal took as its  starting  point  the  decision  of
    First-tier Judge Napthine in October 2011 on the claimant's application
    for leave to remain as a dependant parent, set out above.

13. The family home is jointly owned by the  claimant  and  her  son.   The
    claimant's son has now remarried, to a  woman  who  is  not  a  British
    citizen.  The claimant's son is a British citizen but her grandson is a
    French citizen.  His father had struggled to cope with him and with the
    end of his first marriage and the family regarded the claimant  as  the
    foundation stone of the home now, and the only absolute constant in her
    grandson's life.

14. An independent social worker's report stated that the new wife had  not
    taken on a maternal role in relation to the  claimant's  grandson,  for
    whom she continued to be the primary carer.  The son and his wife lived
    upstairs, with the claimant and her grandson downstairs.  Indeed, for a
    period of nine months, the claimant's son had taken work  in  Eire  and
    left the claimant to care for his son, her grandson, in his absence.

15. The grandmother and grandson were described as emotionally  intertwined
    with the grandson significantly damaged by  maternal  abandonment.  His
    natural mother had drug problems and was not much  involved  with  him,
    highly unreliable as to contact, and often went to Ibiza for months  on
    end instead of engaging with her  son.  Her  current  address  was  not
    known.

16. The claimant had been her grandson's maternal influence for  10  years,
    and during that time,  his  behaviour  had  improved  but  he  remained
    immature, functioning at a level appropriate for a child of  10  or  11
    years old.  The grandson was  now  taking  his  GCSE  examinations  and
    beginning to plan for university.

17. The Judge set out his reasons for departing from the  earlier  decision
    and allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

18. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.





Permission to appeal

19. Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds of appeal, as follows:

          1) The claimant could not meet the relevant Immigration Rules and
             this   was   not   mentioned   in   the   First-tier   Judge's
             proportionality assessment;



          2) The claimant had a poor immigration history to which  adequate
             weight had not been given, and the  Judge  should  have  given
             greater weight to the claimant's  son's  increased  prosperity
             and ability to look after his son;



          3) The finding that the  claimant's  former  daughter-in-law  had
             abdicated her maternal responsibilities towards her  son,  the
             claimant's grandson, was not supported by  evidence  from  the
             child's mother;

          4) It was not open to the  First-tier  Judge  to  find  that  the
             circumstances set out amounted  to  exceptional  circumstances
             and if the claimant wanted to spend more time  in  the  United
             Kingdom  she  should  leave  and  make  an   entry   clearance
             application.

Rule 24 Reply

20. The claimant responded, noting that the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    challenge the Judge's findings as to the credibility of  the  witnesses
    before the First-tier Tribunal or  the  devastating  impact  which  the
    claimant's removal would have on her grandson. Her finding that removal
    would be disproportionate was open to her, having  regard  to  all  the
    facts and the best interests of the child in question.

21. The Secretary of State had not explained what  different  approach  the
    Judge ought to have taken, in an appeal where Appendix FM was  not  met
    but the Judge found, without factual challenge, that the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to remove the  claimant  would  have  a  'devastating'
    effect on her grandson.  The Judge had weighed  properly  the  evidence
    and the interests of the individuals concerned, reaching  a  conclusion
    which was open to her, and the Secretary of  State's  grounds  were  no
    more than a disagreement with some of the Judge's findings of fact.

22. In particular, on the accepted evidence, the grandson's  French  mother
    left his father in 2008, her current address was  unknown  and  he  had
    little contact with her.  The claimant's son had been honest about  his
    failings as a parent, and the Judge had accepted that evidence, as well
    as the evidence of the strong ties between  grandmother  and  grandson.
    The Home Office Presenting Officer at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    had not suggested that the claimant should leave the United Kingdom and
    seek entry clearance and in  the  light  of  the  grandson's  emotional
    needs, no sensible reason had been provided for that suggestion in  the
    grounds of appeal.  The First-tier Judge had been entitled to find that
    it was as a result of the claimant's presence in the family that all of
    them were now more emotionally and financially settled  than  when  she
    arrived 10 years earlier.

23. That was the basis on which the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

24. For the Secretary of State, Mr Walker accepted at  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing that failure to deal with Appendix FM was not a material  error
    of law as it was not the claimant's case that she could  bring  herself
    within the Rules.

25. He further accepted that there was clear evidence that  the  grandson's
    mother has returned  to  France  and  takes  no  further  part  in  his
    upbringing and that therefore the absence of any evidence from her  was
    both unsurprising and immaterial.

Analysis

26.      These grounds of appeal are  really  no  more  than  a  vigorously
    expressed disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal's findings of  fact
    (but not credibility) in relation  to  whether  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances for which leave to remain should be granted  outside  the
    Rules.

27. The Secretary of State's challenge does not approach the  standard  set
    for interference with factual findings by Lord Justice Brooke  at  [90]
    in R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982: the First-tier Tribunal's  findings  are  neither  irrational,
    Wednesbury unreasonable, nor perverse,  on  the  unchallenged  evidence
    before him. Nor do I have any difficulty in understanding  the  Judge's
    reasoning.

28. The findings made by this judge were unarguably  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence  and  accordingly  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  cannot
    succeed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

DECISION

29. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Date:         28 November 2018               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


