
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06140/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4th October 2018                  |On 6th November 2018                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                               MRS SHAMILA BI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Winters, Counsel, instructed by Gray and Co,
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Mathews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal to the Upper
         Tribunal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge James who in a
         decision promulgated on 5 October 2017 dismissed the appellant's
         appeal.

      2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan who applied on 30 October
         2015 for entry clearance to join her husband, Mr Umran Hassain,
         hereinafter referred to as her sponsor. They are paternal 1st
         cousins. He is a British national.

      3. The respondent refused the application on 4 February 2016. Amongst
         other reasons, the entry clearance officer was not satisfied the
         relationship was genuine and subsisting. With the application were
         some photographs of the marriage. A member of the respondent's
         staff telephoned the sponsor and had asked him about his marriage
         and he gave the wrong date. He also said he last saw the appellant
         in October 2015 whereas the appellant had made no mention of such a
         visit nor was there any supporting evidence.

      4. The appellant said they married in Pakistan on the 25th of March
         2011. An application for entry clearance the appellant was made on
         27 September 2013. This was unsuccessful, with the entry clearance
         officer not being satisfy the relationship with genuine. On that
         occasion the only evidence of contact was 4 pages of telephone
         cards which did not contain any personal information or details of
         the calls.

      5. The sponsor's passport showed that he had visited Pakistan from 18
         March 2011 until 26 May 2011 which covered the period of the
         marriage. However, there was no evidence of cohabitation during
         that period. The next entry in his passport was 31 October 2014
         when he stayed until 20 November 2014. There was no documentation
         to confirm during that visit he was with the appellant. The
         respondent pointed out he would have other family members he could
         be visiting.

      6. The appellant had not submitted other documentation to show regular
         contact beyond phone cards which did not confirm contact with the
         sponsor. It was pointed out again that the appellant's parents are
         siblings and they may have used these cards to communicate with
         each other.

      7. The grounds of appeal assert that the sponsor recalled that during
         the telephone interview he stated he last visited his wife in
         October. He did not specify the year rather than stating 2015 as
         stated by the entry clearance officer. It is also alleged that he
         immediately corrected his mistake about the date of the wedding. It
         is also suggested that the sponsor sent a self-addressed envelope
         to the respondent for the return of the documents used in the
         application. However, telephone cards and photographs submitted
         were not returned. It was suggested that the respondent did not
         take proper account of these and appeared to have destroyed this
         evidence.

    The First-tier Tribunal.

      8. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal James in
         Glasgow on 27 September 2017. The judge heard from the sponsor and
         his sister. In a determination promulgated on 5 October 2017 it was
         dismissed. The only issue arising related to whether the marriage
         was genuine and subsisting.

      9. At paragraph 6 the judge states that because of section 85 A(4)(a)
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 the tribunal
         could only consider evidence if it was submitted at the time of
         application.

     10. At hearing the presenting officer confirmed there was no transcript
         of the telephone interview with the sponsor. The judge took the
         view that in the circumstance the discrepancies could not be relied
         upon. However, during the course of cross-examination the sponsor
         had accepted he made errors in response to this call and the judge
         felt able to take this into account. The judge referred to the
         relevance of the telephone cards citing Goudey (subsisting marriage-
         evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 41.

     11. Regarding the missing telephone cards the judge did not accept this
         meant that all the evidence of contact had been destroyed by the
         respondent. It was open to the appellant to reduce other evidence
         of contact.

     12. The grounds of appeal contended that the sponsor used a landline to
         call his wife. However, an itemised telephone bills had not been
         submitted. This meant there could be no cross-referencing the
         numbers dialled with the telephone cards. The presenting officer
         confirmed at hearing there was no evidence that documentation
         submitted with the application had not been returned.

     13. The sponsor's sister gave evidence saying she was present at the
         couple's wedding and that she would have been present in the family
         home when her brother spoke to his wife on the phone. The decision
         records this happened every 3 or 4 days after he returned from work
         and the calls would last for 15 to 20 minutes. She stated that her
         brother did not like using `What's App'. The appellant would call
         her mobile phone using `What's App' when she knew the sponsor would
         be at home and she would hand the phone to him.

     14. At hearing screenshots were produced of the sponsor's sisters
         mobile phone said to be calls from the appellant. The screenshots
         show the name `Shamil' being the appellant's 1st name but there was
         no link with the telephone numbers given in the application form or
         other documentation.

     15. At paragraph 21 of the decision the judge recorded that the
         complete date of the telephone calls was not recorded on the mobile
         phone. The sponsor's sister had said calls were made in August
         2017. The judge had referred to the date of refusal as being 4
         February 2016 and stated that because of this they could not
         consider this evidence.

     16. The judge did note an inconsistency in that the screenshots did
         give a time in that the calls were made as generally before 5 PM.
         The evidence of the sponsor's sister was that there would be
         received after 5 PM when the sponsor would have returned from work.
         She was cross-examined on this point. The judge concluded that this
         undermined the claims made in a witness statement and in her oral
         evidence about the calls being made to her brother. The 3 examples
         of calls made after 5 PM related to days when the sponsor was in
         Pakistan. The judge queried why therefore the appellant would be
         calling him then.

     17. The sponsor's sister also said in oral evidence that the sponsor
         did not use a landline which contradicted the grounds of appeal.
         The judge referred to the absence of phonecards subsequent to the
         date of application which could not have been lost.

     18. The sponsor said that he had visited her in 2014, 2015, 2016 and
         2017 along with his parents and another sister. However no
         statements or evidence was called to confirm this and the claim was
         contradicted by his statement and the stamps on his passport. The
         sponsor had submitted 3 money transfers and the judge at paragraph
         33 referred to address of documentary evidence of financial support
         given that they would then have been made for about 6 years. It
         also turned out that the money sent was from his uncle.

     19. At paragraph 34 the judge records the sponsor saying he had dinner
         with his wife in Pakistan on his last visit and produced the
         receipt and photographs. These related to a trip made between July
         and August 2017. The judge referred to this post-dating the date of
         refusal.

     20. The judge concluded by finding the evidence of the sponsor and his
         sister was not credible and it had not been shown the relationship
         was genuine or subsisting. The judge concluded by saying the
         impression was that this is a marriage of convenience so as to
         obtain a spouse visa.

    The Upper Tribunal.

     21. Permission to appeal was granted inter alia on the basis it was
         arguable that the judge incorrectly excluded evidence from their
         mind on the basis it post-dated the decision. Reference was made to
         paragraph 21 which deals with evidence of telephone calls post
         decision where the judge commented: 'and thus I cannot consider
         this documentary evidence'.

     22. At hearing it was accepted by the presenting officer that the judge
         erred in referring to post decision evidence not being open for
         consideration as section 85A (4)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 had been repealed. However, it was contended in
         light of the other evidence that this error was not material to the
         outcome.

     23. Reference was made to the judge's comments at paragraph 21, and
         alluded to at para 27. The same view is indicated in relation to a
         visit to Pakistan post decision at para 34.

     24. Mr Winters relied upon the grounds advanced in the permission
         application. I was referred to note two of the headnote of Goudey
         (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC). It
         reads:

             "Evidence of telephone cards is capable of being corroborative
             of the contention of the parties that they communicate by
             telephone, even if such data cannot confirm the particular
             number the sponsor was calling in the country in question. It
             is not a requirement that the parties also write or text each
             other."

     25. Mr. Mathews argued that although the judge misdirected herself
         about the admissibility of post decision evidence she nevertheless
         did consider the evidence of the subsequent phone calls as set out
         in paragraphs 20 and 22 and found they did not assist the
         appellant.

     26. The same applies in respect of the stamps on the sponsor's passport
         and the reference to a visit to Pakistan from July to August 2017
         recorded at paragraph 34. Judge referred to the lack of documentary
         evidence of this visit and did referred paragraph 36 to the stamps
         on the sponsor's passport.

     27. Regarding the missing phonecards at paragraph 16 the judge recorded
         the presenting officer as stating there was no evidence on file of
         documents not being return. The judge referred to the absence of
         other evidence of ongoing contact and the discrepancies as to the
         times of calls that were recorded. This is further evidence of the
         judge considering the evidence albeit the it boasted the decision.

     28. The grounds seek to fault the judge for referring to aspects of the
         evidence without making specific findings. An example of this is at
         17 where the judge records that she is taking into account the
         sponsor's contention that evidence submitted was destroyed and the
         presenting officer's point there was no record on file to suggest
         this. As I read this simply indicating that she is taking both
         positions into account. This would suggest the judge is essentially
         taking a neutral stance about the phonecard evidence but is
         considering the evidence in the round.

     29. Similarly, at paragraph 36 judge refers to the passport stamps on
         the sponsor's passport and the photographs and receipts supplied in
         relation to what he said was a meal with the appellant. Mr Matthews
         makes the point that the judge cannot be expected to evaluate every
         single piece of evidence. In any event at paragraph 32 she did
         express a view where she said it was difficult to ascertain from
         the evidence of travel whether this was to see his wife or other
         family members. Reference was made to a jointly owned property in
         Pakistan which he had visited before his marriage.

     30. The judge did comment upon the discrepancies the sponsor's account
         in relation to a telephone interview in the context of his oral
         evidence. The judge had referred to the absence of a transcript of
         the telephone call but was able to referred to discrepancies from
         his oral account.



Conclusions

     31. Notwithstanding the incorrect reference as to post decision
         evidence the judge in fact did consider the evidence. It is my
         conclusion that no material error of law occurred. Aside from this,
         the judge referred to additional factors which would justify the
         decision. I find that the judge carefully considered and evaluated
         the evidence appropriately.

     32. The judge did not find the evidence of the sponsor or his sister
         credible. This was a matter for the judge to decide regard to all
         of the evidence. The judge referred to contradictory accounts about
         the telephone contact as well as a claim visits to Pakistan. Judge
         referred to the absence of documentary evidence which might have
         supported the claim contact and which should have been easily
         accessible. There was reference to the absence of correspondence or
         a witness statement from the appellant. The judge alluded to what
         evidence was as possibly relating to contact between family
         members. This is not specifically demonstrating the marriage was
         genuine and subsisting.

     33. At paragraph 38 judge referred to their impression being that this
         was a marriage of convenience. When the rest of the decision is
         read I believe the judge made this comment as an aside. The issue
         for the judge to determine was whether the marriage was genuine and
         subsisting which is a different test from the notion of a marriage
         of convenience albeit in practical terms there is some overlap.

Decision

I find no material error of law established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge James. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand.




   Francis J Farrelly
 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date :26 October 2018
