
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06399/2016
                                                               HU/06402/2016
                                                               HU/06405/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                           |On 31 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                          PETER [A] - 1st Appellant
                         ELFREDA [A] - 2nd Appellant
                            [U A] - 3rd Appellant
                         (Anonymity orders not made)
                                                                  Appellanst
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Ghana. The first Appellant, born  on  20
    March 1973 is married to the second Appellant, born 22nd of June  1975.
    The third Appellant, [UA] is their son  who  was  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom on [ ~ ] 2008 and was thus almost 9 years old at  the  date  of
    the hearing at first instance. The Appellants appeal against a decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant sitting at Hatton Cross on 28
    July 2017 in which she dismissed their appeals against decisions of the
    Respondent dated 9 February 2016. Those decisions were  to  refuse  the
    Appellants' leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  both  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 (right to respect  for  private  family
    life) of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. It was common ground at the hearing before the Judge that the first and
    second Appellants could not succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as
    partners. The issue in the case centred  on  U  and  whether  he  could
    succeed under paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv)  of  the  Rules;  Appendix  FM
    section EX.1 and/or section 117B (6) of the Nationality Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002. As U had lived in the United Kingdom continuously  for
    more than seven years he was a qualifying child for the purposes of the
    Rules and the statute. They require the consideration of whether it  is
    reasonable to expect a qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom. It
    was accepted that both  U's  parents  had  a  genuine  and  substantial
    parental relationship with their son.

The Appellant's Case

 3. The Appellants' case was summarised by the Judge at [2] to [6]  of  the
    determination. The first Appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student in 2001 and had leave until 2005 since when he has had no leave
    to be here. An appeal against refusal to grant leave  on  human  rights
    grounds was dismissed by the Tribunal in 2014. The first Appellant  was
    an experienced engineer and currently working as such earning in excess
    of �41,000 per annum plus overtime. He and his wife  had  another  son,
    older than U, who lives in Ghana and attends a  private  school  there.
    The second  Appellant  appears  to  have  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally following the dismissal of an appeal  against  a  refusal  to
    issue her with a working holiday maker visa.

 4. The Appellant relied on a report  prepared  by  an  independent  social
    worker Ms Jasmine Smith who said that it was in U's best  interests  to
    remain in the United Kingdom. U was currently thriving  at  school  and
    had established secure  relationships  with  extended  family  members,
    school peers and  his  church.  He  was  integrated  into  the  British
    education system and it would be inappropriate to disrupt his bonds and
    links. The Judge referred to evidence in the  Appellant's  bundle  from
    family and friends  attesting  to  the  child's  close  ties  with  his
    extended family including aunts and cousins in the United Kingdom.

The Decision at First Instance

 5. The Judge noted that in the previous appeal dismissed in  January  2014
    the Tribunal had found that it was in  the  best  interests  and  would
    promote the welfare of U to be with his parents and join his brother in
    Ghana. At that time U was five years old and no reason was shown why he
    would not be able to adjust to life in Ghana. Since  then  three  years
    had passed and U was now almost 9 years old.  The  Judge  commented  at
    [10] that the adults had flagrantly abused the  Immigration  Rules  and
    had remained in the United Kingdom illegally. The first  Appellant  had
    been living and working illegally in United  Kingdom  since  2005.  The
    Judge directed herself that  U's  situation  should  not  be  adversely
    affected by the conduct  of  his  parents  when  considering  his  best
    interests. Those interests were to remain with his parents as part of a
    family unit and continue his education. The Judge did not accept that a
    move to Ghana would have the negative impact on U that the social  work
    report indicated. U's elder brother had received an education Ghana and
    there was no reason why U could not be educated there as well.

 6. It did not follow that the first Appellant  would  be  unemployed  upon
    return to Ghana since he was well equipped to provide  for  his  family
    there. It was not  unreasonable  to  expect  U  to  relocate  with  his
    parents. It was not necessarily the case that U would suffer trauma  or
    become psychotic. How he reacted to the move was dependent upon how his
    parents prepared him. That was a factor overlooked by the social worker
    in her assessment. U had the opportunity to make new friends. The Judge
    cited a number of authorities in particular MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ
    705 and concluded at [16] "in carrying out  the  balancing  exercise  I
    take into account the wider public interest  in  effective  immigration
    control".

 7. There were no  exceptional  circumstances  to  merit  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the  Rules.  U  could  be  educated  in  the  English
    language in Ghana and there were family there with whom the  Appellants
    could stay upon return. Little weight should be given  to  the  private
    life established by the family in the United Kingdom  during  the  time
    they resided here unlawfully. She dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

 8. The Appellants appealed against this decision  in  grounds  settled  by
    counsel who appeared at first instance and before me. The grounds  made
    three main points. The Judge's finding that it would be  reasonable  to
    expect U to leave the United Kingdom was perverse in light of the  law,
    guidance and evidence. The Judge failed to attach appropriate weight to
    the social worker's report and had failed to consider both sides of the
    proportionality balancing exercise. The grounds cited the  Respondent's
    guidance to caseworkers in the Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  -
    Family Migration at section 11.2.4. The longer a child resided  in  the
    United Kingdom the more the balance would begin to swing in terms of it
    being unreasonable to expect the child  to  leave  United  Kingdom  and
    strong reasons would be required in order to refuse a case where  there
    had been continuous residence in the United Kingdom of more than  seven
    years.

 9. The grounds also cited an extract from MA Pakistan  that  the  starting
    point was that leave should be granted to  a  qualifying  child  unless
    there were powerful reasons to the contrary. The  grounds  argued  that
    the Judge  had  failed  to  direct  herself  to  the  Respondent's  own
    guidance. The Judge had failed to engage with the expert evidence which
    was the only means by which the Judge could have been able to ascertain
    the views of U. The Appellant did not  need  to  show  that  it  was  a
    certainty that U might suffer trauma as a result of removal  only  that
    it was more likely than not. The Judge had set the  standard  of  proof
    too high when she rejected the risk of  trauma  as  not  a  given.  The
    grounds conceded that the  first  and  second  Appellant's  immigration
    history could be taken into account when  determining  whether  it  was
    reasonable for U to leave the United Kingdom, but that history was  not
    sufficiently powerful to deny the Appellants leave to remain. The Judge
    had failed to consider the fact that the  Appellants  were  financially
    independent and had contributed to the  tax  system,  that  they  spoke
    English and were fully integrated into the United  Kingdom.  The  Judge
    had  failed  to  properly  prepare  the  scales  when  conducting   the
    proportionality exercise.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Andrew who found that Judge  Grant  had  carefully  considered
    whether or not it would  be  reasonable  for  U  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. The onward appeal was renewed to the Upper Tribunal  and  came
    before Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Norton-Taylor  on  30  August
    2018. In granting permission to appeal he found  it  strongly  arguable
    that the Judge had failed  to  ask  herself  the  correct  question  in
    relation to the application of the reasonableness test  namely  whether
    powerful reasons existed  to  counter  balance  the  residence  factor.
    Citing MT and ET [2018] UKUT 88, Judge Norton Taylor stated  that  [16]
    of the determination arguably  failed  to  address  the  point  as  the
    overall focus of the Judge's assessment appeared to be the  ability  of
    the parents to help U settle in Ghana. There was force in the assertion
    that the Judge had failed to adequately  address  the  expert  evidence
    before her. The Respondent did not reply to the grant of permission.

The Hearing Before Me

11. Counsel for the Appellant relied on her grounds arguing the  Judge  had
    failed to identify the powerful reasons required in a  case  where  the
    child was a qualifying child. This was more than  a  disagreement  with
    the decision. The Appellant's immigration history  in  MT  and  ET  was
    worse than that of the adults in this case. In MT and ET the parent had
    not only overstayed but also committed the crime of fraud and yet  that
    was not considered sufficient to outweigh the  best  interests  of  the
    child. The child was 10 years old at the time of the hearing in MT  and
    ET but in the instant case U was almost 9 at the date of  hearing.  The
    availability of education in Nigeria was not a sufficient reason in  MT
    and ET and the availability of education in Ghana was not  therefore  a
    sufficient reason in this case.  The  extended  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom whose existence was noted by the Judge should have  been  taken
    into account in the proportionality exercise.

12. For the Respondent it was argued there was no material error of law  in
    the determination. The Judge knew to assess the best interests  of  the
    child and it could be clearly seen from the determination that she  had
    done that. Those best interests would not be compromised by  return  to
    Ghana. U would be reunited with his brother who was still in Ghana. The
    Judge was entitled to put greater weight on the nuclear family in Ghana
    rather than the extended family in the United Kingdom.  The  Judge  was
    also entitled to put weight on the immigration history  of  the  adults
    including their failure to regularise their stay in this country.

13. In conclusion counsel stated she was not submitting that the Judge  had
    failed to take account of the evidence but that the Judge had failed to
    set the factors out on both sides  starting  from  a  point  where  the
    scales were evenly balanced. MT and ET was decided after the hearing in
    this case, but the immigration history in MT and ET was worse  than  in
    this case. The decision at first instance was perverse.

Findings

14. Since I heard the appeal in this case  the  Supreme  Court  have  given
    guidance on the application of the reasonableness test when considering
    the position of qualifying children in the case of KO (Nigeria)  &  Ors
    [2018]  UKSC  53.  The  Supreme  Court  emphasised  the  need  for   "a
    straightforward set of rules" and that the purpose of their approach in
    KO  was  "to  narrow  rather  than  to  widen  the  residual  area   of
    discretionary judgment".

15. There were three appeals before the Supreme Court, one of which  NS  is
    particularly relevant to the issues raised in the instant appeal before
    me. It was not a deportation case and thus the public interest did  not
    require the adults' removal because  they  had  a  subsisting  parental
    relationship with the qualifying children (one of whom was more than 10
    years old). The Upper Tribunal had recognised that the  children  would
    lose much if they and  their  parents  were  removed  and  further  the
    children had no knowledge of life outside  the  United  Kingdom.  Their
    best interests were to remain in the United Kingdom. Nevertheless,  the
    Upper Tribunal considered it outrageous for the parents to be permitted
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

16. At [51] of KO Lord Justice Carnwath (giving the judgment of  the  whole
    Court) did not consider that the Upper Tribunal's  disapproval  of  the
    parents' conduct was relevant to its conclusion under section 117B  (6)
    of the 2002 Act. The parents' conduct was only relevant to  the  extent
    that it meant that they had to  leave  the  country.  It  was  in  that
    context that it had to be considered whether it was reasonable for  the
    children to leave with them. The children's best interests  would  have
    been for the whole family to remain in the  United  Kingdom  but  in  a
    context where the parents had to leave, the natural  expectation  would
    be that the children would go with them. Importantly he  added:  "there
    was nothing in the evidence reviewed  by  the  Judge  to  suggest  that
    [removal] would be other than reasonable". As a result, the  appeal  of
    the appellant NS was dismissed.

17. In the light of the decision in KO it is  clear  that  the  appropriate
    test in this case is whether there is  a  natural  expectation  that  U
    should go with his parents. They in turn are expected to leave  because
    they have no leave  to  be  here.  The  grounds  of  onward  appeal  at
    paragraph 12 acknowledge that the Judge set out the factors  which  she
    believed made it reasonable for U to relocate to  Ghana.  At  [15]  the
    Judge stated: "having taken into account the age of U, the level of his
    schooling has reached, the progress he has made, his close ties to  his
    cousins  and  his  integration  into  the  British  way  of   life,   I
    nevertheless find that his  best  interests  are  to  remain  with  his
    parents and return to Ghana as an intact family unit. I find it is  not
    unreasonable to expect him to continue his education, family  life  and
    social and private life in Ghana where, as an added bonus, he can  meet
    his older brother". At [20] she continued that: "U can be  educated  in
    the English language in Ghana and his parents have family in Ghana with
    whom I find they will be able to stay upon return to Ghana  while  they
    re-establish themselves".

18. The relevance of the  poor  immigration  history  of  U's  parents  was
    relevant to the extent that it meant  they  would  have  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. The issue was whether the natural  expectation  that  U
    would go with them could be displaced. Whilst it was  not  relevant  to
    consider  the  poor  behaviour  of  the  parents  when  assessing   the
    reasonableness of expecting U, a qualifying child, to leave the  United
    Kingdom the other factors which the Judge dealt  with  in  some  detail
    were highly relevant. In so far as the parents claim in their own right
    to remain in this country, both had flagrantly abused immigration rules
    and had remained here illegally. The 2nd appellant  had  come  with  an
    agent in 2006, having lost her appeal to enter the country legally. The
    first appellant had been living and working  illegally  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2005. Whilst he argues that he  has  been  in  well  paid
    employment in this country, it is important to note that the employment
    was illegal and his employer liable to a significant fine for employing
    someone with no lawful status as the Judge pointed out at [12]. It  was
    the view of the Judge that  unlawful  employment  counted  against  the
    first appellant not for him. That was the  view  she  was  entitled  to
    take.

19. Even if, there is otherwise an expectation that the child will go  with
    his parents, if the best interests of the child indicate that the child
    should stay in this country (as they did in NS)  those  best  interests
    must still be given significant weight. In this  case  the  Judge  very
    carefully analysed what U's best interests were and whether he could be
    expected to relocate to Ghana and enjoy family life  with  his  parents
    there. U was not at a critical stage in his education and there were no
    important public examinations to sit. He had family to help him  settle
    in Ghana and his older brother was there. The Judge pointed out at [14]
    that the whole family's best interests were to be reunited as  soon  as
    possible.

20. She reminded herself  at  [16]  that  in  carrying  out  the  balancing
    exercise she took into account the wider public interest  in  effective
    immigration control, but I do not consider that that  was  relevant  to
    her consideration under section  117B(6).  There  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances which merited consideration  of  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules. The argument made in the grounds of onward appeal and before  me
    that the Judge had failed to identify either strong or powerful reasons
    why U should not be  granted  leave  to  remain  is,  I  find,  a  mere
    disagreement with the decision of the Judge. Her decision  was  neither
    perverse in the light of the law nor in the light of  the  Respondent's
    own guidance (which in view of its reliance on the bad behaviour of the
    parents is in the light of KO, the wrong test).

21. She  attached  appropriate  weight  to  the  expert  evidence  and  had
    evidently considered it with some care.  At  [13]  she  pointed  out  a
    serious omission in that report that how U would react to the  move  to
    Ghana was dependent upon how his parents prepared him for that move.  A
    Judge is not bound to simply accept the opinion of  an  expert  witness
    but is entitled to consider  the  evidence  and  form  their  own  view
    provided adequate reasons for any disagreement  are  given.  The  Judge
    gave such adequate reasons in this case.

22. The argument she failed to consider both sides of  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise is again a mere disagreement with the decision.  The
    Judge set out in isolation U's best interests and directed  herself  as
    to the relevant issues to be weighed in the balance  and  the  relevant
    amount of weight to be attached in each case, see for example  [19].  I
    do not consider there was any material error of law in this case and  I
    dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appellants' appeals dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for  otherwise
making such an order.


Signed this 29 October 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 29 October 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

