
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06596/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd July 2019                     |On 19th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   M U H L
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Islam (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Broe,  promulgated  on  13th  August  2018,  following  a  hearing   at
    Birmingham  on  31st  July  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, and was born  on  6th
    August 1975.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    28th February 2018, refusing him leave to remain in the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that he seeks leave to remain  in
    the UK as the parent of his two sons, who were born on 31st April  2005
    and 15th August 2006 respectively.  Both are  British  citizens.   They
    are living with their mother, who is the ex-wife of the Appellant.  The
    Appellant maintains that he  plays  an  active  role  in  their  lives,
    through their school activities.

 4. He has secured orders from the court that gave  him  contact  with  the
    children.  This has been frustrated by his ex-wife.  He has worked hard
    to see them because of the unreasonable behaviour of his  ex-wife.   He
    would not be able to play such an active role in their lives if he  had
    to go to Bangladesh.  This would have long-term  consequences  for  his
    life with them.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge observed that there was "little  dispute  about  the  factual
    background to this matter", in that the Appellant was divorced from his
    wife and they have two children, who are  British  citizens,  but  with
    whom he has not  had  direct  access  since  2014.   He  maintains  now
    "contact by cards and letters sent monthly and  on  special  occasions"
    (paragraph 18).  The judge concluded that,

         "I have given careful consideration to the best  interests  of  the
         two children.  They live with their mother and I am  satisfied,  as
         the family court must have been, that it's in their best  interests
         that they remain with her.  Such contact  as  they  have  with  the
         Appellant can continue from Bangladesh" (paragraph 29).

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that  the  Appellant's  direct  access
    with his children ended in 2015.  Prior to  that  he  did  have  direct
    access but this had been frustrated by his  ex-wife.   He  has  secured
    leave as a parent previously and now had indirect contact.   If  he  is
    removed his relationship with his children will  be  directly  impacted
    upon.  The judge had failed to give proper consideration to this.

 7. On 23rd October 2018, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.



 8. On 22nd November 2018,  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  a  Rule  24  response
    accepted that the judge had arguably  erred  in  law  and  invited  the
    Tribunal to determine the appeal with fresh oral (continuance)  hearing
    to consider where the Appellant had established the relationship to his
    children and shown the existence of previous periods of leave.



Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 3rd  July  2019,  Mr  Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted  that  he  would
    have to concede that there was an error on the part of the judge  below
    (although the Rule 24 response was inelegantly drafted in this regard).
     This is a case where the Appellant did have  direct  access  with  his
    children until 2014.  Thereafter, he  has  had  indirect  access.   The
    Appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.   However,  he
    could succeed under freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence, but this  had
    to be demonstrated by the judge undertaking  a  proper  proportionality
    exercise, which he had not done.  This was not a case  of  someone  who
    forges relations with his children when faced with removal.

10. This was a case of someone who had sought contact for a long time,  and
    had been granted "direct" access by a family court.  Significantly, the
    arrangement was then interfered with by his ex-wife,  and  the  CAFCASS
    report is clear from the officer there that it is in the  interests  of
    the children to have access to the father, and the only reason this was
    not happening is because of the mother who has poisoned  the  minds  of
    the children.  This case was quite different from many others  of  this
    kind.  Therefore, the appropriate course of action was for this  matter
    to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for it to consider  what
    future prospective contact arrangements  could  now  be  made  for  the
    Appellant.  Mr Islam, appearing on behalf of the Appellant, agreed that
    this was the right course of action in these proceedings.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This  appeal  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined by a judge other  than  Judge  Broe,  pursuant  to  Practice
    Statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Directions.

12. An anonymity direction is made.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

13. This appeal is allowed.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019
