
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/06893/2016
     HU/06897/2016
     HU/06899/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 February 2018                           |On 7 March 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             1) PARVEEN SIDDIQUE
                         2) MUHAMMAD SHOAIB SIDDIQUE
                             3) ZOHAIB SIDDIQUE
                       (anonymity directionS not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr T Mahmood of Counsel instructed by Aman
                    Solicitors Advocates (Luton)


                            DECISIONS AND REASONS

1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ghani promulgated on 22 May 2017.


2.   Although before me Mrs Parveen Siddique, Mr Muhammad  Shoaib  Siddique,
    and Mr Zohaib Siddique are the Respondents, and the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department is the Appellant, for the sake  of  consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I  shall  refer  to
    the Secretary of State as the  Respondent  and  the  Siddiques  as  the
    Appellants.


3.   The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan born respectively on 1  January
    1966, 7 February 1995 and 20 October 1996.  The First Appellant is  the
    mother of the two other Appellants.  The Appellants entered the  UK  on
    12 January 2012 pursuant to entry clearance granted on 1 November  2011
    conferring leave until 1 February 2014.  The  First  Appellant  secured
    entry clearance as the spouse of Mr Mohammed Sadiq Malik (date of birth
    17 May 1947).  Mr Malik had by that time acquired British  citizenship.
    The Second and Third Appellants were admitted as dependants.


4.   The Appellants were later each granted a variation of leave  to  remain
    until 31 January 2016.  On 20 January 2016 the Appellants  applied  for
    further leave to remain using form FLR(M).  I pause  to  note  that  by
    this stage the Second and Third Appellants had reached their  majority,
    being 20 years old and 19 years old respectively.


5.   The Appellants' applications were refused for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 23 February 2016.


6.   Much of the focus before the Upper Tribunal has been in respect of  the
    requirement - or otherwise - for the First Appellant to take an English
    language test.  In this context it is to be noted that  in  a  covering
    letter  dated  19  January  2016  submitting  the  instant  application
    reference was made in the following terms to the circumstances  of  the
    First Appellant:

         "Our client's [sic.] entered  the  UK  on  12th  January  2012  and
         completed the mandatory two years in the UK in the spouse category.
          However, despite completing mandatory 2 years in the  UK  to  make
         applications  for  Indefinite  leave  to  remain,  since  the  main
         applicant had  not  yet  attained  the  required  English  Language
         Certificate and Life in  the  UK,  they  were  unable  to  make  an
         application for  Indefinite  leave  to  remain.   Therefore,  their
         applications for further leave  to  remain  in  the  same  category
         (spouse) were granted on  31st  January  2014.   Our  clients  were
         granted 2 years extension in spouse category.  Our clients  current
         2 years leave to remain expires on 31st January 2016."


7.   I pause to note that having completed the two years' initial period  of
    leave as a  spouse  the  option  for  the  First  Appellant  under  the
    Immigration Rules was either to apply for indefinite leave to remain as
    a spouse pursuant to paragraph 287 of the Rules,  or  to  apply  for  a
    further period of limited leave to  remain  under  paragraph  284.   As
    identified in the  application  covering  letter,  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 287 would have required  the
    First Appellant to demonstrate adequate knowledge of life in the UK and
    competency in the English language.  In contrast, paragraph 284 - which
    provides for an application to be made for a limited period of  further
    leave - does not require demonstrating knowledge of  life  in  the  UK.
    Nonetheless it does include a provision in respect of English language.


8.   The covering letter goes on to say the following:

         "Although our client can make applications for indefinite leave  to
         remain if the KoLL requirements are met, since they  have  not  yet
         obtained KoLL to make indefinite leave to remain applications,  our
         clients make this application for another 2 years extension in  the
         spouse  category  to  enable  them  to  obtain   English   Language
         certificates and Life in the UK to apply for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain.   Therefore,  since  there  is  sufficient   and   adequate
         maintenance and accommodation available to her and her family,  you
         are requested to grant our client and her two sons another 2  years
         extension under old Immigration Rules."

     It is thereby again apparent that the Appellants were electing  not  to
    apply for indefinite leave  to  remain  because  they  were  not  in  a
    position to satisfy the requirements of the  Rules,  but  instead  were
    applying for a further period of limited leave to remain.


9.   The letter also contains the following:

         "Moreover, in relation to the Language requirements,  our  client's
         application falls in line with her application for entry clearance.
          Therefore, our client or her  both  sons  do  not  need  meet  the
         requirement for this application.  Since our  client  has  met  the
         time scale for ILR applications by completing mandatory 2 years  in
         the UK, they require extension of their visas for another  2  years
         to enable them to obtain the English language Certificate  and  the
         Life in the UK Certificates."


10.  The Respondent saw matters differently.  In the  RFRL,  with  reference
    to paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules, the Respondent  refused  the
    application because of the absence of any suitable evidence of  English
    language competency.  The RFRL states:

         "You have not provided any evidence to show that you have passed an
         English language test in speaking and listening  at  a  minimum  of
         level A1 with a provider approved by the Secretary of  State.   You
         are not from a majority  English  speaking  country  as  listed  in
         paragraph 284(ix)(b).  You have not provided any evidence  to  show
         that you have an academic qualification recognised by UK  NARIC  to
         be equivalent to the standard of a Bachelor's or Master's degree or
         PhD in the UK, which was taught in English.  You do not qualify for
         any of the exemptions listed above therefore you do  not  meet  the
         requirements of 284(ix)."




11.  The Respondent therefore  refused  the  First  Appellant's  application
    under paragraph 284. The decision-maker then went on  to  consider  the
    applicability of Appendix FM.  It is also to be noted in this regard in
    respect of paragraph EX.1 the Respondent stated, amongst other  things,
    this:


         "Whilst it is acknowledged that you entered the United Kingdom as a
         spouse, and  did  not  require  evidence  of  meeting  the  English
         language, when applying for an extension in the same  category  the
         requirement now must be met."



12.  Accordingly it was apparent that the Secretary of State's position  was
    in terms that notwithstanding what might have happened on the  occasion
    of the First Appellant's entry to the United  Kingdom  the  application
    for variation of leave to remain was required to satisfy the applicable
    Rule - paragraph 284; further in the particular  circumstances  of  the
    case the Appellant did not meet the Rule because there was  no  English
    language certificate.




13.  Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge the Appellants argued the  English
    language issue in terms of a legitimate expectation.  It may be seen in
    the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the  Appellant's  evidence
    included an assertion that she had a legitimate  expectation  that  she
    would be granted  a  further  extension  without  an  English  language
    certificate because that is what had happened previously: see paragraph
    10.  Indeed, under the heading 'My Findings'  the  Judge  reached  just
    such a conclusion at paragraph 20:

         "She was then granted further extension until 31st January 2016 and
         with that application she  was  not  required  to  provide  English
         language  certificate.   However,  with  the  current  application,
         Respondent  declined  on  the  basis  that  an   English   language
         certificate  was  not  provided.   She  clearly  had  a  legitimate
         expectation that she was not required to provide the basic  English
         language certificate."



14.  The Judge nonetheless acknowledged that the Appellant did  not  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 284 and that "the  Respondent's  decision
    is in accordance with the Immigration Rules".


15.  The Judge went on to consider Article 8: it is clear that  the  finding
    in respect of legitimate expectation influenced the Judge's  evaluation
    of the Article 8 case.  At paragraph 23 a number of  disparate  matters
    are listed including the following:

         "I also find that the Appellant  did  have  legitimate  expectation
         that as  she  was  not  required  to  submit  an  English  language
         certificate with the prior application for extension, she  was  not
         required to submit one with this current application."

     The fact that this was influential and material is  apparent  from  the
    immediately following sentence, "When all these factors are  considered
    cumulatively...".


16.  In my judgment, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  not  offered  any
    clear or adequate reasoning in respect of the conclusion in respect  of
    legitimate  expectation.   Indeed  Mr  Mahmood,  on   behalf   of   the
    Appellants, very fairly and frankly acknowledged that  he  is  in  some
    difficulty in defending the Judge's decision in this regard.


17.  In the first instance there was nothing before the First-tier  Tribunal
    - and indeed there is nothing before the Upper Tribunal presently -  by
    way of materials demonstrating by what  possible  mechanism  the  First
    Appellant may have been exempted from any English language  requirement
    in the past.  The best  that  it  is  possible  to  ascertain  is  that
    paragraph 282 of the Immigration Rules  provided  an  exemption  in  an
    entry clearance application for certain applicants who had  been  in  a
    relationship for a period of time specified thereunder.  In the absence
    of details of the initial entry clearance application - which was  made
    on 29 November 2010 thereby  coinciding  with  the  day  on  which  the
    English language requirement came into effect - and  without  sight  of
    the  successful  appeal  decision  overturning  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance, it is not transparent on what basis the  Appellant  was  not
    required to provide an English language certificate in the  context  of
    the entry clearance application. The mere fact  that  there  existed  a
    provision that allowed for an exemption  does  not  mean  that  such  a
    provision was applied to the First Appellant's case: there was  nothing
    before the First-tier Tribunal to show that any such exemption had been
    applied - and more particularly the Judge made no such finding. If such
    a provision did not apply, it may be that there were some  transitional
    provisions that were in  play;  or  it  may  be  that  there  was  some
    applicable Home Office policy - but again it appears that there were no
    evidential materials before the First-tier  Tribunal  to  suggest  such
    possibilities, and more particularly the Judge  did  not  identify  any
    basis by which the First Appellant had not been required to demonstrate
    adequate language skills in order to secure entry clearance.


18.  Similarly there does not appear to have been any materials  in  respect
    of, or any exploration in the Judge's reasons and findings  concerning,
    the basis for any exemption from the English language  requirements  at
    the time of the grant of variation of leave to remain in 2014.


19.  In the absence of more detailed exploration of these  matters,  and  in
    the absence of clear reasons from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  I
    conclude that the issue of legitimate expectation was  not  dealt  with
    adequately, and the First-tier Tribunal's findings in this regard  have
    not been adequately reasoned.


20.  In the first instance  -  as  explored  above  -  there  is  no  proper
    assessment as to the basis or foundation of the  supposed  expectation.
    It is not apparent that there was any clear or  obvious  representation
    to the First Appellant, explicit or implicit, upon which she  may  have
    relied.


21.  Moreover, in the context of this latter regard  -  reliance  -  I  note
    that there does not seem to have been any explanation offered as to why
    the First Appellant had not in the period that  she  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom sought to acquire  a  level  of  English  and  indeed  a
    knowledge of life in the UK such that she might have been able to apply
    for indefinite leave to remain, or at the very  least  that  she  might
    have been able to bring herself within the wording of paragraph 284. In
    particular there is nothing to suggest that the First Appellant decided
    not to pursue such matters because of an understanding that it was  not
    necessary.  As I say, it is difficult to see that she has acted in  any
    particular  way  in  consequence  upon  -  or  in  reliance  upon  -any
    representation or action inherent in the  circumstances  of  her  entry
    clearance application, the grant of entry clearance, or  the  grant  of
    variation of leave to remain.


22.  In the circumstances in my judgement the  Decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is in error of law in that it is inadequately reasoned.  As  I
    have identified above the error is  clearly  material  because  it  was
    taken forward into a consideration of Article 8.


23.  I should also add that the Judge concluded that the  appeal  should  be
    allowed under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  That in itself was
    a  conclusion  without  jurisdiction:  the  Tribunal   did   not   have
    jurisdiction to determine the appeal under the Rules but only on  human
    rights grounds.  This would not in  itself  inevitably  be  a  material
    error if the decision under the Rules was sound.


24.  However, it is clear that the Judge factored the unfounded findings  in
    respect of legitimate expectation quite illogically into an  evaluation
    of obstacles to establishing family life in Pakistan: "I also find that
    the Appellant did have legitimate  expectation  that  as  she  was  not
    required to submit an  English  language  certificate  with  the  prior
    application for extension, she was not required to submit one with this
    current  application.   When   all   these   factors   are   considered
    cumulatively,  I  find  that  this  will  establish  very   significant
    difficulties which would be faced by the Appellant and her  partner  in
    continuing their family life outside the UK in Pakistan..."  (paragraph
    23).


25.  Moreover, in this context it appears that almost the  entire  focus  of
    the  Judge's  Decision  was  on  the  relationship  between  the  First
    Appellant  and  her  husband  to  the  exclusion  of   any   individual
    consideration of the circumstances of the Second and Third  Appellants.
    To that extent it is not apparent that the human rights of  the  Second
    and Third Appellants have been given any individual consideration - and
    more particularly the proportionality or  otherwise  of  removing  them
    from the United Kingdom has not been duly adjudicated upon.  I note  in
    this regard that the Judge states in her concluding paragraph "Although
    the dependent applicants are now adults, I find that they are  still  a
    family unit and are residing as such.  To split the family would not be
    proportionate"  (paragraph  23).   However,  there  is  no   suggestion
    inherent in the Respondent's decisions under  appeal  that  the  family
    should be split - but rather that the Appellants should be  removed  to
    Pakistan and that the family need not be split because  the  sponsoring
    paterfamilias can accompany them.  It seems to me again that the  Judge
    has not fully and adequately focused  on  the  correct  issues  in  the
    appeal.


26.  In all such circumstances I find material error of law and I set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


27.  It is common ground between the parties that the appeal should  be  re-
    made before the First-tier Tribunal with a more  thorough  fact-finding
    exercise in respect of each of  the  Appellants  and  their  respective
    private and/or family lives.  It is also common ground that it will  be
    necessary to give much more detailed consideration to both the  factual
    and legal elements of any legitimate expectation argument.  To that end
    I issue the following guidance and Directions:


                                 Directions

    (1)  Both parties are to file and serve legal submissions  with  regard
         to the issue of legitimate expectation to be supported by materials
         as appropriate - be  they  copies  of  case  law,  archived  Rules,
         relevant policy or any other materials.


    (2)  Both parties, so far as they have them in their possession, are to
         file  and  serve  the  details  of  the  initial  entry   clearance
         application  made  on  29  November  2010,  the  decision  on  that
         application, and the appeal decision that followed.


    (3)  Both parties, so far as they have them in their possession, are to
         file and serve  any  materials  relevant  to  the  application  for
         variation of leave to remain that was granted on 1 November 2011.


    (4)  The directions apply to both parties.  It is not  appropriate  for
         either party to assume that the other party will be  in  possession
         of such documents.  Both parties should use their  best  endeavours
         to provide whatever is available.


    (5)  All materials pursuant to the Directions above are to be filed and
         served within 4 weeks of the date shown as the promulgation date on
         this document.




28.  The parties should  be  aware  that  some  further  consideration  will
    likely need to be given to certain factual aspects of  the  appeal  not
    hitherto focussed upon. In particular the Judge  tasked  with  remaking
    the decision in the appeal may be assisted by evidence and argument  in
    respect of the following matters:

         (i) I have noted above that the sponsor, Mr  Malik,  is  a  British
         citizen.  On the FLR(M) application it is  indicated  that  he  has
         held citizenship of Pakistan.  It would be helpful for there to  be
         clarification as to whether he holds dual citizenship or whether he
         now only holds British citizenship.


         (ii)  The  Appellant  and  Mr  Malik  were  married  for  something
         approaching 15-20 years prior to the  Appellant's  application  for
         entry clearance.  It follows that the marriage was conducted for  a
         very  considerable  period  by  the  sponsoring  husband   visiting
         Pakistan: indeed it is in Pakistan that his sons were born and grew
         up.  In such circumstances it may be informative to explore to what
         extent it may sustainably be said, as seems to be the case, that Mr
         Malik has no meaningful contact or ties with  Pakistan.  Indeed  it
         may  be  necessary  to  evaluate  the  nature  and  extent  of  any
         interference  with  family  life  if  the  overall  effect  of  the
         Respondent's decisions requires the Appellant and sponsor again  to
         conduct their married life in a manner essentially similar to  that
         which pre-dated the Appellants' entry to the UK and had been extant
         for a substantial period of time.


         (iii) I have already noted above that very little consideration was
         given by the First-tier Tribunal to the individual circumstances of
         the Second and Third Appellants.  That will now be necessary.


         (iv) It also seems to me to be  of  some  relevance  to  have  some
         clarification or explanation as to why it is  that  the  Appellants
         have not, as it were, 'put their case in order' in respect  of  the
         English language requirements in the period between  their  initial
         arrival and their most recent application for variation of leave to
         remain.  In this context it is to be recalled that it is one of the
         public interest considerations under section 117B of the  2002  Act
         that applicants have a command of the English language.   If  there
         is any particular or good reason why the First  Appellant  has  not
         sought to reach the level of competency such that she could make an
         application that satisfied the requirements of  paragraph  284,  or
         indeed paragraph 287,  then  it  would  be  helpful  to  have  some
         understanding and explanation as to what that might be.



29.  Ultimately, however, it will be a matter for the  next  Judge  who  re-
    makes the decisions in the appeals to have regard to such matters as he
    or she thinks appropriate.  I only raise the above matters  by  way  of
    approximate  guidance;  nothing  therein  should   be   considered   as
    prescriptive or binding.


Notices of Decision

30.  The decisions in each of the appeals are vitiated  for  material  error
    of law. The decisions are set aside.


31.  The decisions in the appeals are to be re-made  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, before any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ghani
    with all issues at large.


32.  No anonymity directions are sought or made.



Signed:                                 Date: 5 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

