
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06660/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |On 10 November 2020                  |
|On 6 November 2020                   |                                     |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                  Between:

                              Mr Alamgir Hosein
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


    This is a decision on the papers without a hearing. The respondent  did
    not object. The appellant requested an oral hearing in the  event  that
    the Upper Tribunal was not persuaded to set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The documents  described  at  para  4  below  were
    submitted. A face-to-face hearing or a remote hearing was not held  for
    the reasons given at paras 6-9 below. The order made is set out at para
    37 below. (Administrative Instruction No. 2 from the  Senior  President
    of Tribunals).


Representation (by written submissions):
For the appellant:     Mr M Biggs, of Counsel, instructed by Hubers Law.
For the respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Specialist Appeals Team.


                                  DECISION

 1. The appellant, a national of Bangladesh born on 1  June  1989,  appeals
    against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  P  S  Aujla
    (hereafter the "Judge") who, in a decision promulgated on 16  September
    2019 following a hearing on 10 September 2019, dismissed his appeal  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8) against a decision of  the  respondent
    of 29 March 2019 to refuse leave  to  remain  on  human  right  grounds
    (Article 8).

 2. On 18 August 2020, the Upper Tribunal sent to the  parties  a  "Note  &
    Directions" by Upper Tribunal Judge  Frances  in  which  Judge  Frances
    stated that she had  taken  the  provisional  view  that  it  would  be
    appropriate in the instant  case  to  decide  the  following  questions
    without a hearing:

         (a)  whether the decision of the Judge involved the  making  of  an
         error of law; and

         (b)  if so, whether it should be set aside.

 3. Judge Frances then gave  directions  which  set  a  timescale  for  the
    appellant to make written submissions on questions (a) and (b), for the
    respondent to lodge submissions in reply and for the appellant to lodge
    further  submissions  in  response.  She  also  gave  directions  which
    provided for any  party  who  considered  that  despite  the  foregoing
    directions a hearing was necessary to consider  the  Issues  to  submit
    reasons for that view within a certain timescale.

 4. In response to the  "Note  and  Directions",  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    received the following documents:

         (i)  on behalf of the appellant, a document entitled:  "Appellant's
         written submissions" dated 1 September 2020 by Mr Biggs,  submitted
         under cover of an email dated 1  September  2020  from  Hubers  Law
         timed at 16:40 hours;

         (ii) on behalf of the respondent, a document  entitled:  "Secretary
         of State's response to the grounds of appeal under Rule 24" dated 3
         September 2020 by Ms Isherwood, submitted under cover of  an  email
         dated 3 September 2020 timed at 13:31 hours; and

         (iii)     on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  a   document   entitled:
         "Appellant's further written submissions" dated 18  September  2020
         by Mr Biggs, submitted under cover of an email dated  18  September
         2020 from Hubers Law timed at 16:39 hours.

The issues

 5. I have to decide the following issues (hereafter the "Issues"),

         (i)  whether it is appropriate to decide  the  following  questions
         without a hearing:

             (a)  whether the decision of the Judge involved the making  of
             an error on a point of law; and

             (b)  if yes, whether the Judge's decision should be set aside.



         (ii) If yes, whether the decision on the appellant's appeal against
         the respondent's decision should be re-made in the  Upper  Tribunal
         or whether the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
         ("FtT").

Whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing

 6. At para 6 of his submissions dated 1 September 2020, Mr Biggs submitted
    that an oral hearing, conducted remotely if necessary, should  be  held
    to decide the Issues if the Upper Tribunal is not persuaded, on  review
    of the papers,  to  set  aside  the  Judge's  decision  and  remit  the
    appellant's appeal to the FtT.

 7. At para 8 of her submissions, Ms Isherwood  submitted  that  it  was  a
    matter for the Upper Tribunal whether to hold an oral hearing but that,
    given the assertions in the grounds, this may be an appropriate  course
    of action.

 8. In reaching my decision as to whether  or  not  it  is  appropriate  to
    decide the Issues without a hearing, I  applied  the  guidance  of  the
    Supreme Court at para 2 of its judgment in Osborn and others  v  Parole
    Board [2013] UKSC 61 and the overriding objective.

 9. Having considered the Judge's decision, the grounds and the submissions
    of the parties, I was of the view that it was necessary  to  set  aside
    the Judge's decision and to remit the appellant's appeal  to  the  FtT.
    Accordingly, I concluded that  there  would  be  no  prejudice  to  the
    appellant if I were to proceed to decide the Issues without a  hearing.
    As Ms Isherwood had not expressed any objection to the  Upper  Tribunal
    deciding the  Issues  without  a  hearing,  I  could  not  discern  any
    prejudice to the respondent. In all of the circumstances, I decided  to
    exercise my discretion and proceed  to  decide  the  Issues  without  a
    hearing.

Questions (a) and (b) - whether the Judge  erred  in  law  and  whether  his
decision should be set aside

10.  It  is  unnecessary  to  rehearse  in  detail  the  appellant's   full
    immigration history. Suffice it to say that, on 30  October  2014,  the
    respondent curtailed the appellant's leave that had been granted on  26
    November 2013 because she considered that he had submitted, in  support
    of his application of 18 June 2013 for leave to remain, a  false  TOEIC
    English language certificate issued by the Educational  Testing  System
    ("ETS"), in that, it had been [pic]obtained fraudulently by the use  of
    a proxy test taker at a  test  on  17  October  2012  at  Eton  College
    International. The respondent therefore considered that the appellant's
    presence in the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good and
    that he therefore did not meet  the  suitability  requirement  in  para
    276ADE(1)(i) of  the  Immigration  Rules  with  reference  to  para  S-
    LTR.2.2(a) and S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM.

11. Before the Judge, Mr Biggs confirmed that family life  was  not  relied
    upon and that the appeal was based solely on  the  appellant's  private
    life claim under para 276ADE(1) of the Immigration  Rules  and  outside
    the Immigration Rules (para 13 of the Judge's decision).

12. Accordingly, a key factual issue before the Judge in  relation  to  the
    appellant's Article 8 private life  claim  was  whether  he  had  acted
    dishonestly in connection with his application for leave to  remain  of
    18 June 2013 by submitting a TOEIC certificate that had  been  obtained
    fraudulently.

The Judge's decision

13. The Judge directed himself on the applicable  burden  and  standard  of
    proof at paras 17-18 of his decision. At para 17, he said:

         "17. On 30 October 2014, the Respondent curtailed  the  Appellant's
         leave that was granted on 26 November 2013 on the  basis  that  the
         Appellant had used  a  false  TOEIC  English  language  certificate
         issued by the Educational  Testing  System  ("ETS")  which  he  had
         obtained in a fraudulent manner by using a proxy  test  taker.  The
         burden of establishing that allegation was on  the  Respondent,  on
         the  basis  of  evidential  burden  if  not  on  the   balance   of
         probabilities."

         (My emphasis)

14. At paras 33 and 34, under the heading: "Consideration and  Findings  of
    Credibility and Fact", the Judge said:

         "33. The Respondent has provided documents in bundle  RB2  together
         with witness statements. Annex Al in the bundle clearly  identified
         the  Appellant.  It  is  stated   that   his   certificate   number
         0044202169026019 which he claimed to have obtained through the test
         centre at the College was declared invalid. Annex A2 showed that 37
         candidates took the test on 17 October 2012.  Out  of  the  37,  31
         (84%) were declared invalid, 6 (16%) were declared questionable and
         none were released. It is clear from the documents  that  this  was
         not a case where some of the results were released as valid so that
         there could be room for mistake or error. None of the  tests  taken
         on the day were found to  be  valid  and  they  were  all  declared
         invalid or unreliable. That evidence was supplied to the Respondent
         by ETS.

         34.  On the basis of the evidence that the Respondent had provided,
         together with the witness statements of the experts,  I  find  that
         the  Respondent  has  made  out  his  case,  on  the   balance   of
         probabilities.

         35.  It was open to the Appellant to provide credible  evidence  on
         the basis of which I could find that there was room for an error in
         the assessment made by ETS. The only evidence that he provided  was
         that his representatives had raised the issue with ETS. Copies of e-
         mail and other correspondence, which passed  between  ETS  and  the
         Appellant's representatives Hubers  Law,  are  in  the  Appellant's
         bundle from pages 41 - 48. All that correspondence took place  from
         May 2019 onwards."

         (My emphasis)

15. At paras 36-39 of his decision, the Judge took  into  account,  against
    the appellant's credibility, the fact that, although the appellant know
    from the respondent's decision of 30 October 2014 that  the  respondent
    considered  that  he  had  submitted  a  fraudulently  obtained   TOEIC
    certificate, he did not claim his innocence with ETS until May 2019,  a
    period of 4 years and 7 months after his leave had been  curtailed.  At
    para 39, the Judge said:

         "39. Given the drastic consequences that curtailment of  his  leave
         would have on him, I find it implausible that the  Appellant  would
         not have protested his innocence and provided whatever evidence  he
         had to the Respondent and ETS that he had relating to the day  when
         he claimed he took the test soon after his leave was curtailed,  if
         in fact he was innocent of having used a proxy test taker...."

16. The Judge then said, at paras 40-41 of his decision:

         "40. Having considered the totality of the  evidence  presented  to
         me, I find that the Respondent has without  doubt  established,  on
         the balance of probabilities, that the Appellant had used  a  proxy
         test taker on 17 October 2012.  He  therefore  obtained  the  TOEIC
         certificate issued by ETS by fraud. The Respondent has  established
         that the Appellant did not  meet  the  suitability  requirement  in
         paragraph 276 ADE(1)(i) of the Immigration Rules.

         41.  As the Respondent had established that the Appellant  obtained
         the TOEIC certificate by fraud, it was incumbent upon the Appellant
         to provide some explanation to undermine the Respondent's  case.  I
         find that the Appellant has not provided an innocent explanation or
         evidence to contradict the evidence submitted by the Respondent."

17. The Judge therefore said, at para 42, that he found that the  appellant
    did not meet the suitability requirement in para  276ADE(1)(i)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. He proceeded to consider the appellant's  Article  8
    claim outside the Immigration Rules at para 43  onwards  and  said  (at
    para 45) that he found that the appellant's  removal  would  be  "fully
    proportionate".

The grounds

18. The grounds may be summarised as follows:

         (i)  Ground 1: The Judge erred by  failing  to  apply  the  correct
         legal principles to which he was referred and which were  explained
         in SM and Qadir v. SSHD [2016] UKUT 229  (IAC),  MA  (ETS  -  TOEIC
         testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 and Ahsan v. SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  2009.
         The  Judge  failed  to  refer  in  terms  or  implicitly  to  these
         principles. Para 9 of the grounds draws attention,  in  particular,
         to para 15 of MA referring to  substantial  gaps  in  the  evidence
         adduced by the respondent,  in  particular  regarding  evidence  of
         'continuity' linking the voice recordings provided to the appellant
         and to the impugned test performance. The Judge erred in failing to
         consider any of the factors set out at para  69  of  SM  and  Qadir
         where the Upper Tribunal said:

             "We turn thus to  address  the  legal  burden.  We  accept  Mr
             Dunlop's [counsel appearing for the Secretary of State for the
             Home Department] submission that in considering an  allegation
             of dishonesty in this  context  the  relevant  factors  to  be
             weighed include (inexhaustively, we would add) what the person
             accused has to gain from being dishonest; what he has to  lose
             from being dishonest; what is known about his  character;  and
             the culture or environment in which  he  operated.  Mr  Dunlop
             also   highlighted   the   importance   of    three    further
             considerations, namely  how  the  Appellants  performed  under
             cross examination, whether the Tribunal's assessment of  their
             English language proficiency is commensurate with their  TOEIC
             scores and whether their academic achievements are  such  that
             it was unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated."

         (ii) Ground 2: The Judge's adverse credibility assessment at  paras
         35-40 is based on a single point, i.e. that the appellant  had  not
         provided evidence of having  challenged  the  respondent  and  ETS,
         including by providing his detailed  evidence  of  having  sat  the
         TOEIC test himself.

         (iii)    Ground 3: The Judge erred by acting procedurally unfairly,
         in that, he failed to put to the appellant that he  had  failed  to
         provide evidence of  having  challenged  the  respondent  and  ETS,
         including by providing his detailed evidence of having sat the test
         himself.

Assessment

19. In relation to ground 1, whilst it is the  case  that  judges  are  not
    obliged to set out or refer to relevant case-law, they are  obliged  to
    apply any relevant applicable principles.  In  the  instant  case,  the
    applicable principles were explained in SM and  Qadir,  MA  and  Ahsan.
    There are  three  steps  in  considering  whether  the  respondent  has
    discharged the overall legal burden of proof upon her. The  first  step
    is to consider whether the respondent's evidence discharged the initial
    evidential burden on the respondent. If so, then the evidential  burden
    shifted to the appellant to provide an innocent explanation. If this is
    shown, it will be for the respondent to prove  otherwise.  The  overall
    legal burden remains upon the respondent to show  to  standard  of  the
    balance of probabilities that the appellant  had  used  a  fraudulently
    obtained TOEIC certificate.

20. It is not apparent from the Judge's  decision  that  he  followed  this
    three-stage process. Although he referred at para 41 to  the  appellant
    not having provided an innocent explanation, the  concluding  words  in
    the final sentence of para 17 do  not  make  sense,  i.e.  that  "(t)he
    burden of establishing that allegation was on the  Respondent,  on  the
    basis of evidential burden if not on the balance of probabilities"  (my
    emphasis). I therefore do not agree with Ms Isherwood's  submission  at
    para 3 that the Judge had directed himself correctly at para 17.

21. In any event, the final of para 17 suggests that  the  Judge  conflated
    the various steps. Indeed, it is clear from paras  33  and  34  of  the
    Judge's  decision  that  he  considered  only  one  step  at  which  he
    considered the evidence from ETS and that he  turned  to  consider  the
    appellant's evidence only after he had already reached his  conclusion,
    based solely  on  the  evidence  from  ETS,  that  the  respondent  had
    discharged the burden of proof upon her to the standard of the  balance
    of  probabilities.  I  therefore  do  not  agree  with  Ms  Isherwood's
    submission at para 7 that the Judge made his findings on the  basis  of
    the evidence as a whole, including the evidence of the appellant.

22. This error of approach is not therefore capable of being saved  by  the
    fact that the Judge subsequently said,  at  para  40,  that:  "(h)aving
    considered the totality of the evidence presented to me,  I  find  that
    the Respondent  has  without  doubt  established,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that the Appellant had used a proxy  test  taker  on  17
    October 2012".

23. Furthermore, I agree with the contention in ground  1  that  the  Judge
    failed  to  consider  whether  there  were  gaps  in  the  respondent's
    evidence. In the instant case, the evidence was that 31 of the 37 tests
    were declared invalid, 6  were  declared  questionable  and  none  were
    released. It is clear that he inferred from the  fact  that  none  were
    released that there were no valid tests, whereas the evidence was  that
    there were 6 that were questionable. It is also clear from the  Judge's
    reasoning in the text I have emboldened in the quote at para  14  above
    that he considered that the evidence from ETS was conclusive, in  that,
    it was determinative of the ultimate question,  whether  the  appellant
    had used a proxy test taker, whereas it is clear from SM and Qadir,  MA
    and Ahsan that it is nonetheless necessary to evaluate the evidence  as
    a whole, following the three-stage approach to reach  a  fact-sensitive
    conclusion.

24. In these circumstances and taking into account the fact that the  Judge
    did not refer at all to the relevant case-law, I  cannot  be  confident
    that he applied the principles explained in SM and Qadir, MA and Ahsan.



25. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge erred in law  as  contended  in
    ground 1. The failure to apply relevant principles in the assessment of
    the credibility of the appellant's evidence that  he  had  not  used  a
    proxy test maker was plainly material to the outcome.

26. The key point raised in ground 3 is that the Judge's reliance upon  the
    appellant's failure to provide evidence  that  he  had  challenged  the
    respondent and ETS about the allegation of fraud before  May  2019  was
    procedurally unfair.

27. Ms Isherwood disputes that there had been  any  procedural  unfairness.
    She  submits  that  the  appellant  was  asked  about  whether  he  had
    complained and has helpfully produced an extract from the  respondent's
    notes of the appellant's oral evidence. Mr Biggs has also  attached  to
    his submissions dated 1 September 2020 his  notes  of  the  appellant's
    oral evidence. These notes were helpful in enabling me to decipher  the
    Judge's handwritten of the oral evidence.

28. Upon my careful examination of all of the notes, I  am  satisfied  that
    the appellant was not asked why he had not  challenged  the  respondent
    and ETS about the allegation of fraud before he did in May 2019. It  is
    clear from the Judge's decision that he considered  that  this  failure
    was determinative of the appellant's credibility, or lack thereof.

29. The appellant's failure to challenge the  allegation  of  fraud  sooner
    with the respondent and ETS is not a point that was reasonably obvious,
    in my view. Given the determinative weight that the Judge placed on it,
    I have concluded that the failure to put the point to the appellant was
    procedurally unfair.

30. Ground 3 is therefore established.

31. It is therefore unnecessary to consider ground 2.

32. For all of the above reasons, I set aside the decision of the Judge  in
    its entirety.

33. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

34. In the instant case, I  have  found  that  there  has  been  procedural
    unfairness. Accordingly, in my view, para 7.2(a) applies.

35. In addition, none of the Judge's findings can  stand  in  view  of  the
    errors that have been  established  (grounds  1  and  3).  It  will  be
    necessary to re-make the decision on  the  appellant's  appeal  on  the
    merits. In addition,  I  have  noted  that  Mr  Biggs  raised,  on  the
    appellant's behalf, issues concerning gaps in the respondent's evidence
    and the appellant gave evidence that the voice recording was not of his
    voice. In all of the circumstances, I am satisfied that the nature  and
    extent of the judicial fact finding which is necessary in this case for
    the decision on the appeal to be re-made is such that, having regard to
    the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the FtT. Accordingly, I am satisfied that para 7.2 (b) also applies.



36. Accordingly, I have concluded that this appeal must be remitted to  the
    FtT.

Notice of Decision

37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  errors
    on points of law such that the decision to dismiss the  appeal  is  set
    aside. The appellant's appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing on the merits on all issues by a judge  other  than
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Aujla.


Signed:

Date: 6 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

