
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/06420/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 January 2018                         |On 7 February 2018             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                MUHAMMAD [I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen  (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain     (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal,
brought with the permission of  a  Judge  of  the  Upper Tribunal,  from  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("the tribunal"), which was sent to the
parties on 23 May 2017, whereupon it allowed the respondent's (hereinafter
"claimant's")  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of   State's   decision   of
25 January 2016, refusing to grant him leave to enter the United Kingdom on
human rights grounds.

2.    By way of brief background, the claimant is a  national  of  Pakistan.
It was accepted by the tribunal that he was in  a  genuine,  subsisting  and
long-term relationship with a female British Citizen one [SA] and  that  the
couple had two British Citizen children who had been born on [  ] 2007  and
[ ] 2009 respectively.  The tribunal, to my mind, clearly proceeded on  the
basis that the couple did not have a valid marriage recognised  in  UK  law.
It equally clearly decided that the requirements of  the  Immigration Rules
relating to partners or parents were not met.   However,  after  a  thorough
appraisal of all relevant matters encompassing  the  question  of  the  best
interests of the  British  Citizen  children  and  the  genuineness  of  the
relationship, and  after  an  evaluation  of  the  factors  referred  to  in
section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act 2002,  it
decided to allow the appeal under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
Human Rights (ECHR) outside the rules.  The key reasoning is contained in  a
passage of the decision which runs from paragraph 26 to 59.  I do not need
to set all of that out.  But, since it has received some  attention  in  the
subsequent submissions I will set out  what  the  tribunal  had  to  say  at
paragraph 56 of its decision.  It said this:


    "56.   I have found that there is a genuine and subsisting relationship
    between the appellant and his UK family.  Such a finding by  the  entry
    clearance officer (and a valid marriage)  would  have  meant  that  the
    Appendix FM application would have been allowed.  The Immigration Rules
    are Article 8 compliant and it follows that I must find that the public
    interest in immigration control is much reduced."


3.    The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal, arguing  that,  as
I understand it, the tribunal had wrongly thought that  there  was  a  valid
marriage and had proceeded on that basis such that it followed that  it  was
wrong to have concluded that the public interest in immigration control  was
"much reduced". Permission to appeal was originally refused by  a  Judge  of
the First-tier Tribunal but was subsequently granted  by  a  Judge  of  the
Upper Tribunal who seemed to be of the view that the  tribunal  might  have
thought the couple were validly married in  circumstances  where  it  seemed
that they were not and suggested that it had failed  to  grapple  with  that
aspect.  It was also said in the grant of  permission  that  if  the  couple
were neither married  nor  engaged  to  be  married  and  had  not  actually
cohabited for at least two years (and the evidence was that they  had  lived
in different countries for much of the  period  of  the  relationship)  they
could  not  fall  within  the  Immigration  Rules  "and  Article 8  cannot,
arguably, be invoked to make good the shortcoming".

4.    Permission  having  been  granted  there  was  a  hearing  before  me.
Representation  was  as  stated  above   and   I   am   grateful   to   each
representative.  Mrs Pettersen, for the Secretary of State, did  not  rely,
in terms, upon the points made in the grant of  permission  nor  the  points
made in the written  grounds  of  appeal.   Instead,  she  argued  that  the
tribunal  had  erred  through  failing  to  consider  and  contemplate   the
possibility of the claimant making a fresh application for  entry  clearance
on the basis of any future marriage  that  he  might  enter  into  with  his
sponsor or on the basis of their becoming  engaged.   Mr Hussain,  for  the
claimant, suggested that the Secretary of State was simply  seeking  to  re-
argue matters already properly decided by the tribunal.

5.    As I indicated to the parties at the hearing, I  have  concluded  that
the making of the decision by the tribunal did not involve the making of  an
error of law.  Accordingly, that decision must stand.

6.    I do not accept that the tribunal was required to  grapple  with  the
marriage aspect notwithstanding that suggestion in the grant of  permission.
 On my reading it was not argued on behalf of the claimant that he was in  a
legally binding marriage with the sponsor as would be  recognised  under  UK
law.  The tribunal, I am entirely satisfied, proceeded on  the  basis  that
that was so.  Indeed, it seems to have been agreed between  the  parties  at
the hearing that it was.

7.    There may have been a misunderstanding on the part of  the  author  of
the grounds as to what the tribunal was actually saying at paragraph 56 of
the decision.  It was not suggesting, in that paragraph, that  there  was  a
valid marriage between the couple.  Nor, insofar as it is  relevant  bearing
in mind the terms of the grant, was  it  suggesting  that  the  parties  had
cohabited  for  two  years  such   that   they   met   the   part   of   the
Immigration Rules which caters for such situations.   All  that  was  being
said was  that  the  relationship  had  been  found  to  be  a  genuine  and
subsisting one and if in those circumstances the  two  had  actually  had  a
valid marriage then that would have resulted in the  application  succeeding
under the rules.  It was that which caused the  tribunal  to  conclude  that
the public interest in immigration control was, in  all  the  circumstances,
much reduced.

8.    I have concluded, on the above basis  that  there  is,  therefore,  no
merit in the grounds as submitted and no merit in the points raised  in  the
grant of permission.  The additional argument put by Mrs Pettersen was  not
in the grounds and no application to amend those grounds had been made.   In
any event, I would agree with Mr Hussain that that  point,  taken  for  the
first time before me,  does  not  go  beyond  re-argument.   The  tribunal's
Article 8 assessment was a clear and thorough one.  The  tribunal  properly
identified matters which weighed  significantly  in  the  claimant's  favour
such as the genuineness of the relationship,  its  longevity  and  the  best
interests of the children.  It was said, in that context,  that  their  best
interests lie in remaining in the United Kingdom and  having  both  parents
with them.  That was particularly so given that  one  of  the  children  has
significant disabilities.

9.    I am satisfied that the tribunal analysed the evidence rationally  and
appropriately.  I am satisfied that it did not misdirect itself in  law.   I
am satisfied that it did not reach perverse findings  or  conclusions.   Its
consideration of the Article 8 arguments outside the  rules  was  holistic.
The outcome it reached was open to it and has been adequately explained.

10.   In light of the above this appeal to the Upper tribunal is dismissed.


Decision

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the
making of any error of law.  Accordingly, that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.  None was sought before me.


Signed:                      Date: 5 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:                      Date: 5 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

