
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/06724/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 October 2017                         |On 08 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                             Rim Prasad Roka Pun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Puar, Counsel instructed by N C Brothers & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Farmer promulgated on 26  January
    2017 in which he allowed the appeal of Mr Rim Prasad Roka Pun against a
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse entry  clearance  and
    this case comes by way of a refusal of a human rights claim.

 2. In short it is not in dispute that Mr Pun who, for the sake of ease and
    for no other reason I refer to as "the appellant", is the  child  of  a
    former Ghurkha and who  applied  for  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom on that basis.  That is set out in significant  detail  in  the
    decision of Judge Farmer and there is no need to repeat that.

 3. The judge found that  there  did,  despite  the  degree  of  separation
    between the appellant and  his  family  and  his  age  that  there  did
    unusually exist a family life in this case, having directed himself  in
    respect of Kugathas [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31at  paragraph  19  and  having
    considered this decision in more detail at paragraphs 21 to 23  of  his
    decision.  The judge found in analysing  the  Article  8  case  that  a
    family life did exist and  that  the  decision  was  in  the  light  of
    historic injustice identified in Gurung [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8  that  the
    interference  with  the  family   life   which   in   this   case   was
    disproportionate.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission to appeal on two grounds:
    first, that the Tribunal had materially misdirected itself  in  law  in
    failing properly to address the test set out Kugathas; and second, that
    the judge failed to give adequate  reasons  for  making  findings  with
    respect to the public interest and  had  disregarded  entirely  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act.  Permission to appeal was given by Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth on 16 August 2017.

 5. I heard brief submissions from both representatives.  Mr Bramble  quite
    candidly accepted that he may be in some difficulty with regards to the
    first ground, given that although the judge does at paragraph 19 direct
    himself in terms of Kugathas, it is clear that the issue of family life
    was dealt with at paragraphs 21 to 23 and I am  satisfied,  having  had
    regard to what the judge has said in paragraphs 21 to 23, that although
    there is no express detailed reference to the decision in Kugathas, the
    principles have properly been applied and it could not be said that the
    judge's  decision  on  this  matter  was  perverse  or  irrational  and
    accordingly I do not find that ground 1 is made out.

 6. Second, turning to the issue of  the  failure  properly  to  deal  with
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act, Mr Bramble  submitted  that  it  was  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's case that Section 117B had not properly  been
    dealt with in that there was a failure properly to deal with the  issue
    of the English language, in particular, and also whether there would be
    recourse to public funds.  He submitted, although with some  degree  of
    reluctance, that this could outweigh the historic injustice point drawn
    attention to by the Court of Appeal in Gurung.

 7. Mr Puar for the appellant submitted on the basis of Rai [2017] EWCA Civ
    320 that the Court of Appeal had made it clear that notwithstanding the
    introduction of Section 117B it could not be  said  that  the  historic
    injustice was outweighed by those factors, given not least a number  of
    policy matters which he submitted were still relevant; and, that it has
    never been a requirement of the policy or otherwise that people in  the
    position of the appellant are required to speak English there being  no
    recourse to public funds.

 8. In the circumstances, and bearing in mind the decisions both in  Gurung
    and Rai are considered, although the judge did not  deal  with  Section
    117B in any great detail, it is nonetheless sufficiently clear that the
    directions served with this was relevant and I consider that  it  might
    have been the case  law  already  referred  to  that  the  decision  is
    adequate and it cannot be argued as the Entry Clearance Officer  sought
    to do that there had been an entire disregarding of the  interests  set
    out in Section 117B.

 9. Accordingly, in the circumstances the case is adequately  reasoned  and
    ground 2 is not made out.

10. For these reasons, I am satisfied that none of the  grounds  of  appeal
    are made out.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date:  6 November 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul




