
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU060382016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 July 2017                          |On 31 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MOHAMMED ABBAS ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant (the Secretary of State):  Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home
                    Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Ali):    Ms K Tobin of Counsel instructed by Fisher
Meredith


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against  a  decision  of  Judge
    Herlihy.  For ease of reference I shall throughout this decision  refer
    to Mr Ali who was the original appellant as "the claimant" and  to  the
    Secretary of State, who was the original respondent as  "the  Secretary
    of State".

 2. The claimant is a national of Bangladesh who was born in October  1977.
    He was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 21 months following his
    conviction at Blackfriars Crown Court for conspiracy to commit fraud by
    false representation following which the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
    decision to make a deportation order against him  pursuant  to  Section
    32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration
    Act 1971.  These effectively provide that a  foreign  criminal  who  is
    convicted of an offence carrying a sentence  of  above  twelve  months'
    imprisonment will  automatically  be  deported  unless  this  would  be
    unlawful either under the Refugee  Convention  or  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  The claimant's case is that  it  would  be
    unlawful because it would be disproportionate  under  Article  8.   The
    material issue in this case  is  whether  or  not  the  effect  on  his
    children would be "unduly harsh" which is a matter which is dealt  with
    under the new part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 which was inserted by Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014  with
    effect from 28 July 2014.  The relevant provisions within part  5A  are
    set out at paragraph 117C as follows:

         "117C. Article 8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals:

             (1)  the deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years  or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
                  Exception (1) or Exception (2) applies.

             (4)  Exception (1) applies where -

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life;

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there will  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

             (5)   Exception  (2)  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine   and
                  subsisting relationship with a qualifying  partner,  or  a
                  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with   a
                  qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the
                  partner or child would be unduly harsh.

                  ...".

 3. The claimant contended that the effect  of  his  deportation  would  be
    unduly harsh on his children and thus he fell within Exception  (2)  as
    set out above.  This claim was rejected by the Secretary of  State  and
    the claimant appealed against this decision.

 4. As noted above his appeal was heard before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herlihy.  The hearing was at Taylor House on 11 October 2016 and  in  a
    determination promulgated on 15 November 2016 Judge Herlihy allowed the
    appeal on the basis that he came within Exception  (2)  of  117C.   The
    Secretary of State  now  appeals  before  me,  permission  having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 2 June 2017.

 5. There are a number of grounds, but for the purposes of this decision  I
    only need to consider one of them.  The ground I need  to  consider  is
    that the judge when considering whether the effect  on  the  claimant's
    children would be unduly harsh failed to have regard to the decision of
    the Court of Appeal in MM  (Uganda)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  450,  where  at
    paragraph 26, the court had found as follows:

         "For all these reasons in my judgment MAB was  wrongly  decided  by
         the Tribunal.  The expression "unduly harsh" in Section 117C(v) and
         Rule 399(a)  and  (b)  requires  regard  to  be  had  for  all  the
         circumstances including the  criminal's  immigration  and  criminal
         history."

 6. Before the Court of Appeal made its decision (in April 2016) there  had
    been conflicting decisions in this Tribunal.  In MAB this Tribunal  had
    found that whether or not the effect on the child  was  "unduly  harsh"
    had to be considered in isolation  without  regard  being  had  to  the
    circumstances of the offence.  In KMO  (Section  117  -  unduly  harsh)
    Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543,  Judge  Southern  declined  to  follow  MAB,
    finding that a proportionality exercise needed to be carried out before
    one could consider properly whether the  effect  on  the  children  was
    unduly [my emphasis] harsh rather than just harsh.   For  example,  the
    separation of children from a parent for a long period of time might be
    very harsh indeed; however, whether it can be said (on Judge Southern's
    reasoning in KMO) to be unduly harsh would depend  on  the  reason  for
    that separation.  So if for example  the  children's  father  had  been
    convicted of a relatively trivial offence,  the  harsh  effect  on  the
    children might be said to be unduly harsh; however, if the  parent  had
    been convicted of a very serious  offence,  such  as  murder,  although
    harsh the separation would be justified and therefore the effect  would
    not be said to be unduly harsh.

 7. Effectively the Secretary of State's submission is that it is not clear
    from reading Judge Herlihy's submission that she appreciated  that  the
    test  to  be  applied  when  considering  whether  the  effect  on  the
    claimant's children was  unduly  harsh  was  a  test  which  in  itself
    required her to carry out a proportionality exercise.  Nowhere  in  the
    decision is reference made to the decision given by the Court of Appeal
    in MM (Uganda), and nor is it clear that any  proportionality  exercise
    was carried out before considering this specific aspect of  the  claim.
    On behalf of the claimant, Ms Tobin accepted that it  might  have  been
    preferable if the judge had  explicitly  dealt  with  this  matter  and
    stated in terms that she considered that the harshness to the  children
    was  sufficiently  great  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   the
    claimant's deportation; she submitted that nonetheless one  could  read
    into her decision implicitly a consideration of whether or not, bearing
    in mind the effect on the children, the removal was proportionate.  She
    points out that at paragraph 37 the judge sets out first  of  all  that
    the Secretary of State had found that "it would not be unduly harsh for
    the claimant's wife and their children to return to Bangladesh with the
    claimant or remain in the UK while he is deported  to  Bangladesh"  and
    then at various parts of the decision dealt with  the  various  factors
    which were for or against the claimant's case.

 8. In my judgment having considered this decision very carefully indeed it
    is not at all clear that when considering whether or not the effect  on
    the children would be "unduly harsh" the judge did have in mind as  she
    was required to, that the term  "unduly  harsh"  imports  within  it  a
    proportionality exercise which has to be conducted.   When  finding  at
    paragraph 46 that it would be unduly harsh "for the claimant's children
    to remain in the  United  Kingdom  without  the  claimant  if  he  were
    deported" although she refers to "considering all the  evidence  before
    me" the evidence which in fact she considers within this  paragraph  is
    evidence exclusively directed to the effect on the children and that is
    set out at paragraphs 46 and 47.  It is only after making the  decision
    that "the claimant has established that it would be  unduly  harsh  for
    his children to remain in the United Kingdom without him" that she then
    goes on to consider the case generally, but by this time it would  seem
    (and this is the  most  likely  meaning  that  can  be  read  into  the
    decision) that the judge has already decided that  the  claimant  falls
    within Exception 2 of Section 117C because the effect on  the  children
    would be unduly harsh if he  was  removed.   At  the  very  least,  the
    decision is inadequately reasoned to make it plain that the  judge  has
    considered as she should whether or not  the  harsh  effect  which  the
    children will suffer is  sufficiently  strong  to  outweigh  the  other
    factors.

 9. In these circumstances I do not need to consider  the  other  arguments
    advanced on behalf of the Secretary of  State  because  this  error  is
    sufficiently material that the decision must be set  aside.   I  cannot
    say that the decision would necessarily have  been  the  same  had  the
    judge properly taken into account the guidance given by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MM (Uganda) and it follows the decision will now have  to  be
    remade.

10. Both parties are agreed that the appropriate course is that this appeal
    now be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard again at Taylor
    House by any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Herlihy  and  I
    will so order.

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy as  containing
a material error of law and remit this appeal back to  Taylor  House  to  be
reheard by any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Herlihy.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                  Date     : 25 July 2017

