
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: HU/06883/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision Promulgated    |
|On: 28 September 2018                   |On: 15 October 2018     |
|                                        |                        |
|                                        |                        |


                                   Before
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                                MR BIKASH rAI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEPAL

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:    Mr D Surestha of Counsel
For the Respondent: Ms S Vidyaran, Senior Presenting Officer


                             DECSION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appealed against the decision of the respondent dated  11
    May 2017 to refuse to grant him entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to Annex K and the IDI Chapter 15.




 2. The appellant's appeal was dismissed by First--tier Tribunal Judge  Row
    following a hearing at Birmingham on 9 April 2018. Permission to appeal
    was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Beach  on  13  June
    2018 but subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  on  31
    July 2018.


 3. Thus, the appeal came before me.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  the  following  findings  in  his
    decision which I summarise. The Judge began his decision by saying that
    the only point raised by the respondent  in  refusing  the  appellant's
    application was that the appellant had  not  demonstrated  that  he  is
    Financially and emotionally dependent on  his  sponsor  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  At  the  time  that  the  appellant's  parents  took  up  the
    opportunity to settle in the  United  Kingdom  under  the  2009  Gurkha
    policy, the appellant 18 years old and would have been entitled to join
    them. The sponsor  decided  not  to  bring  the  appellant  because  of
    financial reasons. At the time the sponsor left the appellant he was 22
    years old.


 5. The appellant's argument is that he has never worked  and  cannot  find
    employment and is financially supported entirely by  his  sponsor.  The
    appellant provided a letter from an official in Nepal  confirming  that
    the appellant was unemployed. The payments made by the sponsor  to  the
    appellant are relatively small and therefore the  appellant  must  have
    some  other  means  of  supporting  himself.  These  remittances  might
    indicate financial dependency or on the other hand they may simply be a
    demonstration of the natural tendency of parents to make gifts to their
    children. They may have paid for the management of the sponsor's  house
    that he retains in Nepal. The appellant  also  indicated  that  he  has
    access to the sponsor's bank account in Nepal.


 6. The appellant says that he is emotionally dependent on his sponsor. The
    sponsor has not provided evidence of telephone  conversations  that  he
    has made to the appellant although he says that  he  used  a  different
    telephone to make the calls.


 7. So far as emotional dependency is concerned the evidence would seem  to
    suggest that the sponsor and his wife waited until the appellant was 22
    years old before deciding to leave him in Nepal and come to the  United
    Kingdom. They made no special arrangements for his care. It  would  not
    be expected that special arrangements will have to be made for an adult
    male in reasonable health. The appellant was  not  suffering  from  any
    mental health problem or  physical  disability  which  might  make  him
    emotionally dependent. His parents considered that he was able to  live
    on his own. He is not emotionally dependent on his sponsor and his wife
    now. The appellant therefore does not meet the requirements of Annex K.


 8. In respect of article 8 rights of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights, the Judge took into account the case of Kugathas [2003]  EW  CA
    Civ 31 and Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320 and in particular the guidance given
    at paragraph 42 when it was stated that the heart of the matter is  the
    question of whether family life subsisted at the time  the  appellant's
    parents chose to settle in the United Kingdom and whether  family  life
    still subsists at the date of the hearing.


 9. The appellant has not demonstrated on a balance of  probabilities  that
    he had family life with his parents on 4 December 2014. He was 22 years
    old and still living in  the  family  home.  The  appellant  has  lived
    independently in Nepal for three years at the date of  hearing.  He  is
    now 25 years old. I have found he is not financially dependent  on  the
    sponsor and he is not emotionally dependent on them either. There is no
    family life between the appellant  and  the  sponsor  at  the  date  of
    hearing. Therefore Article 8  is  not  engaged.  It  is  therefore  not
    necessary to go on to consider the issue of proportionality. The  Judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.


10. The grounds of appeal state the Judge did not  take  into  account  all
    relevant factors in concluding that the appellant was  not  financially
    dependent of the sponsor. The Judge  stated  that  it  must  have  been
    envisaged by the appellant's parents that  their  separation  from  the
    appellant when his parents came to the  United  Kingdom  as  permanent.
    This is against the sponsor's evidence in his witness statement he said
    that the plan was two sponsor the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
    after the first came here.


11. The Judge stated  that  no  special  arrangements  were  made  for  the
    appellant when he left him in Nepal and from that concluded that  there
    must have thought that he was able to look after himself. In respect of
    his finding that the money transfers to the appellant were insufficient
    and therefore he must have some means of supporting himself is perverse
    because the evidence  was  unchallenged  by  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant has been sending money the appellant and also left  money  in
    his bank account in Nepal including giving him money on his visits. The
    Judge then goes on to state that money  transfers  indicates  financial
    dependence but goes on to suggest that these  are  gifts  that  parents
    normally give to children which is speculative.




12. In respect of Article 8, the judge found that there was no family  life
    between  the  appellant  and  his   sponsor   for   him   to   consider
    proportionality. However, the Judge found that there  was  family  life
    with the appellant and the sponsor when they left Nepal.


13. At the hearing I heard submissions from both parties at the hearing.











    Discussion


14. The Judge failed to properly consider and interpret all the evidence in
    this appeal, therefore came to a materially flawed  decision  and  fell
    into material error. The Judge accepted that family life  did  in  fact
    exist between the appellant and his parents when they  left  Nepal  yet
    still found that there is no family life between the appellant and  his
    sponsor at the date of the hearing in accordance with  Article  8  (1).
    The Judge found that the appellant has not demonstrated that  his  ties
    with his parents are above normal emotional ties between adult  parents
    and children found that there was no family life at all and stated that
    he does not have to conduct the proportionality exercise.

15. However, this conclusion was against the evidence before him. The Judge
    stated that when the appellant's parents left the appellant in Nepal at
    the age of 22, there was no  expectation  that  they  would  ever  live
    together again. This was a flawed conclusion  based  on  the  sponsor's
    evidence that at the time that he and  his  wife  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom they could not bring the  appellant  with  them  for  financial
    reasons and left him living in their home Nepal with the  intention  of
    sponsoring him to join them in this country.


16. The Judge referred to the case of  Rai  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320  and  in
    particular the guidance given at paragraph 42 there it was stated  that
    at the heart of the matter is  the  question  of  whether  family  life
    subsisted at the time the appellant's parents chose to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom and whether family life was still subsisting at the time
    of the hearing.

17. Under Article 8(1) the appellant must demonstrate that he had a  family
    life with his parents, which had existed at the time of their departure
    to  settle  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  had   endured   beyond   it,
    notwithstanding them having left Nepal when they did. The evidence that
    was before the Judge indicated that there  is  a  real,  committed  and
    effective support  and  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    parents which has continued after they left  Nepal  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom.

18. The Judge found that the appellant has been sent money  by  his  father
    but said it was of limited amounts and speculated  that  he  must  have
    other sources of income. The Judge failed to consider the evidence that
    the appellant's sponsor would visit Nepal and give him money  including
    access to his bank account in Nepal. The Judge also failed to  consider
    that the appellant continues to live in  his  father's  home,  has  not
    established independent family unit of his own and has been financially
    supported by his sponsor from the United Kingdom. The Judge also failed
    consider the evidence that the appellant was unemployed.

19. The Judge also failed to consider the  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    sponsor's financial situation at the time he came to the United Kingdom
    was such that he could not apply for him to the company him the  United
    Kingdom. This is a relevant  factor  for  why  the  appellant  did  not
    accompany his parent to the United Kingdom.

20. The Judge failed to take into account that the intention of the  Gurkha
    policy was not to split families and decisions made by Gurkha  families
    was to avail themselves of the opportunity  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom and within the policy is that they can sponsor  their  children
    within two years. Although the appellant's application  was  just  over
    two years, that in itself was not a reason to find that  there  was  no
    family life.

21. The  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  historic  injustice  for  Gurkha
    settlers. In Pun and others (Gurkhas-policy  article  8)  Nepal  [2011]
    UKUT 377 (IAC) where he said that the Tribunal was not being  asked  to
    exercise discretion under the  policy,  but  rather  that  in  applying
    Article 8, the policy should be taken into account when considering the
    weight to be given to the public interest in maintaining firm and  fair
    immigration  control  when  assessing  proportionality.  The  Judge  by
    finding that the appellant and his sponsor did not have family life  at
    all, materially erred given his finding that they did have family  life
    when they left Nepal. His misunderstanding of the evidence that  having
    left him there, there was no intention of them living together.

22. It has been held in Ghising and others (Gurkhas/BOC's historical wrong:
    weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC). that the historical wrong suffered  by
    Gurkha ex-serviceman  should  be  given  substantial  weight  (emphasis
    mine). When the appellant has shown that there is family life  and  the
    decision made by the respondent amounts to an interference with it, the
    burden lies with the respondent to show that a decision  to  remove  is
    proportionate although I accept that the appellant will,  in  practice,
    bear the responsibility of producing evidence that  lies  within  their
    remit and about which the respondent may be unaware. The  Judge  failed
    to give substantial weight to the policy in reaching  his  decision  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal under Article 8.

23. The House of Lords in Bekou-Betts v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 39 states  that  the  Judge  must  consider  the
    family life  of  all  those  who  share  their  family  life  with  the
    appellant.  In the appellant's case it is the appellant's  sponsor  and
    his wife who have been granted settlement status in the United Kingdom.
    The Judge did not consider the family life of the  appellant's  sponsor
    with the appellant. That was also material error of law.


24. I give less weight to the respondent's requirement of  an  orderly  and
    efficient immigration control given  the  peculiar  features  of  adult
    children of Gurkhas. The Judge considered that the historical injustice
    goes to the assessment of proportionality but is also operates  on  the
    logical necessity of interference.

25. I find that there were material errors in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and I set aside the decision in its  entirety.  I  remake
    the decision and allow the appellant's appeal.

Decision

The  appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  under  Article  8  of  the   European
Convention on Human Rights.



Signed by                                  Date 8th day of October 2018

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Ms S Chana




