



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU068422015
                                                                 HU068432015
                                                                 HU068442015
                                                                 HU068452015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 August 2017                      |On 16 August 2017                    |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |S A                                               |             |
|           |RA                                                |             |
|           |Master A A                                        |             |
|           |Miss N A                                          |Appellants   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


                                  Anonymity


I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellants. I  take  the  view
that disclosure of the identities of the adult appellants  risks  disclosing
the identities of  the  third  and  fourth  appellants  who  are  minors.  I
therefore issue an anonymity order which extends to all the appellants.   No
report of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  them.
This direction applies  to  both  the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:
For the appellants:    Ms J Heybroek, of Counsel, instructed by  Nasim & Co
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND Directions

 1. The appellants  have  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Phull  who,  following  a
    hearing on  29  September  2016,  dismissed  their  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds (Article 8  of  the  1950
    European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental
    Freedoms (ECHR)) against decisions of the respondent  of  11  September
    2015 refusing their claims for leave to remain on the basis of  Article
    8.

 2. The first and second appellants,  born  on  [  ]  1969  and  [  ]  1972
    respectively, are the parents of the third and fourth appellants,  born
    on [ ] 2002 and [ ] 2004 respectively. The first appellant entered  the
    United Kingdom on 2 May 2009 as a visitor. The second, third and fourth
    appellants entered the United Kingdom on 12 September 2009 as visitors.
    At the time, the third appellant was 6  years  9  months  old  and  the
    fourth appellant nearly 5 years old. All four  overstayed  after  their
    leave as visitors expired.

 3. In the accounts given  by  the  first  and  second  appellants  to  the
    respondent and in their evidence to the judge,  the  first  and  second
    appellants  said  that  the  second  appellant  had  suffered  domestic
    violence at the hands of the first appellant's father in  Pakistan  who
    was said to be an influential religious leader with a  large  following
    and who has vowed to separate  the  second  appellant  from  the  first
    appellant. It was said that the domestic violence has left  the  second
    appellant traumatised, she is under treatment for depression  and  that
    the children had witnessed the domestic abuse and violence.

 4. The reason for the conflict with the first appellant's father was  said
    to be the fact that the second appellant's maternal  grandparents  were
    Ahmadi Muslims who  had  converted  to  Sunni  Islam.  When  the  first
    appellant's father discovered  that  the  second  appellant's  maternal
    grandparents were previously Ahmadi Muslims, he demanded that the first
    appellant immediately divorce the  second  appellant.  As  a  religious
    leader, his father would not accept the second appellant's  background.
    In evidence before the judge, the witnesses gave evidence to the effect
    that the family would experience problems at the  hands  of  the  first
    appellant's father.

 5. An unusual feature of this case is that  representations  made  on  the
    appellants' behalf to the respondent in a letter dated  8  August  2015
    from Nasim & Co Solicitors specifically stated  that  it  was  accepted
    that the family conflict "cannot realistically amount to  a  claim  for
    asylum,  however  it  is  submitted  that  the  circumstances  are   so
    exceptional as to give rise to a level of protection under Article 8".

 6. By the date of the hearing before  the  judge,  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants had been living continuously in the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    period of at least 7 years. They were therefore  "qualifying  children"
    under s.117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  The
    judge had before her a report from an independent social worker,  a  Ms
    Shulamit Greenstein. Ms Greenstein had interviewed all four  appellants
    and gave an account of  their  circumstances  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    especially the circumstances of the third and  fourth  appellants.  She
    also gave details of the links that the third and fourth appellants had
    developed with the United Kingdom. She said that they were  very  close
    to their cousins, the children of the first appellant's sister. The two
    families live together.

 7. Importantly, the circumstances of the third and  fourth  appellants  in
    the United Kingdom were not limited to their relationships  with  their
    cousins. In her report, Ms Greenstein described the extent to which the
    third and fourth appellants were integrated in the United Kingdom.

 8. I have carefully considered the appellants' grounds and the submissions
    before me. I am satisfied that the judge has materially  erred  in  law
    and that her decision should be set aside for reasons which I will  now
    give:

 9. Ms Greenstein's report gave details about the lives of  the  third  and
    fourth appellants  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  links  they  had
    developed.  The  judge  mentioned  Ms  Greenstein's   report   in   two
    paragraphs, i.e. paras 36 and 42, which read:

            "36. I  have  considered,  the  independent  social  worker,  Ms
                 Greenstein's,  report.  It  sets  out  her  experience  and
                 expertise to prepare the report. She references the  report
                 with objective evidence, as set out pages 4 and  5  of  the
                 report.  She  was  instructed  to  prepare  a  report,  and
                 consider the best interests of [the  third  appellant]  and
                 [the fourth appellant], the current social circumstances of
                 the family in the UK  and  the  impact  on  the  children's
                 removal to Pakistan in terms of their physical  and  mental
                 wellbeing.

            42.  ... the social worker  notes  at  page  11  that,  "...  In
                 speaking  with  [the  third  appellant]  and  [the   fourth
                 appellant], they did present as nervous  and  anxious  when
                 asked  direct  questions  however,  appeared  relaxed   and
                 comfortable with adult family members... The  views  shared
                 by the family were  a  true  reflection  of  their  current
                 situation and concerns". I understand  this  to  mean  that
                 [the  third  appellant]  and  the  [fourth  appellant]  are
                 comfortable with their parents. They  can  help  adjust  to
                 life in Pakistan away from their grandfather."

            (my emphasis)

10. The two sentences  I  have  underlined  represent  the  judge's  entire
    assessment of Ms Greenstein's report. The judge failed to  engage  with
    the evidence in Ms Greenstein's report about the lives of the  children
    in the United Kingdom and the links they had developed  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

11. I accept that the judge considered s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
    Immigration Act 2009 at  para  46.  However,  an  examination  of  that
    paragraph reveals that there was no assessment of  the  evidence  about
    the ties and links the third and fourth appellants had developed in the
    United Kingdom. At para 46, she stated:

            "46. ... section 55, which I turn to consider  now.  [The  third
                 appellant] and [the fourth appellant] have also  overstayed
                 but I find they are minors and cannot be  blamed,  for  the
                 actions of their parents. I find on balance it is in  their
                 best interests to be with  their  parents  for  support.  I
                 accept the children speak English and  they  do  understand
                 some Urdu. There are  schools  in  Pakistan  that  use  the
                 English medium of instruction that they can attend. I  find
                 that the children would be returning with their parents and
                 they can be helped to adjust to life in Pakistan  on  their
                 return. I accept that although they will be separated  from
                 their cousins, and this may cause them some upset.  I  find
                 however the  parents  can  help  them  adjust.  [The  third
                 appellant] and [the fourth  appellant]  can  also  maintain
                 their relationships through  visits  and  modern  means  of
                 communication."

12. In MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, the Court of Appeal held that the
    fact that a child has been in the United Kingdom for seven  years  must
    be given significant  weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
    exercise and that there must be a  very  strong  expectation  that  the
    child's best interests will be to remain in the United Kingdom with his
    parents as part of a family unit, and  that  must  rank  as  a  primary
    consideration in the proportionality exercise.

13. The judge did not refer to (MA (Pakistan) in her decision, although she
    had the judgment before her. Of course, there was no need for the judge
    to have  made  specific  reference  to  (MA  (Pakistan).  However,  her
    reasoning does not disclose that she considered the ties of  the  third
    and fourth appellants  to  the  United  Kingdom,  as  described  in  Ms
    Greenstein's report, nor is there anything  that  shows  that  she  was
    aware that significant weight must  be  given  to  the  fact  that  the
    children have been in the United Kingdom for at least 7 years.

14. Accordingly, when the judge's reasoning is  read  as  a  whole,  it  is
    impossible to escape the conclusion that, when she did mention s.55  at
    para 46, it was meaningless. The judge's reasoning  does  not  disclose
    what she made of the ties of the third and  fourth  appellants  to  the
    United Kingdom which, as indicated at paras 7 and  8  above,  were  not
    limited to their relationships with their cousins.

15. I am therefore satisfied that the judge erred in law in failing to take
    into  account  relevant  evidence  in  reaching  her  decision  on  the
    proportionality, i.e. the contents of Ms Greenstein's report insofar as
    she described the extent to which the third and fourth appellants  were
    integrated in the United Kingdom.

16. This error is clearly material to the outcome of the Article  8  claims
    of the third and fourth appellants. If it is disproportionate to remove
    the children, this would be significant in the  balancing  exercise  in
    relation to the first and second appellants. Thus, the  error  is  also
    material to the outcome of the Article 8 claims of the first and second
    appellants.

17. In addition, it is not clear whether the judge accepted or rejected the
    credibility  of  the  accounts  of  the  first  and  second  appellants
    concerning the alleged  domestic  violence  by  the  first  appellant's
    father, although it is clear that she rejected the claim that the first
    appellant's father is  a  well-known  religious  leader  with  a  large
    following on the basis that no evidence of his religious  position  had
    been submitted. The only assessment of credibility of the  accounts  of
    events in Pakistan was at paragraph 41 where the  judge  described  the
    evidence that the minor cousins of the third and fourth appellants  had
    given to Ms Greenstein when they described what the  third  and  fourth
    appellants had said to them about  their  paternal  grandfather.  After
    quoting from the relevant parts of Ms Greenstein's report at  para  41,
    the judge said, in effect, that the  minor  cousins  had  not  attended
    court to be tested on  their  evidence.  This  did  not  amount  to  an
    assessment but an outright rejection of their  evidence  on  the  basis
    that they had not attended court to be tested on their evidence.  There
    was no recognition by the judge that they were minors and no assessment
    of the evidence she heard from the  adult  witnesses,  i.e.  the  first
    appellant, the second appellant, the first appellant's sister  and  the
    husband of the first appellant's  sister  about  the  alleged  domestic
    violence.

18. I acknowledge that Mr Tufan's submission,  that  this  claim  that  the
    second appellant as a person whose maternal grandparents had  converted
    from the Ahmadi  religion  to  the  Sunni  religion  suffered  domestic
    violence for that reason is not supported by  the  background  material
    and is incredible, has some force. However, this does  not  change  the
    fact that credibility has not been assessed.

19. I have considered carefully whether the assessment of  credibility  was
    material to the outcome. I accept that the judge rejected the  evidence
    that the first appellant's father was  a  well-known  religious  leader
    with a large following on the ground that it was  not  corroborated  by
    supporting evidence. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that the  credibility
    of the account of the alleged problems in Pakistan is relevant  to  the
    balancing exercise in relation  to  proportionality  of  removal  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

20. I am satisfied that the judge's failure to assess  the  credibility  of
    the evidence concerning the alleged problems experienced from the first
    appellant's father was also  material  to  the  balancing  exercise  in
    relation to proportionality outside the Rules.

21. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision  will  be  able  to  re-make  the  relevant  decision  itself.
    However, the Practice Statement for the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber
    of the Upper Tribunal at  para  7.2  recognises  that  it  may  not  be
    possible for the Upper Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when
    it is satisfied that:

         "(a)     the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

22. In my judgement, this case  falls  within  para  7.2(b).  In  addition,
    having regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in JD (Congo) &  Others
    [2012] EWCA Civ 327, I am of the view that a remittal to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a re-hearing on the merits on  all  issues  is  the  right
    course of action.

23. The first and second appellants are on notice that the respondent takes
    issue with the credibility of their evidence that the second  appellant
    experienced domestic violence at the hands  of  the  first  appellant's
    father and also that the  first  appellant's  father  is  a  well-known
    religious leader with a large  following.  They  will  be  expected  to
    produce objective evidence to support their claim that converts to  the
    Sunni  religion  from  the  Ahmadi  religion  face  a  real   risk   of
    experiencing difficulties of the  sort  claimed  from  Sunni  religious
    leaders and that they do  not  have  a  reasonable  and  safe  internal
    flight, albeit that  this  will  be  relevant  only  to  the  balancing
    exercise under Article 8(2).

24. Of course, as a consequence and as I  explained  to  Ms  Heybroek,  the
    judge hearing the  appeal  on  the  next  occasion  may  make  positive
    findings in their favour or they may run the risk of adverse  findings.
    In either case, if they later make an asylum claim and  if  the  asylum
    claim is refused, the findings  will  be  stand  as  a  starting  point
    pursuant to the guidance in Devaseelan (Second appeals - ECHR -  Extra-
    Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka  *  [2002]  UKIAT  00702  .  Ms  Heybroek
    acknowledged this. It was  clear  to  me  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants have made an informed decision that they wish to rely on the
    account of domestic violence and the alleged problems  with  the  first
    appellant's father only in relation to their Article 8 claims.





Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that it is set aside in its entirety.

This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  re-
make the decision on the appellant's appeal on the merits on all  issues  by
a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Phull.


[pic]
Signed                                             Date: 14 August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
