
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/06526/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On: 21st June 2019                   |On: 15th July 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                Monica Oyasor
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms N. Braganza of Counsel instructed by Latitude Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on the 5th January  1998.
       She appeals to this Tribunal against the decision of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge Brookfield) to dismiss her  appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds.

    2. The history of this matter is as follows:

|5 January 1998    |Appellant born in Nigeria                         |
|2001-2008         |The Appellant first visits the United Kingdom aged|
|                  |3, and makes no fewer than seven subsequent trips |
|                  |during her childhood                              |
|28 August 2009    |The Appellant's last entry to the United Kingdom, |
|                  |aged 11                                           |
|23 December 2015  |Application made for leave to be granted on human |
|                  |rights Grounds, Appellant then aged 17            |
|12 May 2017       |Application is refused                            |
|5 February 2018   |Appeal to First-tier Tribunal dismissed by Judge  |
|                  |Brookfield                                        |
|16 March 2018     |First-tier Tribunal Judge Osbourne refuses        |
|                  |permission                                        |
|14 June 2018      |Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic refuses permission     |
|5 September 2018  |HHJ Pelling QC grants permission upon application |
|                  |for Cart judicial review of Upper Tribunal's      |
|                  |decision                                          |
|16 October 2018   |HHJ Choudhary quashes decision of Judge Kekic     |
|2 November 2018   |Vice President UTIAC Mr CMG Ockelton grants       |
|                  |permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal        |


    3. The first matter before me is therefore whether the decision of Judge
       Brookfield is flawed for error of law such  that  it  should  be  set
       aside.  If the answer to that question  is  yes,  I  am  required  to
       remake the decision in the appeal.




       Error of Law

    4. By way of introduction it is appropriate that I set out the basis  of
       the Appellant's  claim  under  Article  8  ECHR.  The  salient  facts
       asserted are:

         . The Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom since she  was  11
           years old (she is now 21)

         . She has throughout that period lived with her sister Gloria, who
           is  seventeen  years  her  elder.  Gloria  and   the   Appellant
           consistently describe their relationship as akin to  mother  and
           daughter

         . The Appellant also lives with Gloria's British husband  Richard,
           whom she describes as a 'father figure'

         . Gloria and Richard have three children, who are now aged 12,  10
           and 3.  The Appellant has a close sibling-like bond  to  all  of
           them

         . The Appellant has in addition two uncles in the  United  Kingdom
           who are both married with  young  families  of  their  own.  The
           Appellant enjoys a close family relationship with all  of  these
           aunts/uncles/cousins

         . All of these family members are either British, or have  settled
           status

         . The Appellant has not been  back  to  Nigeria  since  2009.  Her
           parents have now divorced. Her father is remarried and  she  has
           not seen him for many years. Her mother periodically visits  the
           United Kingdom but the Appellant has no real contact with her

         . The Appellant suffered from significant  health  problems  as  a
           child which meant that when she arrived in  the  United  Kingdom
           she was suffering from oedema in her legs, kidney issues and was
           prone to infection

    5. Before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant  asserted  that  the
       combined force of these factors makes  the  decision  to  refuse  her
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom disproportionate and  therefore
       a breach of her Article 8(1) right to a family and private life.

    6. Judge Brookfield was not satisfied that the Appellant could meet  any
       of the requirements of the Rules as they relate  to  Article  8.  She
       went on to consider whether the decision to refuse to grant leave was
       nevertheless a disproportionate  interference  with  the  Appellant's
       Article 8 rights.

    7. At paragraph 8(vi) of the decision the First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
       that the Appellant shares a family life  with  her  sister  and  that
       Article 8 is engaged. In  the  same  paragraph  she  found  that  the
       decision was taken in pursuit of a legitimate Article  8(2)  aim  and
       that it was one that the Secretary of State was lawfully entitled  to
       take.

    8.  Proceeding  to  consider  proportionality  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       directed itself to s117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
       Act 2002 and at 8(vii) said this:

         "The appellant has been educated in the United  Kingdom  for  seven
         years and accordingly  speaks  fluent  English.  The  appellant  is
         financially reliant on her sister and brother in law in the UK  who
         do not receive direct public benefits. The appellant's  sister  has
         accessed education and routine medical treatment under the NHS  for
         the appellant in the UK. The appellant is not entitled to education
         or routine healthcare in  the  UK  under  the  NHS.  There  was  no
         evidence that the  appellant  or  her  sister  have  paid  for  the
         treatment or education that the appellant has received in the UK. I
         find the appellant has been in receipt of public funds  during  her
         residence in the United Kingdom".

    9. It was this paragraph that formed the centrepiece  of  Ms  Braganza's
       case before me.  She submitted that the Tribunal  had  there  weighed
       against the Appellant the fact that she had been sent to  school  and
       taken to the doctors, without at any point taking  into  account  the
       fact that she was then a young  child.  In  granting  permission  HHJ
       Pelling QC considered  that  this  was  an  arguable  error  of  law,
       amounting to a failure to take relevant considerations into  account.
       Whilst the decision might not, in the final analysis, be  changed  he
       found  that  "given  the  acutely  fact-sensitive   nature   of   the
       enquiry...it is almost impossible to conclude that the outcome  would
       have been the same". This was a sentiment with which Mr  McVeety  for
       the Secretary of State agreed. He accepted that if  this  ground  was
       made out, then the entire decision would need to  be  re-made,  since
       such a finding could not  be  safely  extricated  from  the  decision
       overall.

   10. That said, Mr McVeety did not accept that there was an error  of  law
       identified in the passage cited at my �8 above. He argued that it was
       not clear whether in fact the  Tribunal  had  weighed  those  matters
       against the Appellant. It was  possible  to  read  the  paragraph  as
       amounting to a statement of fact, or alternatively to be criticism of
       the Appellant's sister, the adult  who  had  at  all  material  times
       responsibility for her. I am unable to read the passage in that  way.
       The context in which the  reasoning  appears  is  in  the  Tribunal's
       consideration of the mandatory public interest  factors  set  out  in
       s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  It  is
       clear therefore that the finding  that  the  Appellant  has  been  in
       receipt of public funds is a matter that is weighed  against  her  in
       accordance with the third sub-section of s117B:

           '(3)  It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.'

   11. The applicability of the public interest factors at Part  5A  of  the
       2002 Act to children was a matter considered by  the  Upper  Tribunal
       (myself and Mr Justice McCloskey) in Miah (section 117B NIAA  2002  -
       children) [2016] UKUT 00131(IAC). We found that there  was  no  legal
       basis upon which to conclude  that  the  statute  did  not  apply  to
       children. We found however that  the  fact  of  minority  remained  a
       highly relevant factor, and that the section had to be read, and  the
       consequences of it weighed, with that in mind:

           "While the impact of sections  117B  (1)-(5)  on  children  will
           appear harsh  and  unfair  to  many,  this  is  the  unavoidable
           consequence of the legislative choice which Parliament has made.
            In this context,  we  draw  attention  to  what  this  Tribunal
           decided in Forman (Sections 117A - C considerations) [2015] UKUT
           412 (IAC).  This decision emphasises that while it is obligatory
           to have regard to the considerations listed in Section  117B  in
           all cases where proportionality under Article 8(2) ECHR is being
           determined, the statutory list is not exhaustive.   Accordingly,
           in any given case, the obligatory statutory considerations  will
           be weighed by the Tribunal with  all  other  facts  and  factors
           which have a legitimate bearing on the issue of proportionality.
            In the case of a child it  is  possible  to  envisage,  in  the
           abstract, a series of  considerations  which  could  potentially
           outweigh the public interest.  These might include matters  such
           as parental dominance and influence; trafficking; other forms of
           compulsion;  and  the  absence  of  any  flagrant,  repeated  or
           persistent breaches of the United Kingdom's  immigration  regime
           by  the  child  concerned.  Furthermore,  the  child's  age  and
           personal circumstances at the commencement of the  period  under
           scrutiny   and   thereafter   will   be    obviously    material
           considerations. Viewed panoramically, it  seems  uncontroversial
           to suggest that an Article 8(2) proportionality  exercise  which
           strikes the balance in  a  manner  which  overcomes  the  public
           interests engaged is more likely to occur in the case of a child
           than that of an adult.

   12. There was therefore no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       directing itself to the terms of  s117B(3),  or  applying  them.  The
       error was in failing to temper that matter with consideration of  the
       fact  that  the  Appellant  was  sent  to  school  by  an  adult  (in
       accordance, one might add, with the law).  It was her sister who made
       that decision, and who took her to the GP.   It would I  think  be  a
       perverse outcome, and not one which parliament could conceivably have
       intended, to weigh without qualification, against a child  applicant,
       the actions of an adult third-party.   I am therefore satisfied  that
       this first ground is made out. Mr McVeety having accepted  that  this
       would be fatal to the decision overall, I need not address any of the
       other three points that  Judge  Pelling  considered  to  be  arguable
       errors of law.

   13. That being my finding, the parties invited me to re-make the decision
       on the evidence before me.




       The Re-Made Decision

   14. I am satisfied that the Appellant cannot meet any  of  the  competing
       requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules:

           '276ADE (1). The requirements to be  met  by  an  applicant  for
           leave to remain on the grounds of private life  in  the  UK  are
           that at the date of application, the applicant:

           (i)   does not fall for refusal under  any  of  the  grounds  in
           Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5.  in
           Appendix FM; and

           (ii)  has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on  the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and

           (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

           (iv)  is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
           the  UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
           imprisonment) and it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
           applicant to leave the UK; or

           (v)   is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
           at least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the  UK
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

           (vi)  subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years  or  above,
           has lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
           significant obstacles to the applicant's  integration  into  the
           country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave  the
           UK.'

   15. That is because she cannot qualify under:

        a) Sub-paragraph (iii) because she has not lived here for 20 years;

        b) Sub-paragraph (iv) because at the date of  application  she  had
           not lived here for 7 years;

        c) Sub-paragraph (v) because she was not at the date of application
           over 18;

        d) Sub-paragraph (vi) because she is fit, well and able and has  no
           serious  mental,  social  or  physical  challenges  which  would
           prevent her in time establishing relationships with other people
           in Nigeria such that would constitute a 'private life'.

   16. I further find that if she  made  an  application  today,  she  would
       similarly fail to meet the very particular requirements of the  rule.
       Although she has now lived here for longer than seven years she is no
       longer a child. Although she has lived here for what  is  approaching
       "at least half her life" she has not yet  reached  that  point.  That
       will not be, by my calculations, until the 21st April 2021.

   17. I therefore proceed to consider the case on a classic Razgar footing.
        Before I embark on that assessment I must mark  that  the  Appellant
       was unable to  meet  any  of  the  alternative  requirements  of  the
       relevant immigration rule. Ordinarily  that  would  be  a  matter  to
       attract  substantial  weight  in  the   balancing   exercise,   since
       parliament has specifically mandated that the rules now signify where
       the balance should, in the generality of Article 8 cases, be  struck.
        There is however in this case, a significant gap between the  issues
       arising under the rule, and the issues arising  on  the  facts.  Sub-
       paragraphs  (iii)-(v)  of  276ADE(1)  are  only  concerned  with  the
       quantity of time spent in the United Kingdom; the Appellant seeks  to
       rely on the quality of her family and  private  life.   Sub-paragraph
       (vi) is only concerned with the potential situation in  Nigeria;  the
       Appellant is concerned  with  the  actual  situation  in  the  United
       Kingdom.    With those considerations  in  mind  I  turn  to  address
       Article 8.

   18. It was found by Judge Brookfield that the Appellant shares  a  family
       life with her sister.  Although ordinarily one would not assume there
       to be 'family' life ties between adult siblings in this case that was
       plainly a finding open to  Judge  Brookfield.  The  relationship  has
       been, since the Appellant was 11 years old, essentially maternal; the
       Appellant was 19 at the date of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  and
       today is 20, but she continues to live under her sister's roof and be
       an integral part of her family.

   19. I would add that I am satisfied that the Appellant's family life ties
       extend beyond her relationship with her sister to  other  members  of
       the household. Gloria's children have grown  up  with  the  Appellant
       being an integral part of their family, and I see no reason to  doubt
       the evidence that they are extremely close to her. They look  to  her
       as a big sister. She in turn regards them as  her  younger  siblings.
       She plays a significant role in their upbringing, for instance taking
       them to and from school when Gloria and  Richard  are  at  work.  She
       takes the 3 year old to nursery, and when she is not at nursery cares
       for her all day.   She has  given  the  elder  children  support  and
       guidance, in particular the 12 year old:

           "I share a room with [B] and we are very close. [B]  is  a  very
           emotional child and she sees me as a big  sister  who  she  will
           discuss anything with.  Even  when  she  was  being  bullied  at
           school".

       I note in respect of the  latter  Gloria's  acknowledgment  that  her
       daughter did not feel able to open up  to  her  about  what  she  was
       experiencing at school, instead turning to the Appellant.

   20. Similarly I see no reason to reject the Appellant's evidence that her
       relationship  with  her  brother-in-law  Richard  is   in   substance
       paternal, particularly since she has not had any contact with her own
       father for many years.  In his statement he  says  life  without  the
       Appellant as part of the  family  would  be  "just  unthinkable"  and
       "extremely devastating". He  describes  her  as  a  "blessing  and  a
       wonderful person".

   21. I am not satisfied that this quality of relationship could be said to
       pertain to the Appellant's relationships with  her  other  two  adult
       brothers, their wives and children. Although I do not doubt her  when
       she says that they are close, there  is  no  evidence  before  me  to
       indicate that these relationships  go  beyond  the  "normal  ties  of
       affection" discussed in  Kugathas  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31.   I  accept
       however that  these  relationships  with  her  wider  family  are  an
       important aspect of  the  Appellant's  private  life  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

   22. In common with the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  am  satisfied  that  the
       Secretary of State was entitled, as a matter  of  law,  to  take  the
       decision that it did. The question is whether,  taking  all  relevant
       circumstances into account, it is proportionate.

   23. I begin with the matters that weigh against the Appellant.

   24. The first is that the maintenance of immigration control  is  in  the
       public interest. She has not had any leave to remain since  the  19th
       February 2010, when she overstayed her visit visa[1].  She does  not,
       as far as I can tell, qualify  for  leave  under  the  terms  of  the
       Immigration Rules today. That is a matter that weighs against her.  I
       bear in mind however that for most of that time the Appellant  was  a
       minor. She played no part in the decision to bring her here and leave
       her with her sister  (indeed  it  would  seem  from  the  Appellant's
       ambivalence towards her mother that this was a decision that has  led
       to some emotional difficulties for the  Appellant).   That  said  the
       Appellant is now 20 years old and to that extent I must weigh against
       her  the  failure  to  regularise  her  position,  or  to  meet   the
       requirements of the Rules.

   25. The Appellant speaks fluent English. This is, properly understood,  a
       neutral factor in the balancing exercise although it is worth  noting
       the purpose underlying s117B(2), that those seeking to settle in this
       country are able to speak English because, inter alia,  such  persons
       are better able to integrate into society.    That this is so is well-
       illustrated by the Appellant  who  has  fully  integrated  since  her
       arrival as a child. She has passed her GCSE's, made numerous  friends
       and played a role in her local community  as  a  carer  to  a  family
       friend.

   26. It is in the public interest, and in particular in the  interests  of
       the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who  seek
       to remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent. I accept
       that the Appellant and her family have had  no  recourse  to  'public
       funds', as they are defined at paragraph 6 of the Immigration  Rules,
       since her arrival.  The Appellant has been housed and  maintained  by
       Gloria and Richard with no support from any external agency.  For  at
       least some of the medical treatment that the Appellant has had,  they
       have paid privately (as evidenced  by  receipts  in  the  Appellant's
       bundle).  It is right to find however,  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       did, that there has been some reliance on the public  purse  inasmuch
       as the Appellant attended state school  and  went  to  her  GP.   The
       question is whether that is capable of  undermining  the  Appellant's
       claim to 'financial independence' under s117B(3).

   27.  The  2002  Act  does  not  define  what  is  meant   by   'financial
       independence'. There is nothing in Rhuppiah v Secretary of State  for
       the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58 that assists. Nor  am  I  able  to
       find any other authority on the point.  The section has been  drafted
       with an evidently wider scope than the other formulation often  found
       in the immigration rules "without recourse to  public  funds",  which
       has  a  specific  meaning,  set  out  in  policy  and  in  the  Rules
       themselves, that definition consisting of a list of  benefits.  I  am
       not however persuaded that its scope is so wide  so  as  to  take  in
       access to state education. Applying an 'ordinary usage'  principle  I
       suspect  most  people  in  this  country  who  regard  themselves  as
       'financially independent' still send their children to state schools.
       If I am wrong I am not satisfied that the section in any  event  adds
       any significant weight to  the  Secretary  of  State's  side  of  the
       scales. Applying the principle in  Miah  I  bear  in  mind  that  the
       Appellant was a child and that her place of education was a matter of
       choice for Gloria and Richard.

   28. The effect of s117B(4) and (5) is that little weight should be  given
       to the private life that the  Appellant  has  established  since  she
       arrived in the United Kingdom,  since  her  presence  here  has  been
       precarious at best, unlawful at  worse.  Again,  the  Miah  principle
       applies and I take into account the fact that the Appellant was,  for
       most of her time here, a child. As such it would be unrealistic, even
       unfair, to imagine that she would closet herself away and decline  to
       make friends or to socialise with her peers because  her  immigration
       status was uncertain. For  much  of  that  time  she  was  blissfully
       unaware of that fact. In those circumstances the force of s117B(5) is
       somewhat blunted.

   29.  The  Appellant  has  no  criminal  convictions.  Nor  is  there  any
       suggestion that there are any matters arising from her  conduct  that
       might give the Secretary of State, or the public, concern should  she
       be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom.

   30. I now turn to consider the matters that weigh in favour  of  granting
       leave to remain to the Appellant.

   31. I accept and find as fact that the Appellant is in  effect  estranged
       from her parents, who are themselves now divorced. She  was  sent  to
       the United Kingdom at the age of 11 for what she thought was  another
       of her regular holidays here.  She never got  to  go  home.   In  her
       evidence  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal   the   Appellant   gave
       unchallenged evidence that her parents have never sent her any  money
       since the day she arrived here.  She does not speak to them. She  did
       not however deny that she has had some contact with her parents. They
       have both visited the United Kingdom - separately - in the  past  few
       years. They have stayed with her brothers, and with Gloria.   In  her
       evidence to me the Appellant wished to underline that  she  does  not
       regard it as appropriate that she objects to these arrangements -  it
       is up to Gloria whom she invites into her home. It is just  that  the
       Appellant is no longer close  to  either  parent  and  does  not  ask
       anything of either of them.  Gloria's own evidence confirmed that  of
       the Appellant. She said that she now has virtually  no  contact  with
       their father. He has remarried and has a new family. She has  contact
       with her mother on "very rare occasions", the last of  which  was  in
       2017 when she came to the United Kingdom. Gloria explained  that  she
       had not herself been brought up by their mother. She had been  raised
       by their paternal grandmother who passed away in 2016.  The  sisters'
       dislocation from their mother  was  further  emphasised  by  Gloria's
       evidence that when she visited Nigeria in 2016 she did not  even  see
       her mother once, instead visiting the village  where  she  had  lived
       with her grandmother.

   32. By contrast the family life that the Appellant  shares  with  Gloria,
       Richard and their three children is, in substance, one  of  an  adult
       daughter with her mother, father and three younger siblings. She  has
       always been close to Gloria but has actually been part of her  family
       for ten years now, a long time in the life of a young person. It is a
       warm and loving environment. All of the evidence before me  indicates
       that Gloria and Richard have not differentiated between the Appellant
       and their own biological children.  The question at the heart of this
       appeal is whether this young woman should be granted leave to  remain
       in order that she can remain part of this family unit. I answer  that
       question bearing in mind that in a short time she will reach  an  age
       where  she  will  qualify  for  leave  to  remain   under   paragraph
       276ADE(1)(v) of the Rules in her own capacity.

   33. Whilst he did not challenge any of the evidence regarding the quality
       of the family life that the Appellant enjoys in the  United  Kingdom,
       Mr McVeety rightly pointed out that the Appellant  is  now  20  years
       old. She is at an age where she could be  expected  to  start  moving
       away from the family, and live independently.  I have considered that
       submission carefully but in the Appellant's case there are  a  number
       of reasons why I accept that she  is  not  yet  ready  to  make  that
       transition.

   34. The first, I think, is her family history. Whilst the  Appellant  now
       enjoys more than a sororal bond with Gloria, this has been  borne  of
       the broken relationship with their parents.  That dislocation,  at  a
       young age, when the Appellant herself was unwell and so  particularly
       vulnerable, must have been extremely difficult for the Appellant.  It
       is in that context that I read  the  language  used  in  the  witness
       statements when  the  Appellant's  separation  from  this  family  is
       contemplated:  "unthinkable",   "devastated",   "heartbroken".    Her
       connection to this family is  particularly  potent  because  of  that
       corresponding lack of connection to her own mother.

   35. The second, and related, matter is the  Appellant's  extremely  close
       relationship with the children. The Appellant has shared a room  with
       the eldest, B, for a number of years and both she and  Gloria  attest
       to the special nature of that relationship. It is not always the case
       that sisters - particularly sisters who share a room - will  get  on,
       but the unchallenged evidence here is that B is strongly attached  to
       the Appellant, looking to her for guidance as well as fun. B and  her
       siblings have known nothing other than the Appellant  being  part  of
       their family and I accept that it would be  contrary  to  their  best
       interests if there was a forcible interference with that family life.



   36. The third matter is  that  the  Appellant  still  has  some  personal
       challenges to deal with before she is able to stand on her two  feet.
       She is clearly an intelligent young woman but she has  faced  several
       hurdles in completing her education. As a child at school in  Nigeria
       she always struggled, partly because she missed so much school  as  a
       result of repeated bouts of typhoid, malaria and related  infections.
       Her education was then interrupted by her move to the United Kingdom,
       where she was required to  fit  into  a  completely  alien  education
       system.  It was not until she was 15  that  she  was  diagnosed  with
       dyslexia.    Today this has left her  feeling  indecisive  about  her
       future  education,  and  career  choices.  At  the  time  that   this
       application was made it was the Appellant's stated ambition to  study
       medicine. Whatever her eventual choice will  be,  she  will  find  it
       difficult to make, and to pursue, without the support and  assistance
       of Gloria and Richard.  It is also worth noting  that  the  Appellant
       has deep concerns about her ability to  cope  with  her  dyslexia  in
       Nigeria, where it is a condition little understood or recognised.  It
       is not taken into account by admissions boards at  universities,  for
       instance. Here she was offered a place at Bolton  University  and  by
       Leeds Beckett (which she was unable to take up because of her status)
       but there she would find it difficult to gain admission to university
       and continue her education.

   37. For those reasons I accept that this particular 20  year-old  is  not
       about to strike out on her own and move away from the family home.  I
       accept that she is, and will for the  foreseeable  future  remain,  a
       'child' of this family: see for instance PT (Sri Lanka)  v  Secretary
       of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  612,  Ghising  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC)

   38. It is in this context that I must evaluate whether  the  decision  to
       refuse her leave is a proportionate response, necessary in  order  to
       pursue the legitimate aim of protecting the economy.

   39. I have considered all of the evidence in the round. I  remind  myself
       that the Appellant is currently unable to meet  the  requirements  of
       the Rules. Even though that is a matter that weighs  heavily  against
       her, I am quite unable to  conclude  that  the  decision  -  and  the
       Appellant's consequent removal - would be proportionate or necessary.

   40. The consequences for her would  be  devastating.   Whilst  I  do  not
       accept that the  Appellant  would  be  unable  to  -  or  face  "very
       significant obstacles in" - making her way in Nigeria, I do recognise
       her personal antipathy towards that outcome. In her witness statement
       she put it like this:

           "I was 11 years old and I cannot remember anything about my life
           there. Although I have lived with Nigerian people in the  United
           Kingdom, I have not continued to adopt the Nigerian culture,  in
           fact I have found that I do not agree with a lot  of  values  in
           Nigeria, particularly the status of women in the country".

   41. She would be giving up everything she has known in the United Kingdom
       - her family, her home, her prospective education,  her  friends  and
       entire private life - in order to start afresh in a country of  which
       she has little understanding and no adult experience. As I say  I  do
       not consider that this intelligent and personable young  woman  would
       be unable in time to re-establish a private  life  for  herself  (the
       true test in 276ADE(1)(vi): see Kamara v Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department  [2016] EWCA Civ 813)  but I do  recognise  that  the
       obstacles that she will face are likely to be difficult to  surmount.
       She will be lonely. She may feel vulnerable. She will,  as  she  puts
       it: "not know where to start".

   42. More significant though, that any of that, would be the personal loss
       to the Appellant of her strong family life in the United Kingdom. Her
       returning to Nigeria would present a very serious  obstacle  to  that
       family life continuing in the same way that she has hitherto  enjoyed
       it.    I accept that the children would be badly affected.  It  would
       not be the same  as  an  older  sibling  going  away  to  university.
       University students come back at weekends  and  the  holidays.  Their
       movement away from the family is gradual, and never complete.  If the
       Appellant were to return to Nigeria the likely consequence would be a
       very substantial interference in the relationships that she has  with
       these children. They could speak to her online, and might  enjoy  the
       occasional visit to Nigeria. Other than that their big  sister  would
       have been completely removed from their lives,  in  a  traumatic  and
       upsetting way.  As for the Appellant herself, she would be  facing  a
       loss of significant family relationships for the second time  in  her
       life.  I accept that the emotional impact of such a separation  would
       be extremely difficult for all of them.   In all of the circumstances
       I find that it would be unjustifiably harsh.

   43. I therefore allow the appeal on human rights grounds.




       Decisions

   44. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       and it is set aside.

   45. There is no order for anonymity.

   46. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               8th July 2019
                                                     -----------------------
[1] The Appellant was in possession of a multiple entry visa valid until
the 14th March 2013; I take that date from 6 months of her last entry, the
last date upon which she was permitted to enter/remain the United Kingdom
in accordance with paragraph 41 of the Rules

