
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/06726/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Determination Promulgated         |
|On 12th September 2018                  | On 21st September 2018            |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                               MAHBUBUR RAHMAN
                      (ANONYMITY HAS NOT BEEN DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Waheed, Counsel for Hamlet Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Withwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 15 February 1993.   He
    appealed the Home Office's decision of 24 May 2017 refusing  him  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of  human  rights  citing
    family and private life as he had undergone an  Islamic  marriage  with
    Luna Ali, a British citizen, on 7 October 2016  and  they  now  have  a
    child who is also a British citizen born on 17 August 2017.  His appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Geraint Jones on  14  May
    2018  and  was  dismissed  on  human  rights  grounds  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 24 May 2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Grimmett on 14  July  2018.
    The permission  states  that  the  Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant used deception to remain in the United Kingdom.  Neither  the
    respondent  nor  the  Presenting  Officer  raised  any  allegation   of
    deception either before or at the hearing and this issue was not put to
    the appellant.


 3. There is no Rule 24 response.


The Hearing


 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that the issue of deception was at  no
    time put to the appellant and was not mentioned until the decision  was
    promulgated and he therefore accepted that there is a material error of
    law in the First-Tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

 5. Counsel thanked him for this submission.


 6. It is clear that this important issue was not raised before or  at  the
    hearing and was never put to the appellant. This  must  be  a  material
    error of law.  This is an  appellant  with  a  British  partner  and  a
    British child.


Notice of Decision


Because I find that there is a material  error  of  law  in  the  First-Tier
Judge's decision I direct that that decision is  set  aside.   None  of  its
findings are to stand other than as a  record  of  what  was  said  on  that
occasion.  It is appropriate in terms of Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007
Act and of Practice Statement 7.2  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-Tier
Tribunal for an entirely fresh hearing.

The members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are  not
to include First-Tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones.

Anonymity has not been directed.

Signed                                  Date 20 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray








