
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/06186/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 June 2017                           |On 22 June 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |



                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                           S'Phamandla Brain Shazi


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C M Fielden, of Counsel, instructed by MNS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of South Africa  born,  on  4  December  1986,
    appeals with permission against a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Nightingale, promulgated on 23 September  2016  in  which  she
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
    State to maintain her decision to deport the  appellant  following  his
    conviction for supplying class A controlled drugs.

2.   The appellant arrived in Britain  in  2003  at  the  age  of  17  as  a
    dependant of his mother.  He has lived in Britain since that date.   He
    has a British citizen partner,  [KL],  with  whom  he  has  been  in  a
    relationship for approximately ten years.  They have  three  daughters,
    the first born on [ ] 2008 and the second born  on  [  ]  2015.   Their
    third daughter was born on [ ] 2017, that is, after the promulgation of
    the determination in the First-tier.

3.   On 6 August 2014 the  appellant  was  convicted  of  eleven  counts  of
    supplying class A drugs  (cocaine  and  heroin)  and  sentenced  to  32
    months' imprisonment.  He did not  appeal  against  the  conviction  or
    sentence.  On 13 July 2015 he was served with a notice of intention  to
    deport.  He then made representations  on  human  rights  grounds.   He
    appeals against the decision to refuse that application.

4.   The judge set out in paragraphs 6  onwards  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position which was that although the welfare  of  the  British  citizen
    children had been considered in accordance with the  respondent's  duty
    under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009
    these had to be balanced against the relevant factors including  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals.  While it was accepted that he
    had a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his  first
    daughter it was not accepted that he had such a relationship  with  his
    second daughter because she had been born after he  had  been  sent  to
    prison.

5.   It is not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for  the  children  to
    live in South Africa as they were South African by descent as  well  as
    British citizens - it was considered they  would  be  young  enough  to
    adapt to living in South Africa with the support of their parents.   It
    was also not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for the children to
    remain in Britain because there was no evidence to show  a  significant
    detrimental effect upon them and they would  be  able  to  continue  to
    attend school and receive necessary support and care from their mother,
    who had been their sole carer.  Contact could be maintained  by  visits
    and modern methods of communication.

6.   While it was accepted  that  the  appellant's  partner  was  a  British
    citizen and that they had a genuine and subsisting relationship it  was
    noted that they did not actually live together.  While it was  accepted
    that the relationship had  been  formed  while  the  appellant  was  in
    Britain lawfully and his immigration status was not precarious  it  was
    not considered unduly harsh to expect the appellant's partner  to  live
    in South Africa if she chose to do so and there was no evidence that it
    would be unduly harsh for her children to live there.

7.   In any event it was pointed out that the appellant  did  not  meet  the
    exception in paragraph 399A as he had not  been  lawfully  resident  in
    Britain for most of his life.  He was a South African national and  had
    spent his childhood and until he was  17   in  South  Africa.   He  had
    maintained contact with South Africa and he had returned on a visit  in
    2007.  He had acquired education in South Africa and skills in  Britain
    that he could use to find a job in South Africa.

8.   The judge noted documentary evidence before  her  including  the  OASys
    assessment dated 2 August 2016 and a copy of a printout from the Police
    National Computer regarding the appellant's criminal  conviction.   She
    noted a witness statement from the appellant, a letter from a  Mr  Neil
    and from a Miss Smith, who was the appellant's offender manager.

9.   She noted that  the  appellant's  representative  stated  that  he  was
    arguing the exceptions found in paragraph 399(a) and 399(b)  but  would
    not be arguing the provisions of Section 399A.  The argument  would  be
    that there were compelling circumstances which rendered the deportation
    a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

10.  The judge heard oral evidence both from the appellant and  his  partner
    and heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  and  set  out  the
    provisions of Sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders  Act  2007  and  the
    terms of the Immigration Rules relating to deportation including  Rules
    390A, 398 and 399.

11.  In paragraphs 50 of the determination the judge set  out  her  findings
    and reasons for her decision.  She carefully weighed up the evidence of
    the appellant and of his partner and considered in detail the rights of
    the  appellant's  two  existing  children.   She  considered  that  the
    deportation of the appellant to South Africa would  have  virtually  no
    impact on his then youngest daughter before concluding that the  eldest
    daughter would have made friendships at school  and  other  aspects  of
    private life here but stated that although she accepted that there  was
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  between  the  appellant
    and that child that had been interrupted by the  appellant's  offending
    and the time he spent in prison.  There was no evidence before her that
    that separation had caused  particular  difficulties  with  his  eldest
    daughter.  She considers the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  partner's
    mother but noted that she  worked  full-time  as  did  the  appellant's
    partner and stated that therefore she was not satisfied that there  was
    a  relationship  of  the  claimed  closeness   between   the   maternal
    grandmother and the children.

12.  She accepted that the offender management  professionals  had  assessed
    that the appellant currently posed little risk of reoffending and a low
    risk of causing serious harm.  She  noted  that  the  appellant  had  a
    series of offences relating to drugs and stated that that could not  be
    discounted.

13.  When considering whether or not it would be unduly harsh to expect  the
    appellant's two British citizen children to relocate  to  South  Africa
    she took into account the determination of the Tribunal in  KMO,  which
    had been confirmed as the correct approach by the Court of Appeal in MM
    (Uganda).  She accepts that it would be harsh for the  elder  child  to
    lose contact with her father but  stated  that  she  had  already  been
    separated from him for a lengthy period  of  time  due  to  his  prison
    sentence.  She accepted also that relocation would  present  challenges
    in the short term but noted that the appellant had said that he thought
    that he could find something by way of employment in South Africa.

14.  She considered that while the appellant's partner might wish to  choose
    to remain in Britain, as she was entitled to do as a  British  citizen,
    that was  not  the  same  as  saying  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to her relocation to South Africa.  She was not in employment
    in the United Kingdom and had not established a career here.

15.  In any event the judge did not consider that the  relationship  was  as
    close as suggested.  Her conclusion was that it  would  not  be  unduly
    harsh for either of the British  citizen  children  to  live  in  South
    Africa and stated that she made that  finding  to  be  weighed  in  the
    balance of the appellant's offending.

16.  She referred to the particular dangers that were caused  by  drugs  and
    stated that  she  had  to  balance  that  against  the  effect  on  the
    appellant's partner and upon his children.  She concluded that it would
    not be unduly harsh for the appellant or his partner to live  in  South
    Africa and stated that there were no circumstances over and above those
    described  in  paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM.   Moreover,  in   the
    alternative she concluded that it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    appellant's daughters to remain in Britain with  their  mother  without
    the appellant.  She pointed out that their mother was the primary carer
    and that the second child had only recently come  to  know  her  father
    after the release from  prison  and  that  the  elder  child  had  been
    separated from her father with little adverse effect  on  her  welfare.
    The appellant's partner and children would  continue  to  be  supported
    from public funds at the same level as at present and would  suffer  no
    material deprivation.  She  went  on  to  say  that  although  she  was
    prepared to accept that the  appellant  has  assisted  his  partner  in
    caring for the children she noted that the appellant's partner was  not
    in employment and was a full-time  mother  and  was  therefore  not  in
    particular need of his assistance.

17.  She therefore concluded  that  paragraph  399(a)  and  399(b)  did  not
    apply.

18.  She then turned to  the  issue  of  whether  or  not  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraph
    399(a) and (b).  She found that no such circumstances exist.  She  took
    into account the fact that the appellant's  partner  was  pregnant  but
    stated that when that  child  was  born  she  would  have  no  existing
    relationship with the appellant and would know nothing different  other
    than the level of communication enjoyed at the time of birth.  She  did
    not  consider  the  pregnancy  as  a  compelling   circumstance.    She
    considered that the appellant would be able to find employment in South
    Africa and found that his removal was lawful  and  proportionate.   She
    therefore dismissed the appeal.

19.  Although permission was refused in the First-tier further grounds  were
    lodged in the Upper Tribunal which  were  considered  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chapman.  Judge Chapman effectively  stated  that  there
    was no merit in the grounds of appeal as lodged but, in paragraph 6  of
    her decision granting permission she referred to the judgment in Hesham
    Ali [2016] UKSC 60 and stated that  given  that  the  applicant  was  a
    settled migrant and that  the  test  in  Jeunesse  v.  the  Netherlands
    applied the issue was whether a fair balance had  been  struck  between
    the interests of the appellant and those of  the  community.  She  also
    stated that the judge  might  have  been  entitled  to  find  that  the
    pregnancy of the appellant's partner was a material factor as  part  of
    the overall proportionality assessment.

20.   At  the  hearing  before  me  Miss  Fielden  first  stated  that   the
    appellant's previous representatives had stated that the appellant  had
    no case under paragraph 399A but went on  to  say  that  following  the
    decision in Jeunesse v. the Netherlands the  fact  that  he  had  lived
    lawfully in Britain for a considerable period of time should have  been
    taken into account and could of itself, possibly, amount to  compelling
    circumstances.

21.  She went on to state that the appellant   was  a  settled  migrant  and
    that when weighing up relevant factors in an Article 8 exercise outside
    the terms of the Rules that was a fact that should have been taken into
    account.  The judge, she appeared to argue, had erred in not  doing  so
    and in not placing weight on the fact that the appellant's partner  was
    pregnant.

22.  In reply Mr Jarvis pointed out that  Jeunesse  was  not  a  deportation
    case and that in this case the Rules were clear and  properly  set  out
    the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.  He stated
    that the correct test was whether or not  there  were  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those set out in  the  Rules  which  would
    mean that the appellant would be able to succeed under Article 8 of the
    ECHR.  He emphasised that, in any event, the terms of Section  117C  of
    the 2002 Act had not been considered by the Supreme Court when  handing
    down the judgment in Hesham Ali  and  that  that  Section,   which  was
    binding on the judge emphasised that very compelling circumstances were
    required.  In any event he stated that although the judgment in  Hesham
    Ali was correct to the extent that the Rules might not be considered to
    be a complete code that was a  technical  point.  He  referred  to  the
    judgment of Lord Justice Burnett at paragraph 19 in EJA [2017] EWCA Civ
    10, which emphasised that the judgment in Hesham Ali  had  not  lowered
    the burden which had to be overcome by a foreign criminal to succeed in
    demonstrating that it would be disproportionate to deport him from  the
    Britain.

23.  He referred moreover to the terms of Section 117C(6) of  the  2002  Act
    which referred to very compelling circumstances - he stated  that  that
    was the appropriate test to apply.  It was appropriate that  the  judge
    should have considered  that  issue  as  part  of  the  proportionality
    assessment.  In this case at paragraph 59 the judge had carried  out  a
    proper proportionality assessment, having considered all  the  relevant
    factors and had found that deportation would not be a  disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights. He had given  clear
    reasons for his decision.

24.  Indeed, he argued that the grant of permission indicated  an  incorrect
    understanding of the terms of the judgment in Hesham Ali.

25.  He stated that in any  event  Jeunesse  had  emphasised  only  that  an
    applicant's presence in Britain  should  be  taken  into  account  when
    assessing proportionality of removal.  That did not, however,  overrule
    the test laid down by statute.

26.  Again, in reply, Miss Fielden stated that  it  was  important  to  take
    into account the length of time the appellant had been in Britain.

Discussion

27.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the  determination
    of the judge of the  First-tier  tribunal.   The  judge  made  a  clear
    assessment of relevant factors when considering the proportionality  of
    deportation.  She considered and reached conclusions  that  were  fully
    open to her with  regard  to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
    children and  with  his  partner  and  was  entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusion that it would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant's
    partner or  the  children  to  relocate  to  South  Africa.   She  also
    considered, in the alternative, that it would not be unduly  harsh  for
    the children to remain in Britain with  their  mother,  who  was  their
    primary carer and had been such all their lives.  She was  entitled  to
    place weight on the fact that the appellant and his  partner  were  not
    living in the same home.  She did weigh up all relevant factors and the
    fact that the appellant could not qualify under  paragraph  398(a)  was
    merely a statement of fact on which she was entitled to rely.  The mere
    lawful presence of the appellant for a period of  less  than  half  his
    life could not be considered to be a "very compelling" circumstance.  I
    asked Miss Fielden if there were any other factors  to  be  taken  into
    account, in particular what evidence there was of the appellant's  work
    record.  There was no such evidence before me  although  the  appellant
    indicated to Miss Fielden that he had worked here.

28.  The judge did properly weigh up  the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's
    offence albeit that she accepted that the likelihood of reoffending was
    low but she was entitled to place weight thereon and to find  that,  on
    balance, it was appropriate that the appellant should face deportation.
     There is nothing in the judgment of Hesham Ali that would  have  meant
    that the judge could or should have reached any other  conclusion  than
    that which  she  did  reach  and  which  she  reached  properly  having
    considered all relevant factors.

29.  I therefore dismiss this appeal and  find  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Judge dismissing the appellant's appeal against the  refusal
    of leave to remain on human rights grounds shall stand.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]
Signed                                  Date 21 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
