
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07606/2019
                                                               HU/07611/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Decision given orally                |                                     |
|On 3 July 2020                       |On 30 July 2020                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     NU
                                     AU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Atuegbe, R & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, who are minors born on the same  day  in  2006,  appeal
    with permission the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lloyd-Smith,
    who for reasons given in her decision dated 29 January  2020  dismissed
    the appellants' appeals against the decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.  That decision, which was made on 22 March 2019, was to refuse
    the appellants' applications to settle in the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    adopted children of a British national and her husband who has  settled
    status in the United Kingdom.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  explained
    that he was not satisfied that the sponsors had had sole responsibility
    for the children's upbringing and  explained  why  this  was  so  under
    paragraph 310(x) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence  from  the  sponsoring  adoptive
    mother and found (in paragraph 39) that the sponsor and her husband had
    not had sole responsibility for the appellants  and  so  dismissed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.  In summarising the case before her the
    First-tier Tribunal judge referred to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision.  She observed in paragraph 11 of her decision that the  Entry
    Clearance Manager had raised  the  issue  of  the  sponsor  not  having
    demonstrated sole responsibility  either  financially  or  emotionally.
    She also noted in this paragraph that at the start of  the  hearing  Mr
    Billinge had stated that it was accepted the sponsor  and  her  husband
    are  the  adoptive  parents  of  the  appellants  and  have   financial
    responsibility for them.  Therefore, the issue to be decided was one of
    whether the sponsor has had sole responsibility for them.

 3. The challenge by the appellants focused on the correctness of the First-
    tier Tribunal's evidential findings.  In granting permission to  appeal
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant  noted  the  background  factors  and
    concluded that the judge  had  erred  by  focusing  on  delay  and  had
    misdirected herself as to the test to be applied under  paragraph  297.
    This was the first mention of paragraph 297 in the proceedings so far.

 4. At the hearing before me today it was accepted by Ms Isherwood for  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and by the appellant's representatives that the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in  approaching  this  case  through  the
    prism of 'sole responsibility'.  The correct course would have been for
    the  judge  to  consider  the  case  under  paragraph  310(ix)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, being the single provision of  paragraph  310  which
    the Entry Clearance Officer had considered the  appellants  had  fallen
    foul of.  That provision is in these terms, "was  adopted  due  to  the
    inability of the original parents or current carers to care for him and
    there has been a genuine transfer of  parental  responsibility  to  the
    adoptive parents".

 5. Ms Isherwood had good reason to accept that the First-tier Tribunal had
    erred in its approach.  She also raised, when I turned to the  remaking
    of the decision, her concerns about  the  immigration  history  of  the
    sponsors.  This is the first time that such  points  had  been  raised,
    however, she  accepted  that  these  concerns  did  not  touch  on  the
    requirement in paragraph 310(ix), that is to say whether there had been
    a genuine transfer of parental responsibility or the adoption  had  not
    been due to the inability of the  original  parents  to  care  for  the
    appellants.  Indeed, as I have cited  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, it was accepted by the Presenting Officer before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the sponsor and her husband are the adoptive parents
    of the appellants.  In these circumstances Ms Isherwood  understandably
    accepted that the appeals could  no  longer  be  opposed.   The  ground
    available to the appellants is under  the  Human  Rights  Act.   Having
    regard to the fact of the appellants' ability to demonstrate  they  met
    the only requirement of the Immigration Rules identified by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in his  decision,  in  my  judgment  it  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with family life to refuse an application
    where the requirements of the Rules had  been  met.   Accordingly,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   These  appeals  are
    allowed on human rights grounds.

 6. By way of footnote, it will be  for  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
    consider the concerns raised by Ms  Isherwood  when  implementing  this
    decision in particular whether there is  any  basis  for  calling  into
    question the citizenship and settled status of the appellants' adoptive
    parents.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside

Upon remaking, the appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Dated:  3 July 2020

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
