
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07061/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 May 2019                          |On 03 June 2019                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  ABUL [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Shrestha of Counsel, instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. In a decision sent to the parties on  1  March  2019,  I  set  aside  for
material error of law the   decision  of  Judge  Watson  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal dated 10 December 2018, dismissing the  appeal of the appellant,  a
citizen of Bangladesh, against a decision made by the respondent on 9  March
2018 refusing his application for leave to  remain  on  family  and  private
life grounds. I found that the judge erred in failing to  address  paragraph
EX.1(a) of the Immigration Rules (the issue of whether it was reasonable  to
expect the British citizen child to leave the UK) and  also  s.117B(6)  NIAA
2002.  At para 8, I noted that there was no real dispute  about  the  facts,
hence the case would be retained in the Upper Tribunal.  I  then  stated  at
para 9 that:

    "Neither party referred to the  Supreme  Court  guidance  given  in  KO
    (Nigeria) UKSC [2018] although in my view its terms lend  more  support
    to the appellant than to the respondent.  A presidential panel  of  the
    Upper Tribunal is due to deliver  a  decision  on  several  test  cases
    seeking to clarify the guidance given in KO (Nigeria).  In view of  the
    necessity for the Upper Tribunal to receive submissions in any event on
    the significance for the appellant's case of the guidance given  in  KO
    (Nigeria), I shall direct that the case be set down for a  further  one
    hour hearing to receive submissions from both parties  as  to  how  the
    decision in this case should be re-made in the light  of  the  guidance
    given by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) together  with  the  further
    analysis of that guidance due to be promulgated by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in the aforementioned test cases."

2. Since then we have had further guidance from the  Upper  Tribunal,  inter
alia, in JG (s117B(6): "reasonable le to leave" UK) Turkey  [2019]  UKUT  72
(IAC) Rev 1 and from the Court of Appeal in  SSHD  v  AB  (Jamaica)  &  Anor
[2019] EWCA Civ 661.

3. My task in this case is  to  re-make  the  decision  on  the  appellant's
    appeal.

The facts

4. Whilst I stated in my error of  law  decision  that  there  was  no  real
dispute as to the facts, it is more correct to say that I  was  satisfied  I
could proceed on the basis that the judge's findings of fact were sound.  On
most matters those findings were based on agreed facts.  In  particular  the
following facts are not in dispute. The appellant came to the UK in 2010  as
a student and his Tier 4 visa was  renewed  to  15  September  2015.  On  15
September 2015 he applied for leave to remain outside of the Rules and  then
this was varied on 24 February 2016 to an application for  leave  to  remain
under Family and Private Life. This was refused on 17 August  2017  although
the refusal notice was not served on the appellant until 14  November  2017.
In August 2017 the appellant married Ms [A], this being a marriage  arranged
by her parents. Both are fit and well. She is a dentist. She  completed  the
undergraduate part of her training in December 2017 and  is  now  doing  her
post graduate studies  and  training  to  complete  her  qualification.  She
commenced her one-year placement in March 2018 and  worked  until  May  2018
when she left due to her pregnancy. She returned to work in  November  2018.
She is earning while training and studying and earns sufficient  to  support
the family. The couple have a baby born in May 2018. Both the  baby  and  Ms
[A] are British citizens. Ms [A] was born in the UK and all her  family  are
here. They live with her mother and brother.

5.  The  only  area  of  factual  dispute  concerned  whether  or  not   the
appellant's wife could get family help with looking  after  her  child.  The
appellant's evidence was  that  his  mother  and  brother  had  some  health
problems and would not be able to care for the baby while  Ms  [A]  went  to
work four days a week and studied one day a week at  college  and  continued
her home studies at the weekend. The judge, however, found  that  there  was
"considerable family assistance available to Ms [A] in caring for  the  baby
at home and she would also have the ability  to  look  at  paid  child  care
assistance" (para 13) - although the judge also accepted  at  para  16  that
"the appellant is at present an important resource to her and her life  will
be considerably  harder  if  he  has  to  leave  the  country  and  make  an
application to return." (the judge went on to evaluate that this  would  not
be "unduly harsh").

6. As regards the appellant's financial circumstances, the judge also  found
that the appellant's wife earned �1700 net per month  (in  March  2018)  and
the appellant had thus shown that he  and  his  wife  earned  sufficient  to
support the family without recourse to public funds. At para  19  the  judge
added that "whilst I have found that the spouse has  at  present  sufficient
to  maintain  the  family  it  does  not  follow  that  an  entry  clearance
application is bound to succeed. I have very  limited  documentation  before
me and the case is not analogous to Chiwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

7. In my error of law decision I found no error in the judge's finding  that
the the couple would not  face  insurmountable  obstacles  if  they  had  to
return to Bangladesh and the appellant had not established that there  would
be very significant obstacles to his reintegration into Bangladesh  society.


8. One feature  of  the  appellant's  case  is  that  at  the  date  of  the
respondent's decision, the couple were only expecting a child. It  was  only
by the time of the hearing before the First tier  Tribunal  judge  that  the
appellant's wife had given birth to their child. No point was taken  by  the
respondent at the time that this was in fact  a  "new  matter"  and  one  on
which pursuant to s.85(5) of the 2002 Act the respondent had not  given  any
consent to it being raised in the appeal. The parties and the  judge  simply
proceeded on the basis that this was evidence  that  should  be  considered.
However, Mr Kotas confirmed that the respondent was content  to  proceed  on
the basis that the appellant's up to date circumstances, including the  fact
that there is a British citizen child, should be considered.

Submissions

9. I heard submissions from both representatives. Mr  Kotas  submitted  that
the further guidance in JG  and  SSHD  v  AB(Jamaica)   confirmed  that  the
assessment of reasonableness within para.EX.1(a) of the Rules and s  117B(6)
NIAA 2002 had to be child-centred  and  that  the  Tribunal  had  to  assess
reasonableness without considering the conduct of  the  parent  although  it
was indirectly relevant to consider in the real world what  the  immigration
situation of the parents was. Here the appellant had been  in  the  UK  with
leave for five years (until September 2015) although not  thereafter.  Given
the very young age of the child, there were no issues concerning  education.
However, he would accept that  the  respondent's  current  guidance  on  the
position of parents of "qualifying children" treated  the  fact  that  there
was a qualifying child as a "starting point". Pages 68-69  of  the  guidance
dated 11 April 2019 stated that "[t]he starting point is that we  would  not
normally expect a qualifying child to leave the UK.  It  is  normally  in  a
child's best interests for the whole family to remain together, which  means
if the child is not expected  to  leave,  then  the  parent  or  parents  or
primary carer of the child will also not be expected to leave  the  UK".  So
far as concerns the policy that was in force when the  respondent  made  her
decision in this case (Mach 2018), the policy was, he said, as  set  out  in
KO (Nigeria). Mr Kotas said that in this case there was no  evidence  either
way about whether the appellant's wife would leave the UK if  the  appellant
was required to leave. Thus it was a "choice" case.

10. Mr Shrestha submitted that the mother and child  were  British  citizens
and that the appellant had had leave (including  s.3C  leave)  lawfully  for
over 9 years. In these circumstances it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
the child to leave the UK, particularly since it was  an  accepted  fact  in
this case that the appellant had been playing  the  major  role  in  looking
after the child, as his wife was either  working  or  studying  towards  her
dentistry degree. The appellant is  not  an  overstayer  and  following  the
guidance given by the Supreme Court in  Rhuppiah  [2018]  UKSC  58,  it  was
important to consider that there were degrees of precariousness and in  this
case  the  appellant's  immigration  status   was   not   characterised   by
unlawfulness.  He was one year away from being  eligible  to  apply  on  the
basis of 10 years residence. In  response  to  Mr  Kotas'  submissions  that
there was no evidence that the wife would or would  not  leave  the  UK  and
thus that it was a "choice" case, he said that there  was  evidence  as  set
out in the wife's witness statement that she would not be able to leave  and
in any event, under para EX.1(a) of the Rules and s 117B(6) of the 2002  Act
it was not the reasonableness of the parent leaving but that  of  the  child
that was in issue.  He also contended that the  appellant  was  entitled  to
the benefit of the guidance given in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 as his  was  a
family  case  and  it  was  clear  that  the  sponsor  met   the   financial
requirements given her income and thus entry clearance  was  "likely  to  be
granted".

11. In the course of submissions it became clear that more  information  was
needed regarding the wife's dentistry course and when it was  likely  to  be
completed. I gave an oral direction  that  the  appellant's  representatives
send within 7 days  documentation  confirming  the  wife's  expected  degree
completion date, with a  copy  to  be  sent  to  the  respondent  (Mr  Kotas
indicated the respondent would not wish to respond). In response I  received
further documents from  the  appellant's  solicitors,  including  a  witness
statement from his wife dated 21 May 2019, which they had  sent  on  22  May
2019.

Policy considerations

12. The Home Office amended its policy document 'Appendix  FM  1.0b:  family
life (as a partner or parent) and private life: 10 year', publishing  a  new
version on 19th December 2018. The updated guidance includes a  revision  to
the section entitled  'Would it be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
the UK?' (pages 68-70).  This was amended  following  the  decision  of  the
Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria). In its latest incarnation, dated April  2019,
the policy document contains the following passages:


      "Is the child a British citizen or have they lived in the UK for a
      continuous period of at least 7 years?


      The decision maker should establish from the application or claim the
      age and nationality of each child affected by the decision. Where the
      child is a foreign national, the decision maker should establish their
      immigration history in the UK (for example how long have they lived in
      the UK and where they lived before).


      In establishing whether a non-British Citizen child has lived in the
      UK continuously for at least the 7 years immediately preceding the
      date of application, the decision maker should include time spent in
      the UK with and without valid leave.


      Short periods outside the UK - for example for holidays or family
      visits - would not count as a break in the continuous period of at
      least 7 years required. However, where a child has spent more than 6
      months out of the UK at any one time, this will normally count as a
      break in continuous residence unless any exceptional factors apply.


      Will the consequence of refusal of the application be that the child
      is required to leave the UK?


      The decision maker must consider whether the effect of refusal of the
      application would be, or would be likely to be, that the child would
      have to leave the UK. This will not be the case where, in practice,
      the child will, or is likely to, continue to live in the UK with
      another parent or primary carer. This will be likely to be the case
      where for example:


         . the child does not live with the applicant


         . the child's parents are not living together on a permanent basis
           because the


           applicant parent has work or other commitments which require
           them to live


           apart from their partner and child


         . the child's other parent lives in the UK and the applicant
           parent has been here


           as a visitor and therefore undertook to leave the UK at the end
           of their visit as a condition of their visit visa or leave to
           enter


           If the departure of the parent or carer would not result in the
           child being required to leave the UK, because the child will (or
           is likely to) remain living here with another parent or primary
           carer, then the question of whether it is reasonable to expect
           the child to leave the UK will not arise. In these
           circumstances, paragraph EX.1.(a) does not apply.


           However, where there is a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship between the applicant and the child, the removal of
           the applicant may still disrupt their relationship with that
           child. For that reason, the decision maker will still need to
           consider whether, in the round, removal of the applicant is
           appropriate in light of all the real-life circumstances of the
           case, considering the best interests of the child as a primary
           consideration and the impact on the child of the applicant's
           departure from the UK, or them having to leave the UK with them.
           If it is considered that refusal would lead to unjustifiably
           harsh consequences for the applicant, the child or their family,
           leave will fall to be granted on the basis of exceptional
           circumstances.


        Would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?


         If the effect of refusal of the application would be, or is likely
         to be, that the child would have to leave the UK, the decision
         maker must consider whether it would be reasonable to expect the
         child to leave the UK.


    Where there is a qualifying child


    A child is a qualifying child if they are a British child who has an
    automatic right of abode in the UK, to live here without any
    immigration restrictions as a result of their citizenship, or a non-
    British citizen child, who has lived in the UK for a continuous period
    of at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of application,
    which recognises that over time children start to put down roots and to
    integrate into life in the UK. The starting point is that we would not
    normally expect a qualifying child to leave the UK. It is normally in a
    child's best interest for the whole family to remain together, which
    means if the child is not expected to leave, then the parent or parents
    or primary carer of the child will also not be expected to leave the
    UK.


    In the caselaw of KO and Others 2018 UKSC53, with particular reference
    to the case of NS (Sri Lanka), the Supreme Court found that
    "reasonableness" is to be considered in the real-world context in which
    the child finds themselves. The parents' immigration status is a
    relevant fact to establish that context. The determination sets out
    that if a child's parents are both expected to leave the UK, the child
    is normally expected to leave with them, unless there is evidence that
    that it would not be reasonable.


      There may be some specific circumstances where it would be reasonable
      to either expect the qualifying child to leave the UK with the
      parent(s) or primary carer or for the parent(s) or primary carer to
      leave the UK and for the child to stay. In deciding such cases, the
      decision maker must consider the best interests of the child and the
      facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker should
      also consider any specific issues raised by the family or by, or on
      behalf of the child (or other children in the family).


      It may be reasonable for a qualifying child to leave the UK with the
      parent or primary carer where for example:


         . the parent or parents, or child, are a citizen of the country
           and so able to enjoy the full rights of being a citizen in that
           country


         . there is nothing in any country specific information, including
           as contained in relevant country information which suggests that
           relocation would be unreasonable


         . the parent or parents or child have existing family, social, or
           cultural ties with the country and if there are wider family or
           relationships with friends or community overseas that can
           provide support:


      o the decision maker must consider the extent to which the child is
      dependent


      on or requires support from wider family members in the UK in
      important areas of his or her life and how a transition to similar
      support overseas would affect them


      o a person who has extended family or a network of friends in the
      country should be able to rely on them for support to help
      (re)integrate there


      o parent or parents or a child who have lived in or visited the
      country before for periods of more than a few weeks. should be better
      able to adapt, or the parent or parents would be able to support the
      child in adapting, to life in the country


      o the decision maker must consider any evidence of exposure to, and
      the level of understanding of, the cultural norms of the country


      o for example, a period of time spent living amongst a diaspora from
      the country may give a child an awareness of the culture of the
      country


      o the parents or child can speak, read and write in a language of that
      country, or are likely to achieve this within a reasonable time period




      o fluency is not required - an ability to communicate competently with
      sympathetic interlocutors would normally suffice


      . removal would not give rise to a significant risk to the child's
      health


      . there are no other specific factors raised by or on behalf of the
      child


      For guidance on how to consider a child's best interests, see the
      Exceptional Circumstances section of the Family Migration: Appendix FM
      Section 1.0a Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) 5-Year Routes and
      exceptional circumstances guidance, which can be found here:


      https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/chapter-8-appendix-fm-
      family-members


      Where the decision maker believes that, based on the specific
      circumstances raised, refusal would not breach their Article 8 rights,
      they should refer to the following section on compassionate compelling
      factors, to consider whether a short period of leave outside the
      Immigration Rules is appropriate: compassionate factors."

13. I would make several observations about this policy document. The  first
is that it (still) does not accurately reflect the decision in KO  (Nigeria)
, in that it states that "[i]f If the  departure  of  the  parent  or  carer
would not result in the child being required to leave the  UK,  because  the
child will (or is likely to) remain  living  here  with  another  parent  or
primary carer, then the question of whether it is reasonable to  expect  the
child to leave the UK will not  arise.  In  these  circumstances,  paragraph
EX.1.(a) does not apply." As confirmed by the Upper Tribunal in JG  and  the
Court of Appeal in SSHD v AB (Jamaica), the  decision-maker  when  assessing
reasonableness has to hypothesise whether it would be reasonable  to  expect
the child to leave, even if it is considered unlikely  the  child  will.  As
noted by UTJ Plimmer in SR (subsisting  parental  relationship  -  s117B(6))
Pakistan [2018] UKUT 334 (IAC) and as endorsed by the President  in  JG  at
paras 33-59 policy documents in the present form do not  provide  a  tenable
construction of the plain and ordinary meaning of EX.1(a) or of s.117B(6).

14. Second, there is no longer any specific mention in the policy  doucments
of the fact that it is not reasonable to expect a British citizen  child  to
leave the UK. That omission,  however,  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  a
British citizen child is entitled to live and reside in the  UK  and  cannot
be required to leave. Both a British citizen child and a child residing  for
7 years may be a "qualifying child" and no subdivision is made  between  the
two categories; but that does not entail that no greater weight attaches  to
the fact of nationality than to the fact of   7 years  residence.  As  noted
by Baroness Hale at [30], "[a]though nationality is not a  "trump  card"  it
is of particular importance in assessing the best interests  of  any  child"
and at [32] it was stated:


         "32. Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship be  played
         down. As citizens these children have rights which they will not be
         able to exercise if they move to another country.  They  will  lose
         the advantages of growing  up  and  being  educated  in  their  own
         country, their own culture and their own language. They  will  have
         lost all this when they come back as adults.  As  Jacqueline  Bhaba
         (in 'The "Mere Fortuity of Birth"? Children, Mothers,  Borders  and
         the  Meaning  of  Citizenship',  in  Migrations   and   Mobilities:
         Citizenship, Borders and Gender (2009), edited  by  Seyla  Benhabib
         and Judith Resnik, at p 193) has put it:


                  'In  short,  the  fact   of   belonging   to   a   country
                  fundamentally affects the manner of exercise of a  child's
                  family and private life, during childhood and well beyond.
                  Yet  children,  particularly  young  children,  are  often
                  considered parcels that are easily movable across  borders
                  with their parents and  without  particular  cost  to  the
                  children.' "

British citizenship creates rights and benefits that exist from  the  moment
when it is acquired and constitutes a status that places  a  person  outside
immigration controls. (I shall return to the significance I  attach  to  the
fact  that  the  child  is  a  British  citizen  later  on  when   assessing
reasonableness.)
15. These two features reduce somewhat the value of  this  guidance  insofar
as it is intended to reflect case law.
16. Third, it would appear on the  basis  of  developments  in  Home  Office
policy guidance that it is no longer possible to say  straightforwardly,  as
the Tribunal did in SF & Others  [2017]  UKUT  120  (IAC),  that  since  the
respondent's policy accepts that (absent criminality or a  poor  immigration
history) the British citizen children should not be expected  to  leave  the
UK, there can be no public interest in requiring their parent(s)  to  leave.
The policy document at the time of the decision of concern in  SF  &  Others
was Immigration Directorate Instruction - Family Migration -  Appendix  FM,
Section 1.0(B) "Family Life as a Partner or Parent  and  Private  Life,  10-
year Routes" (the edition of August 2015). At 11.2.3 it contained a  section
headed "Would it be unreasonable to expect a British Citizen Child to  leave
the UK?". The Tribunal in  SF  &  Others  set  out  its  relevant  parts  as
follows:

    "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must not take
    a decision in relation to the parent or primary carer of a British
    Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to force that
    British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age of that child.
    This reflects the European Court of Justice Judgment in Zambrano.


    Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
    primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case must
    always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect
    a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent or primary
    carer.


    In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
    parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with the
    child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship.


    It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
    conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations of
    such weight as to justify separation, if the child could otherwise stay
    with another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK or in the
    EU.


    The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


         criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph 398
         of the Immigration Rules;


         a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
         repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules."

17.This led the Upper Tribunal to conclude at para 12 that:

         "...where there is clear guidance which  covers  a  case  where  an
         assessment  has  to  be  made,  and  where  the  guidance   clearly
         demonstrates what the outcome of the  assessment  would  have  been
         made by the Secretary of State, it would, we think, be  the  normal
         practice for the Tribunal to take such guidance into account and to
         apply it in assessing the same consideration in a  case  that  came
         before it."

18. At the same time, despite being now silent on the specific  position  of
the parent of a British citizen  child,  the  latest  policy  document  does
accept that "[t]he starting point is that we would not   normally  expect  a
qualifying child to leave the UK" and that "[i]t is normally  in  a  child's
best interests for the whole family to remain  together, which means if  the
child is not expected to leave, then the parent or parents or primary  carer
of the child will also not be  expected  to  leave  the  UK".  That  wording
indicates a presumption in favour of the parent of a British  citizen  child
(or non-British citizen child resident for 7 years) not  being  expected  to
leave the UK unless there are specific circumstances that  would  make  that
proportionate. To that extent, the new policy document continues to  have  a
bearing on the proper assessment of the weight to be attached to the  public
interest in requiring a parent of a British citizen child to leave. If  that
presumption is not displaced on the facts of a particular case,  it  amounts
to the respondent saying there is no public interest  in  requiring  such  a
parent to leave.
My assessment
19. In the appellant's case, six factors seem to  me  to  be  of  particular
importance.
20. First, there is the fact that the  child  is  a  British  citizen.  That
seems to me to be of particular  importance  in  this  case  because,  being
still very young, most of the considerations that arise in the case of  non-
British citizen children resident in the UK  for  7  years,  such  as  their
educational, linguistic, cultural circumstances in the  UK,  cannot  play  a
significant role. Many of the rights and benefits that accrue  from  British
nationality are for  a  very  young  child  still  putative.  Yet  they  are
important in the present because they are rights which, if required to  live
in Bangladesh, the child would not be able to exercise  in  the  future.  In
particular, as noted by Baroness Hale in ZH (Tanzania), the child will  lose
the advantages of growing up and being educated in their own country.
21. Secondly, whilst there is incomplete information about  the  appellant's
financial circumstances, Mr Kotas has not disputed that the appellant  would
be able, on the basis of the wife's  present  income  levels,  to  meet  the
financial requirements of the Immigration Rules governing spouses.  Nor  has
Mr Kotas suggested that there are any other possible respects in  which  the
appellant might face difficulties in meeting in full  the  requirements  for
entry clearance as a spouse.  That in my  view  does  bring  into  play  the
principles set out in Chikwamba, at least to  the  extent  that  it  appears
likely the appellant would succeed  in  any  such  application.  Mr  Kotas's
submissions that  Chikwamba  principles  only  apply  if  the  appellant  is
"bound'" to succeed in an  entry  clearance  application  is  too  narrow  a
reading. As was stated by the President in JG at para 85:

    "85. In so concluding, we apply the law as set  out  by  the  House  of
    Lords in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 and  in  subsequent  cases,
    including Hayat v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1054. Following the approach adopted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Gill in R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department (Appendix FM - Chikwamba -  temporary  separation  -
    proportionality) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC), we acknowledge that where
    an application for entry clearance from abroad is likely to be  granted
    and where there would be significant interference with family  life  by
    temporary removal of the  person  making  that  application,  then  the
    weight to be accorded to the requirements of obtaining entry  clearance
    (that is to say, to that  aspect  of  immigration  control)  is  to  be
    reduced, particularly in cases involving children." (emphasis added)

22. Thirdly, the appellant has been playing a major role as a parent of  the
couple's child since the child's birth and, if not required to  leave,  that
is likely to continue to be the case, at least until his wife has  completed
her postgraduate dentistry qualifications. In the absence of the  appellant,
the child would have  extremely  limited  care  from  the  appellant's  wife
because of her combination of work and studies.
23. Fourthly, on the hypothesis of the child being  required  to  leave  the
UK, that would most likely to result in a  situation  where  his  mother,  a
British  citizen,  remains   in   the   UK   to   complete   her   dentistry
qualifications. I make that finding of fact because I see no reason  not  to
accept what she said regarding this in her  witness  statement  of  20  July
2018 wherein she stated that "I am in the middle of my degree and cannot  be
expected to leave my education in the UK  where I want to develop  a  career
in dentistry. The further documentation sent by  the  appellant  on  22  May
2019 identifies that her initial completion date for her  Dental  Foundation
Training was 31 August 2019 but that this was extended for 12 months due  to
maternity leave, lack of completion of  requirements  and  LTFT  (Less  Than
Full Time  Training),  so  that  her  extended  course  completion  date  at
Birmingham University is 31  August  2020.  Her  further  witness  statement
notes that she has spent 7 academic years studying A levels and a degree  in
Dentistry and that her departure "would completely end my education  and  in
the UK and my future employment prospects". Her plain intention to  complete
her course in the UK  makes  very  good  sense  in  terms  of  planning  the
economic future of her family, whether that be  in  the  UK  or  Bangladesh,
since without completing this  qualification,  she  would  not  be  able  to
practice as a dentist. Given that on my finding the appellant's  wife  would
remain in the UK, at least until completion of her course,  I  consider  the
appellant's departure would  cause  significant  disruption  to  the  child,
whose best interests surely lie in remaining with both parents.  I  consider
that would be the case  even  in  the  context  of  a  temporary  separation
(necessary to make an application for entry clearance), since even  on  that
basis it would involve significant interference  with  family  life,  taking
into account the best interests of the child.
24. Fifthly, the appellant has not had any period of time in the  UK  during
which his stay has been unlawful. He had lawful leave  as  a  student  until
September 2015 and has since then enjoyed s.3C leave. Whilst  for  s.117B(5)
purposes  his  immigration   status   has   nevertheless   been   precarious
throughout, his situation is to be clearly contrasted with an appellant  who
over the same period  has  been  in  the  UK  illegally  or  unlawfully.  In
contrast to the position of the appellant in JG (who was found  to  be  both
dishonest and  unscrupulous  and  to  have  flagrantly  defied  the  law  by
overstaying her leave for a large number of years (see para 80)),  it  would
be disproportionate to require this appellant to  return  to  Bangladesh  to
make an entry clearance application from there.
25. Sixthly, I consider that the revised version of the Home  Office  policy
governing  the  position  of  qualifying  children  in   relation   to   the
reasonableness criterion indicates that there is a presumption in favour  of
the parent of a  qualifying  child  not  being  required  to  leave.  In  my
judgement,  the  aforementioned  factors  suffice  to  establish  that   the
presumption has not been rebutted in the appellant's case.
26. I consider these reasons suffice to  establish  that  the  appellant  in
this case is entitled to succeed  under  para  EX.1(a)  of  the  Immigration
Rules and also under s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act. He is the parent of a  child
whom it would not be reasonable to expect to leave the UK.
27. To conclude:
I have already set aside the decision of the FtT judge  for  material  error
of law.
The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  28 May 2019

              [pic]
