
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07942/2017 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Remotely by Skype for Business       |                                     |
|On 19 November 2020                  |On 6 January 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                              Maurice VILLIOUS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, instructed by Bristol Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on 29 July 1998.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 20 February  2002  and  was  granted  six
    months' leave to enter in line with that of his  mother.   He  was,  at
    that time, 3 years old.

 2. On 4 December 2002, his mother applied for an extension of her leave as
    a student with the appellant included as her dependent.   On  17  March
    2003, the appellant was granted further leave until 17  March  2004  in
    line with his mother.

 3. On 17 March 2004, the appellant's mother applied for  an  extension  of
    her student visa again with the appellant as her dependant.  On  7  May
    2004, that application was refused.  On 21 January 2005,  the  decision
    was withdrawn and reconsidered  and  again  refused.   The  appellant's
    mother unsuccessfully appealed against that  decision  and  she  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 9 March 2016.

 4. On 2 August 2010, the appellant's mother lodged an application  outside
    the Immigration Rules on compassionate grounds but this application was
    refused on 7 March 2011.  On 8 June 2011, the  respondent  reconsidered
    her decision and granted discretionary leave until 8 June 2014.

 5. On 29 May 2014,  the  appellant's  mother  lodged  another  application
    outside the Immigration Rules on compassionate grounds and, as a result
    of that, on 1 August 2014  was  granted  discretionary  leave  until  1
    August 2017.  The appellant was granted leave in line with that of  his
    mother.

 6. On 31 August 2016, the appellant was convicted  at  the  Bristol  Crown
    Court of the offences of affray and possession of an  offensive  weapon
    in a public place.  On 30 September 2016, he was  sentenced  to  twelve
    months' detention in a Youth Offender Institution on both counts to run
    concurrently.

 7. On 15 October 2016, the  appellant  was  served  with  a  notice  of  a
    decision to deport him based upon  that  criminal  conviction.   On  28
    October 2016, submissions were made on behalf of the appellant.  On  16
    December 2016, the appellant  was  served  with  a  signed  deportation
    order.  Removal directions were set for 20 June  2017  but  these  were
    cancelled and the decision to deport him made on 16 December  2016  was
    withdrawn.

 8. A fresh decision to deport the appellant and to refuse his human rights
    claim was made on 15 July 2017.

The Appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant appealed to the Fist-tier Tribunal.  The appeal was heard
    by Judge L Murray on 13  January  2020.   In  a  decision  sent  on  10
    February 2020, Judge Murray  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

10. Judge Murray concluded that neither Exception  1  nor  Exception  2  in
    s.117C(4) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    (as amended) ("the NIA Act 2002") applied.   As  regards  Exception  1,
    Judge Murray was not satisfied that there would  be  "very  significant
    obstacles" to the appellant's integration into Jamaica on  return  (see
    s.117(4)(c)).  Further, in  relation  to  Exception  2,  Judge  Murray,
    although satisfied that the appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his qualifying partner, was not  satisfied  that  the
    effect of his deportation would  be  "unduly  harsh"  (see  s.117C(5)).
    Finally,  Judge  Murray  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were   "very
    compelling circumstances over and above those in Exceptions 1 and 2" so
    as to outweigh the public interest (see s.117C(6)).

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 18
    April 2020,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  O'Keeffe)  refused  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  The application  was  renewed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and, on 20 July 2020, UTJ Perkins granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

12. On 26 August 2020, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 response.

13. In reply to that rule 24 response, on 23 September 2020, the  appellant
    filed a rule 25 reply.

14. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing by Skpye for Business on  19
    November 2020.  I was based in the  Cardiff  Civil  Justice  Centre  in
    court and Ms Brown, who represented the appellant, and Mr Howells,  who
    represented the Secretary of State,  joined  the  hearing  remotely  by
    Skype.

A Preliminary Matter

15. At the outset of the hearing, Ms Brown made an application inviting  me
    to recuse myself on the basis of imputed or apparent bias.   The  basis
    of this application was my knowledge of the contents of para 14 of  the
    respondent's rule 24 notice.  In that paragraph, the Secretary of State
    reports that, subsequent  to  the  hearing  before  Judge  Murray,  the
    appellant was on 29 July 2020 sentenced to ten months' imprisonment  at
    the Bristol Crown Court for possession of a blade in a public place.

16. Ms Brown indicated that two applications had been  made  prior  to  the
    hearing on the appellant's behalf,  on  5  November  and  11  November,
    seeking a direction from the Upper Tribunal that the respondent  should
    delete para 14 of the rule 24 reply and serve an amended rule 24 notice
    for the purposes of the hearing.  She indicated that both  applications
    had been rejected and that, in effect, she was  now  seeking  to  renew
    that application to me.

17. Ms Brown submitted that para 14 of the rule 24 reply was  not  relevant
    to whether Judge Murray's decision disclosed an error of law and should
    be set aside.  She  submitted,  having  knowledge  of  this  conviction
    created a situation of imputed or apparent bias, namely  that  a  fair-
    minded observer would conclude that there was a real possibility that a
    judge determining the error of law issue would be biased.

18. Ms Brown relied upon the statement of the relevant law set out  in  the
    Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  Ortega   (remittal;   bias;   parental
    relationship) [2018] UKUT 298 (IAC) at [22].

19. Mr Howells accepted that para 14 of the rule 24 notice was not relevant
    to the error of law issue and, if I  concluded  that  I  should  recuse
    myself, then the rule 24 notice would be refiled with para 14  omitted.
    He made no further submissions.

20. Having heard the submissions of both parties,  I  rejected  Ms  Brown's
    application to recuse myself on the basis of imputed or  apparent  bias
    and indicated that I would give  my  reasons  in  my  decision  on  the
    appeal.  I now do so.

21. The relevant law is summarised  in  [22]  of  Ortega  where  the  Upper
    Tribunal (Lane J, President and UTJ Pitt) adopted the UT's reasoning in
    Alunbankudi (appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 542 (IAC)  at  [6]-[8]  as
    follows:

         "22. The Upper Tribunal decision of Alubankudi (Appearance of bias)
             [2015] UKUT 542 sets out in paragraphs 6 to 8  the  "Governing
             Legal Principles" to be applied when considering an allegation
             of bias:

                  6. Every litigant enjoys a common  law  right  to  a  fair
                    hearing. This entails fairness of the procedural, rather
                    than substantive, variety. Where a breach of this  right
                    is demonstrated, this  will  normally  be  considered  a
                    material error of law warranting the  setting  aside  of
                    the decision of the  FtT:  see  AAN  (Veil)  Afghanistan
                    [2014] UKUT 102 (IAC) and  MM  (Unfairness;  E&R)  Sudan
                    [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC). The fair hearing principle may be
                    viewed as the unification of the two common  law  maxims
                    audi alteram partem and nemo judex in causa  sua,  which
                    combine to form the doctrine of natural justice,  as  it
                    was formerly known.  These  two  maxims  are,  nowadays,
                    frequently expressed in the  terms  of  a  right  and  a
                    prohibition, namely  the  litigant's  right  to  a  fair
                    hearing and the prohibition which precludes a Judge from
                    adjudicating in a case in which he has an interest.

                  7. Further refinements of the fair hearing principle  have
                    resulted in the development of the concepts of  apparent
                    bias and  actual  bias.  The  latter  equates  with  the
                    prohibition identified immediately above.  In  contrast,
                    apparent bias, where invoked, gives rise to  a  somewhat
                    more sophisticated and subtle challenge. It entails  the
                    application of the following test:

                        'The question is whether the fair-minded  observer,
                        having considered the facts,  would  conclude  that
                        there was a real possibility that the tribunal  was
                        biased.'

                    See Porter v Magill [2001] UKHL 67, at [103].

                    In Re Medicament [2001] 1 WLR 700, the Court  of  Appeal
                    provided the following exposition of  the  task  of  the
                    appellate, or review, court or tribunal:

                        'The   Court   must   first   ascertain   all   the
                        circumstances  which  have   a   bearing   on   the
                        suggestions that the Judge was biased. It must then
                        ask whether those circumstances would lead  a  fair
                        minded and informed observer to conclude that there
                        was a real possibility that the Tribunal was  bias.
                        The  material  circumstances   will   include   any
                        explanation given by the Judge under review  as  to
                        his   knowledge   or    appreciation    of    those
                        circumstances.'

                    In Lawal v Northern Spirit [2003] UKHL 35, the House  of
                    Lords reiterated the importance of first identifying the
                    circumstances which are said to give  rise  to  apparent
                    bias."

                  8. The authorities place due emphasis on  the  requirement
                    that  the  hypothetical  reasonable  observer  is   duly
                    informed.  This  connotes  that  the  observer   is   in
                    possession of all  material  facts.  See,  for  example,
                    Taylor v Lawrence [2002] EWCA Civ 90, at  [61]  -  [63].
                    Furthermore, the hypothetical fair minded observer is  a
                    person  of  balance  and  temperance,  "   ...   neither
                    complacent nor unduly sensitive or suspicious", per Lord
                    Steyn in Lawal at [14]. Finally, it  is  appropriate  to
                    emphasise that the doctrine of  apparent  bias  has  its
                    roots in a principle of some longevity and  indisputable
                    pedigree, namely the requirement that justice  not  only
                    be done but manifestly be seen  to  be  done:  see,  for
                    example, Davidson v Scottish Ministers [2004] UKHL 34.""

22. At [23] in Ortega, the UT identified its task:

         "Our task is therefore to place ourselves  in  the  position  of  a
         "duly informed" hypothetical reasonable observer in order to assess
         whether the First-tier Tribunal decision discloses  an  absence  of
         judicial impartiality or real possibility of such."

23. As will be clear from this summary, the test  of  imputed  or  apparent
    bias is an objective one ("the fair-minded observer"); there must be  a
    "real possibility" of bias; and the "hypothetical reasoned observer" is
    "duly informed", namely is in possession of all material facts.

24. In Halliburton Company v Chubb Bermuda Insurance Ltd  [2020]  UKSC  48,
    the Supreme Court recently approved the approach to apparent or imputed
    bias in a judicial context derived from the case law set out in  Ortega
    (see [52]-[53] per Lord Hodge with whom the other Justices agreed).

25. In the circumstances of this appeal, the "fair-minded  observer"  would
    be aware that an Appellate Judge in the UT was well-aware that  his  or
    her role was restricted, in the first instance, to determining  whether
    the judge in the First-tier Tribunal  had  made  an  error  of  law  in
    reaching his or her decision.

26. That observer would also be aware that judges of UTIAC have  experience
    in determining appeals, initially limited to concluding whether a Judge
    of the First-tier had made an error of law, then whether that  decision
    should be set aside and, if necessary, thereafter remaking the decision
    on the evidence relied upon at the date of the UT's hearing (whether on
    the same day as the error of law hearing or subsequently).

27. The fair-minded observer would also be aware of the consistent practice
    that any evidence not relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal  could
    only be admitted in the UT  in  accordance  with  para  15(2A)  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended).  The practice, which was indeed followed in this  appeal,  is
    that prior to the  initial  error  of  law  hearing,  the  parties  are
    directed that an application under rule 15(2A) is necessary  if  either
    party wishes to rely on evidence not before the First-tier Tribunal and
    that application is to be accompanied by the additional  material  that
    the party wishes to rely upon.  That would,  in  a  case  such  as  the
    present, include any reliance by the respondent if the decision were to
    be remade, on any conviction of  the  appellant  after  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

28. In my experience, it has never been suggested that that process,  which
    is likely to put before a UT judge determining whether there is a error
    of law material not relevant to that  decision  but  which  may  become
    relevant  if  an  error  of  law  is  established  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision has to be remade, is  wrong  in  principle  because
    adverse material contained in  such  an  application  will  lead  to  a
    situation of imputed or apparent bias  by  the  judge  determining  the
    error of law issue.

29. Further, if Ms Brown's submission is correct, it would likely lead to a
    judge in a civil case who, for example, during the course of a  hearing
    ruled that particular evidence (adverse to one party) was inadmissible,
    thereafter being unable to continue with the hearing  as  knowledge  of
    that evidence would give rise to a real possibility of bias in the fair-
    minded observer.  As a generality, that is not,  in  my  judgment,  the
    true position.  A fair-minded observer would be well-aware that  judges
    are able to reach decisions, particularly in the appellate context when
    making decisions on error of law, putting  to  one  side  any  material
    which, though not relevant at that  stage  but  might  become  relevant
    later, and determining the  legal  issue  untainted  by  any  prejudice
    which, it is contended, might  flow  from  knowledge  of  that  adverse
    material.

30. In my judgment, the "duly informed" "fair-minded  observer"  would  not
    consider that there was  a  real  possibility  that  a  judge  of  UTAC
    determining whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  involved  an
    error of law would be biased (or prejudiced) by knowledge, derived from
    a respondent's rule  24  notice,  that  subsequent  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision an appellant has committed  a  further  offence  or
    offences but which are not relevant to the error of law decision.

31. For these reasons, therefore, I rejected  at  the  hearing  Ms  Brown's
    application that I should recuse myself on  the  basis  of  imputed  or
    apparent bias.

The Grounds of Appeal

32. In her oral submissions, Ms Brown adopted the grounds of appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal and principally relied upon the more detailed grounds to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Grounds 1-3 challenge  the  judge's  findings
    and conclusion that Exception 1 in s.117C(4) was  not  met.   Ground  4
    challenges the judge's adverse finding that Exception  2  in  s.117C(5)
    was not met.  Ground 5 challenges the judge's  finding  and  conclusion
    that there were not "very compelling circumstances" satisfying the test
    under s.117C(6).

33. Before setting out those grounds, one issue was clarified by Mr Howells
    at the outset of the hearing.  In the respondent's rule 24  notice,  it
    was  contended  that  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy   the   first
    requirement in Exception 1 in s.117C(4)(a)  namely  that  he  had  been
    "lawfully resident in the United Kingdom" for "most" of his life.  That
    was not in issue before Judge Murray and Mr Howells  accepted,  on  the
    basis of the appellant's immigration history, that the  appellant  had,
    in fact, spent "most" of his life in the UK and so he accepted that the
    appellant met the requirement in  s.117C(4)(a).   Mr  Howells  accepted
    that the only issue in Exception 1 was that which was  decided  against
    the  appellant  by  Judge  Murray  namely  whether  there  were   "very
    significant obstacles" to his "integration" in  Jamaica  on  return  as
    required by s.117C(4)(c).

34. Ground 1: First, the judge  reached  a  perverse  conclusion  that  the
    appellant could integrate into Jamaica because he had a grandmother and
    other relatives there who would be able to assist him.  That conclusion
    was not supported by any evidence.  The evidence was  that  he  had  no
    relationship with anyone in Jamaica save his grandmother  whom  he  has
    spoken to from time to time.  Secondly, the judge  had  been  wrong  to
    conclude that the mere presence of relatives in Jamaica was  sufficient
    to establish that there were not "very significant  obstacles"  to  his
    integration.  That conclusion ran  counter  to  the  "broad  evaluative
    assessment" required following the decisions in Parveen v  SSHD  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 932 and Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813.   Thirdly,  it  was
    irrational for the judge  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  could  be
    accommodated by his grandmother simply on the basis that she  had  been
    able to accommodate the appellant, his mother and brother  for  a  five
    week  stay  in  2012.   Fourthly,  given  the  evidence  was  that  the
    appellant's  mother  sent  a  total  of  �536.97  to  the   appellant's
    grandmother in Jamaica and is a school dinner lady and cleaner, it  was
    an error to conclude that  she  would  be  able  to  provide  financial
    support to the appellant if he returned to Jamaica.

35. Ground 2: The judge erred in concluding that  the  appellant  would  be
    able to integrate on return to Jamaica because he had  been  bought  up
    within a Jamaican family and a wider Jamaican community in the UK.  The
    judge failed to take into account country expert evidence of Dr Luke de
    Noronha in particular, that the "question of culture and  reintegration
    is not reducible to  having  been  raised  in  a  Jamaican  household".
    Further, the appellant's evidence was that most of his family  that  he
    knew in the UK were "African"  coming  from  "all  different  types  of
    cultures".

36. Ground 3: The Judge was wrong to discount the expert evidence of Dr  de
    Noronha that had identified risks to the appellant on return to Jamaica
    such as the inability to obtain  employment,  of  being  exploited,  of
    becoming the victim of extortion or robbery and even being killed.  The
    judge had been wrong to conclude that Dr de Noronha's opinion was based
    upon the appellant having no family members in  Jamaica  to  offer  him
    support.  The expert's opinion was, it is contended, not based  upon  a
    lack of family support.

37. Ground 4: In concluding that the impact of the appellant's  deportation
    would not be "unduly harsh" upon his partner under Exception 2,  it  is
    contended that the judge was wrong to  state  that,  as  regards  their
    relationship, the appellant had spent the "majority" of his time  since
    the relationship commenced in 2018 in prison or  detention.   That  was
    factually inaccurate.

38. Ground 5: In assessing there were "very compelling circumstances" under
    s.117C(6),  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the   evidence
    concerning the abuse which the appellant suffered at the hands  of  his
    mother.  That, it is contended, was relevant  to  the  public  interest
    which was not fixed but flexible (relying  upon  CI  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 207 and Akinyemi v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2098).

Discussion

     Grounds 1, 2 and 3

39. I will take Grounds 1 to 3 together as they all challenge  the  judge's
    finding in relation to the application of Exception 1 in  s.117C(4)  of
    the NIAA Act 2002.

40. By virtue of s.117C(3), the deportation of a foreign criminal, such  as
    the appellant who has not been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
    four years or more, will be in the public interest unless  Exception  1
    in s.117C(4) applies or Exception 2 in s.117C(5) applies.

41. s.117C(4) provides as follows:

         "Exception 1 applies where -

          a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,

          b) C is  socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the  United
             Kingdom, and

          c) there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported."

42. Ms Brown accepted that it was for the appellant to establish  Exception
    1, in particular as the only outstanding issue under Exception 1,  that
    there were "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his  "integration"  into
    Jamaica on return.

43. In Parveen v SSHD the Court of Appeal  considered  the  test  of  "very
    significant obstacles" in s.117C(4)(c).  The Court (at [9]) referred to
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 13  (IAC).
    Underhill LJ said this:

         "The  [meaning  of  'very  significant  obstacles']  was   recently
         addressed by the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J and  UTJ  Francis)  in
         Treebhawon v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKUT
         13 (IAC). At para. 37 of its judgment the UT said:


              "The other limb of the test,  'very  significant  obstacles',
              erects a self-evidently elevated threshold,  such  that  mere
              hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles and mere upheaval  or
              inconvenience,  even  where  multiplied,  will  generally  be
              insufficient in this context."


         I have to say that I do not find that a very useful  gloss  on  the
         words of the rule. It is fair enough  to  observe  that  the  words
         "very significant" connote an "elevated" threshold, and I  have  no
         difficulty with the observation that the test will not  be  met  by
         "mere inconvenience or upheaval". But I am  not  sure  that  saying
         that "mere" hardship or difficulty or hurdles, even if  multiplied,
         will not "generally" suffice adds anything of substance.  The  task
         of the Secretary of State, or the Tribunal, in any  given  case  is
         simply to assess the obstacles to integration  relied  on,  whether
         characterised as hardship or difficulty or anything  else,  and  to
         decide whether they regard them as "very significant"."


44. In Kamara v SSHD the Court of Appeal explained (at [14])  the  idea  of
    "integration".  Sales LJ (as he then was) said this:

         "14. In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's  "integration"
         into the country to which it is proposed that he  be  deported,  as
         set out in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a  broad  one.
         It is not confined to the mere ability to find a job or to  sustain
         life while living in the other country. It is  not  appropriate  to
         treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss and  it  will
         usually be sufficient for a court  or  tribunal  simply  to  direct
         itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea  of
         "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family life."


45.  Consequently,  the  test  of  "very  significant  obstacles"  sets  an
    "elevated threshold" and the task of the judge is to  assess  what,  if
    any, obstacles there were to the appellant's integration in Jamaica and
    whether  those  obstacles  were  "very  significant".   The   idea   of
    "integration" requires a broad  evaluative  judgment  to  be  made  and
    whether the appellant would be a "enough of an insider" in  Jamaica  in
    terms of his understanding of life, with a capacity to participate  and
    be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in society  and  to  build  up
    within a reasonable time human relationships to give substance  to  his
    private and family life in Jamaica.

46. Judge Murray cited Kamara, Treebhawon and Parveen at paras 26-28 of her
    determination.  There can be no doubt that she  had  well-in  mind  the
    correct approach when applying s.117C(4).  Ms Brown's submission  under
    Grounds 1-3 is, in essence, that the judge  failed  properly  to  apply
    that test in the light of the evidence including the expert  report  of
    Dr de Noronha.

47. At paras 31-34, the judge set out the evidence from the appellant,  his
    mother and brother  as  to  the  circumstances  that  would  await  the
    appellant in Jamaica as follows:

         "31. ... The appellant's first witness statement is at  page  1  of
             his bundle.  He says that he went to Jamaica in 2012 with  his
             mother and brother.  It was 'alright' and had nice beaches but
             he did not want to live there.  It was not for him and he  did
             not know anyone there.  His grandmother was there and she  was
             in her late 60s and unable to look after  him.   He  would  be
             homeless.  He had not looked into Jamaica as a place  to  live
             and would not know what to expect.  His grandmother relied  on
             her pension.  He did not know anything about Jamaican  culture
             and his mother did not speak Patois.

         32.  His brother, [ ] states at P41 of the appellant's bundle  that
             they visited Jamaica in 2012/13 for  5  to  6  weeks  and  saw
             distant family and relatives.  It was a nice  break  and  they
             got away from the stresses of UK life.  The appellant would be
             distraught if he was away from him and his mother.

         33.  His mother's [ ] statement is at P62 of the bundle.  She  says
             that she has family in Jamaica but that they  are  not  really
             close.  She has third and fourth cousins  and  her  mother  is
             there.   Her  cousins  cannot  look  after  or   support   the
             appellant.  Her mother was too old to take him in and she  was
             the one supporting her.  Her mother  was  not  working.   They
             have more family in the UK.

         34.  In cross-examination [the appellant's mother]  said  she  also
             had brothers in Jamaica and that the appellant would be unable
             to stay with her mother because there  was  not  enough  room.
             Her brother struggled and did not support her mother."

48. Then at para 35 the judge made the following findings:

         "35.     I find that the appellant would  clearly  not  be  without
             relatives or connections on return.  The appellant  stated  in
             his witness statement that  his  grandmother  had  a  pension.
             There has been no disclosure in relation to this and he denied
             that he had said this  in  his  witness  statement  in  cross-
             examination.  No financial evidence either in relation to  the
             appellant's mother or  grandmother's  circumstances  has  been
             provided.  The appellant, his mother and brother were all able
             to stay with his grandmother in 2012/2013 for five - six weeks
             and I also therefore do not accept that she would not have the
             room to accommodate him.  It is said that she is in  her  late
             sixties and so would not be able to support him.  However,  he
             is now an adult and hence  would  need  accommodation  in  the
             first instance rather than support.  I also do not accept that
             his mother would be unable to send him money  as  she  already
             sends it to her own mother and supports the appellant  in  the
             UK.

49. At paras 36-37 and the beginning of para 38, the judge considered Dr de
    Noronha's report.  I will return to this shortly.   Then,  having  done
    so, the judge continued at paras 38-39 as follows:

         "38. .... Although his mother has provided bank statements at  P116
             to 155 of the appellant's bundle they contain  information  in
             relation to withdrawals and no balance or evidence of payments
             in.  In view of the  fact  that  the  appellant's  grandmother
             could accommodate three of them for 5 weeks  and  it  has  not
             been shown that his mother would be unable to send him money I
             find that it has not been demonstrated that he  would  not  be
             supported by family or that he would be without  funds  there.
             The appellant has obtained some qualifications as evidenced by
             the certificates at P303 to 308 of his bundle.  He has City  &
             Guilds certificates in construction.  Despite the unemployment
             rate in Jamaica, I am satisfied that it has been  demonstrated
             that he would be without employment.  He has been  brought  up
             within a Jamaican family and the wider Jamaican  community  in
             the UK  and  I  conclude  that  he  is  therefore  a  cultural
             connection.

         39.  Whilst I accept that he would face obstacles initially  as  he
             has not lived there since the age of 3, in view  of  the  fact
             that he has a grandmother, uncles and his mother's  third  and
             fourth cousins there I find that he would be able to integrate
             and the likelihood is that they would help  him  make  further
             connections.  I find that in the circumstances, having  regard
             to the test in relevant case law, the obstacles would  not  be
             very significant."

50. Ms Brown submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant could be accommodated by this grandmother and that his mother
    could provide financial support.  She submitted that it was, in effect,
    unreasonable to conclude that his  grandmother  could  accommodate  the
    appellant simply on the basis of a visit by the appellant, his  brother
    and mother in 2012/2013 when they had stayed with the  grandmother  for
    six  weeks.   Further,  it  was  unreasonable  to  conclude  that   the
    appellant's mother could provide financial support  to  the  appellant.
    Ms  Brown  relied  upon  the  fact  that  the  evidence  was  that  the
    appellant's mother worked as a school dinner lady and cleaner (see para
    1 of her statement at page 62 of the appellant's bundle).  Further,  as
    set out in para 12 of the grounds, Ms Brown relied on the  evidence  in
    the bank statements from the appellant's mother showing that  over  the
    six-month period between July and December 2019, the appellant's mother
    had only sent the appellant's grandmother a total of �536.97.  Ms Brown
    also relied upon the  "very  modest  expenditure"  shown  in  the  bank
    statements of the appellant's mother.

51. Had the judge simply relied upon the appellant being  accommodated  and
    financially supported in Jamaica on return, there would be no doubt, as
    Ms Brown submitted, that  the  judge  would  have  failed  properly  to
    consider the  "broad  evaluative  question"  identified  in  Kamara  of
    whether the appellant could "integrate" in Jamaica".  The judge did not
    do that, as I will  deal  with  shortly,  when  she  considered  Dr  de
    Noronha's evidence.

52. As regards the evidence concerning accommodation and financial support,
    the appellant provided little evidence to support his claim  (and  that
    of his mother) that his grandmother could not accommodate him and  that
    he could not obtain financial support from his  mother.   The  evidence
    was that his mother provided him financial support in the  UK.   It  is
    unclear whether  the  judge's  attention  was  drawn  to  the  specific
    payments made to the appellant's grandmother by his own mother set  out
    in Ms Brown's grounds at para 12.  They were,  undoubtedly,  relatively
    modest payments.  However, as I have said, the judge took into  account
    that the appellant's mother already provides him with financial support
    in the UK.  As the judge noted,  the  appellant  provided  no  specific
    financial evidence as to  his  mother's  income  or  his  grandmother's
    circumstances other than, as regards his grandmother, stating that  she
    lived on a pension.  The judge also concluded in para 38, that  despite
    the  unemployment  rates  in  Jamaica,  given  his  qualifications  the
    appellant had not demonstrated that he would be without  employment  in
    Jamaica.  Likewise, as  regards  accommodation  with  his  grandmother,
    there was no evidence that his grandmother no longer had available  the
    accommodation in which the appellant, his mother and brother had stayed
    in Jamaica in 2012 on a visit.  It was reasonably open to the judge  to
    infer that that accommodation would be available to the  appellant,  at
    least in the short term, until he was self-sufficient.

53. The judge's findings were not inconsistent with the evidence and, in my
    judgment,  were  findings  rooted  in  the  evidence   and   reasonable
    inferences from that evidence.  The judge's findings  were  within  the
    range of reasonable conclusions open to  the  judge  on  the  evidence.
    Consequently, I reject Ground 1.

54. Integration is, however,  more  than  a  matter  of  accommodation  and
    subsistence.  The "broad evaluative judgment"  identified  in  [14]  of
    Kamara requires a more  vigorous  investigation  into  an  individual's
    ability to fit in and be, or become,  part  of  the  community  in  the
    country to which he is returning.  The appellant, of  course,  came  to
    the UK age 3 and so, for all intents and purposes, apart from the short
    visit to Jamaica in 2012 has never lived in the community  and  culture
    in Jamaica.  Before the judge, the appellant  relied  upon  the  expert
    report of Dr de Noronha to support his contention that he would be  too
    much of a 'outsider' on return to Jamaica.  Grounds  2  and  3  contend
    that the judge failed properly to grapple with and give weight to Dr de
    Noronha's expert opinion which supported the appellant's case  that  he
    could not effectively integrate in Jamaica given his situation  of  not
    having lived there since the age of 3.

55. The judge dealt with Dr de  Noronha's  report  at  paras  36  -  38  as
    follows:

         "36. I have considered the conclusions of Dr Luke  Noronha  against
             the  background  of  these  findings  in   relation   to   the
             appellant's family's connections in  Jamaica.   No  issue  has
             been taken with Dr Noronha's expertise and the report complies
             with the relevant  Practice  Directions.   The  basis  of  his
             report is that the  appellant  seemingly  does  not  have  any
             family members to support him (para 6).  Dr Noronha  concludes
             that the appellant will be unable to pass  as  a  Jamaican  on
             return  due  to  his  actions  and  mannerisms  and  will   be
             immediately visible as someone who has lived  outside  Jamaica
             and this will present risks.  He states that the vast majority
             of people deported to Jamaica  end  up  living  in  low-income
             neighbourhoods in urban settings and many deported people  are
             vulnerable to extortion and robbery.  He states that there  is
             a very real risk that he will be subject to  serious  physical
             violence and it is essential that deported persons have family
             support or personal resources and resilience.  If he does  not
             have family support, and no means of paying rent  he  will  be
             homeless.  In  relation  to  employment  he  states  that  the
             current unemployment rate is  around  9.6%  and  higher  among
             young adults between 16 and  24  (20%  to  25  %).   The  vast
             majority of employers will not hire  anyone  without  a  clean
             record  and  the  appellant   does   not   seem   particularly
             employable.  In conclusion, he states that  at  P262  that  he
             would face several profound obstacles to integration  relating
             to  cultural  alienation,  family  estrangement  and   stigma,
             housing and homelessness and vulnerability to crime,  violence
             and extortion; employment; and maintaining family life.

         37.  In his addendum report at P264 of the bundle he states that he
             confirms his findings and that the Guardian has since reported
             that at least five men deported from the UK were killed in May
             2019.  He also states that  the  NGO  provision  for  deported
             persons in Jamaica is now even thinner on the ground than when
             he wrote the report in March 2019.

         38.  The conclusions in the expert's report are premised to a large
             extent on the absence of family members to support him and the
             absence of financial support.  ...."

56. Under Ground 3, Ms Brown submitted that the judge was wrong to consider
    that Dr de Noronha's report was premised on  the  appellant  having  an
    absence of family members to support him and other support in  Jamaica.
    She referred me to his report at page 252-255 and paras 7-9, 11 and  20
    as well as the whole of the section to which  that  belongs  under  the
    heading "cultural alienation, family estrangement and stigma" (paras 4-
    20 of the report).

57. Mr Howells submitted that the judge had not erred in law and that there
    were numerous references in the expert report to a  person  who  lacked
    family support in Jamaica.  He referred me to a number of paragraphs in
    the report (including paras 6, 25, 51 and 56) as well as the conclusion
    in para 57 where Dr de Noronha stated that: "without  family  support",
    the appellant was likely to be  vulnerable  to  "destitution,  cultural
    alienation,  stigma,  social   isolation,   homelessness   and   marked
    vulnerability of extortion, crime and violence."

58. Dr de Noronha does, in a number of places in his  report,  refer  to  a
    lack of "family support" or "family members" (see  e.g.,  paras  6  and
    57).

59. In his first report at paras 5 and 6, Dr de Noronha says this:

         "5.  In my research, I have met over 100  deported  persons.   Most
             return and live  with  family  members.   Sometimes,  deported
             persons have loved ones to return  to,  and  work  to  rebuild
             their lives with the support networks as their foundation.  In
             my experience, these individuals tend to have  emigrated  from
             Jamaica as adults and to have only been away from  the  island
             for a few years; their family connections tend to be secure in
             Jamaica.

         6.   [The appellant] does not fit this description,  and  seemingly
             does not have any family members to  offer  him  any  support.
             His mother mention in her witness statement that her mother is
             too old to take him in,  and  that  their  only  other  family
             members are distant cousins.  More broadly,  deported  persons
             are often resented by members of families and communities when
             they return and face profound forms of stigma."

60. At para 7, Dr de Noronha speaks of deported persons being defined by

         "many  people  in  their  families  and  communities  as   unwanted
         failures".

61. At para 8, Dr de Noronha says this:

         "Even if [the appellant] were able to find a distant family  member
         to take him  in,  this  would  not  necessarily  provide  him  with
         security."

62. In my judgment, however, the basis of Dr  de  Noronha's  views  is  not
    exclusively focused upon a person who has no family support.

63. At para 20, Dr de Noronha says this:

         "Importantly, for the [the appellant], the question of his cultural
         familiarity with  Jamaica  is  not  only  about  his  'culture  and
         customs', but about his familiarity  with  how  things  operate  in
         Jamaica - in terms of  norms,  customs,  language,  economics,  and
         respect.  In other words, the question of culture and reintegration
         is not reduceable to having been raised in  a  Jamaican  household,
         but relates to whether [the appellant] understands how to  navigate
         life in Jamaica.  This is  especially  marked  in  the  context  of
         poverty, underemployment, and the high levels of violent crime.  In
         the following  sub-Sections,  I  emphasise  the  difficulties  [the
         appellant] will face in finding work, secure housing  and  personal
         security - all of which will compound and be compounded by his lack
         of familiarity with how things work in Jamaica."

64. The expert then goes on to consider "housing  and  homelessness",  "NGO
    support services", "employment", "vulnerability to crime, violence  and
    extortion" and "maintaining family life".  At para 55 it is states that
    the appellant:

         "Would face several profound obstacles to reintegration in Jamaica.
          These relate, broadly, to cultural alienation, family estrangement
         and stigma;  housing  and  homelessness;  vulnerability  to  crime,
         violence and extortion; employment;  and  maintaining  family  life
         ..."

65. At para 56 Dr de Noronha states:

         "While [the appellant] may  have  some  familiarity  with  Jamaican
         language and culture,  having left age three he  is  certainly  not
         likely to be 'familiar  with  the  cultural,  social  and  economic
         aspects of life in Jamaica'.  In fact, his lack of  familiarity  is
         likely to put him at serious risk of  destitution  and  render  him
         vulnerable to crime and violence."

66. Whilst I agree, to an extent, with  Mr  Howells'  observation  that  at
    times the expert deals with the appellant as a person with  no  support
    in Jamaica, it is plain that his conclusions  are  not  fixed  to  that
    premise.  Much of what is  said,  in  particular  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's inability to  integrate  with  the  "cultural,  social  and
    economic aspects of life in Jamaica" is largely premised  on  the  fact
    that the appellant was 3 years old when he  left  Jamaica.   That,  the
    expert acknowledges,  exposes  the  appellant  to  vulnerabilities  and
    insecurity which, on any view, is relevant to whether there  are  "very
    significant obstacles" to his integration in Jamaica.

67. That latter point is also the focus of Ground 2.  That  challenges  the
    judge's finding in para 38 that:

         "[The appellant] has been brought up within a Jamaican  family  and
         the wider Jamaican community in  the  UK  and  I  conclude  he  has
         therefore a cultural connection".

68. That finding fails to have regard to both the evidence of the appellant
    and his mother and that of the expert.  The  appellant's  evidence  was
    that most of his family in the UK are "African" and not only  Jamaican.
    At para 112 of his statement (at page 13 of the bundle)  the  appellant
    says:

         "Most of my family that come around are African.  My family has all
         different types of cultures, my cousin is from Nigeria and  I  also
         have full white English cousins.  My family is not  only  Jamaican.
         I was born in Jamaica, but I was not raised any  differently  to  a
         normal English child.  All I know is the UK."

69. At para 20 of his first  report,  Dr  de  Noronha  observers  that  the
    appellant's ability to navigate life in Jamaica  and  the  question  of
    culture and reintegration:

         "Is not reducible to having been raised in a Jamaican household".

70. I accept Ms Brown's submission that the judge failed  to  grapple  with
    the expert's view, in particular in respect of  this  issue  raised  in
    ground  2.   But  also,  in  my  judgment  the  judge  wrongly   placed
    insufficient weight upon the expert's view as to the  cultural,  social
    and physical risks to the appellant on  the  basis  that  the  expert's
    report was premised upon a lack of family support which the judge found
    the appellant would have.

71. For these reasons, I accept that the judge erred as set out in  Grounds
    2 and 3.

72. It follows, therefore, that the judge erred in law  when  finding  that
    the appellant did not meet the requirement in s.117C(4)(c) of the  NIAA
    Act 2002 and that finding cannot stand.

    Ground 4

73. Ground 4 is directed to the judge's finding that the appellant had  not
    established Exception 2 in s.117C(5), namely that the impact  upon  his
    partner would be "unduly harsh" if he were deported  to  Jamaica.   The
    judge dealt with this  issue  at  paras  40-44  of  her  determination.
    There, she said this:

         "40. It is also argued that he has a partner  in  the  UK  and  his
             deportation or requiring her  to  move  to  Jamaica  would  be
             unduly harsh.  She is [JR] and a British citizen and therefore
             a qualifying partner.  According to her witness  statement  at
             P25 of the bundle they moved in together in May 2018 and  then
             he was recalled to jail in July 2018 but she  kept  in  touch.
             He visited her a lot after his release from jail.

         41.  The respondent did not seek to argue that the relationship  is
             not genuine and according to her evidence they have been in  a
             relationship since 2018.  He cannot rely on para 399(b) of the
             Immigration Rules because the relationship was commenced  when
             his status was precarious.

         42.  Whilst I accept, having heard both their evidence,  that  they
             are in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  they  are  not
             currently living together and the appellant  has  since  their
             relationship commenced been sentenced to two  further  periods
             of imprisonment.  On 5 March 2018 he  was  sentenced  to  nine
             months in a Young Offender's Institution for affray  and  then
             on 26 February 2019 sentenced to possession of a  knife  blade
             and breach of a  criminal  behaviour  order  to  a  period  of
             thirteen months' imprisonment.

         43.  In KO (Nigeria) and others  v  SSHD  [2018]  1  WLR  5273  the
             Supreme Court held that in determining whether the  effect  of
             deporting the foreign criminal would be 'unduly harsh' on  the
             criminal's  child  within  s.117C(5)   of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, one was looking for a  degree
             of harshness going  beyond  that  what  would  necessarily  be
             involved for any child faced with a parent's deportation.  The
             determination did not require a consideration of the  severity
             of the parent's offence.  Following  clarification  under  the
             Supreme Court, the 'unduly harsh' assessment is not of  itself
             a balancing exercise;  it  is  solely  an  evaluation  of  the
             consequences and  impact  of  deportation  on  the  individual
             concerned; there is no room for the wider public  interest  to
             be taken into account in the assessment beyond the  difference
             between the two categories of offender (i.e.  those  sentenced
             to less than four years; those  sentenced  to  at  least  four
             years).  The Court approved the approach in MK (Sierra  Leone)
             [2015] UKUT 223 and MAB (USA) [2015] UKUT  435  where  'unduly
             harsh':

                  'does  not  equate   with   uncomfortable,   inconvenient,
                  undesirable or  merely  difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a
                  considerably more elevated  threshold.   'Harsh'  in  this
                  context, to note something severe, or bleak.   It  is  the
                  antitheses of pleasant or comfortable.   Furthermore,  the
                  addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated
                  standard still higher.'

         44.  In circumstances where they have only  lived  together  for  a
             short period, do not currently live together and the appellant
             has spent  the  majority  of  time  since  their  relationship
             commenced in prison I find it would not be unduly harsh on her
             if he were deported to Jamaica.  I therefore find that he  has
             not met the requirements of Section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act."

74. Ms Brown criticised the judge's reasoning in  only  one  respect.   She
    submitted that the judge had been wrong in para 44 to conclude that the
    appellant had spent the "majority of  time"  since  their  relationship
    commenced in 2018 in prison.  Since April 2018 and up to  the  date  of
    the judge's decision, the relationship had lasted for one year and nine
    months.  She submitted that, properly  calculated,  the  appellant  had
    during that time spent twelve months not in  prison  either  serving  a
    custodial sentence or in immigration detention.

75. At the hearing, there was considerable discussion  as  to  the  precise
    period of time in which the appellant was in prison and/or  immigration
    detention.  In his submissions, Mr Howells offered a different timeline
    for the appellant's imprisonment and/or immigration detention.  On  his
    figures, which I  will  not  set  out  here,  he  calculated  that  the
    appellant had only spent seven months not in custody or  detention  out
    of a total of one year and nine months of the relationship.   He  based
    that assessment on the Home Office's computer records.

76. In the absence of  clear  records  as  to,  not  only  the  periods  of
    custodial  sentence  served  by  the  appellant  but  also  periods  of
    immigration detention, it is not possible to determine with any  degree
    of certainty precisely how long the appellant was not in prison  and/or
    immigration detention during the 21 months of his relationship with his
    partner.  On one view, he was not in prison for twelve of the 21 months
    and on another view he was not in prison for seven of  the  21  months.
    The  PNC  summary  obtained,   and   provided,   by   the   appellant's
    representatives after the hearing  did  not  sufficiently  clarify  the
    position.

77. Even  if  Ms  Brown's  calculation  is  accepted,  and  that  therefore
    technically the judge should not have described the appellant as having
    spent the "majority" of the time  of  his  relationship  in  prison  or
    detention, I do  not  see  how  that  mischaracterisation,  in  itself,
    materially affected the judge's finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that the impact upon his partner would be "unduly harsh".

78. It is not suggested by Ms Brown that the judge misdirected  herself  as
    to the proper approach to the issue  of  "unduly  harsh"  following  KO
    (Nigeria) or, indeed, the more recent Court of Appeal's decision in  HA
    (Iraq) and another v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176.

79. On either view, the relationship was a relatively short one.  On either
    view, the appellant and his partner were not currently cohabiting.   On
    either view, the appellant  had  spent  a  significant  period  of  the
    relationship in prison or immigration detention.

80. There was, put  simply,  insufficient  evidence  before  the  judge  to
    establish that the impact upon the appellant's partner would be "unduly
    harsh" applying the 'elevated' threshold following KO (Nigeria).   None
    is, in fact, identified either in the grounds or rule  25  reply.   The
    fact that the appellant had a longer relationship with his partner as a
    "best friend" before 2018 cannot, in my judgment, assist in a  material
    way to demonstrate that the impact upon her now would be "unduly harsh"
    if he were deported.

81. For these reasons, I reject Ground 4 challenging  the  judge's  finding
    under s.117C(5).

    Ground 5

82. Having concluded that the appellant could not succeed under Exception 1
    or Exception 2 in s.117C(4) and (5), the judge  correctly  went  on  to
    consider whether the appellant could succeed under  Article  8  on  the
    basis that there were "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
    those described in Exceptions 1  and  2"  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
    public interest applying s.117C(6) (see NA  (Pakistan)  v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662).

83. Given the judge's finding in respect of Exception 1  cannot  stand,  as
    that is necessarily the premise upon which the s.117C(6)  was  applied,
    then that error also infected the judge's adverse  conclusion  applying
    s.117C(6).

84. However, specifically under this ground, Ms Brown  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to take into account, in assessing whether there  were
    "very  compelling   circumstances",   the   evidence   concerning   the
    appellant's problems faced at school and that he had  been  subject  to
    abuse by his mother as a child, including up to  the  age  of  17.   Ms
    Brown accepted that  this  evidence  did  not  excuse  the  appellant's
    offending behaviour but, she submitted, following CI (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 2027, evidence of  such  matters  as  child  abuse  was
    relevant.  Ms Brown submitted that that evidence was set out in various
    documents in Section D of the appellant's bundle.

85. Mr Howells submitted that CI (Nigeria) was distinguishable as  in  that
    case, there had been evidence of sustained abuse.

86. As I have already said, the judge's conclusion in relation to s.117C(6)
    cannot stand and the decision in that regard must necessarily be remade
    together with the decision in relation to Exception 1.  Suffice it  for
    me to say here that the evidence relied upon by  the  appellant  as  to
    child abuse was relevant to the  judge's  assessment  under  Article  8
    applying s.117C(6).  The weight to give that evidence would, of course,
    be primarily a matter for the judge and, no doubt, the  more  sustained
    the evidence shows the child abuse to have been, the greater the weight
    a judge might give such evidence in making  the  assessment  under  Art
    8.2.  Here, however, the judge made  no  reference  to  this  evidence.
    That was a failure to consider a  relevant  matter  in  the  Article  8
    assessment and, in itself, amounted to a material error of law.

87. For these reasons, therefore, Ground 5 is made out.

Decision

88.  For the above reasons, the judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's
    appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an error  of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

89. Both representatives agreed that, if an error of law  was  established,
    the proper disposal of the appeal was to remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal to remake the decision.  However, it  was  also  accepted
    that, depending upon precisely what error of law was established,  some
    findings should be preserved.

90. In that latter regard, having rejected Ground 4,  the  judge's  finding
    that the appellant's deportation would not be "unduly harsh"  upon  his
    partner, and so Exception 2 did not apply, stands and is preserved.

91. The remaking of the decision will concern Exception 1 and,  so  far  as
    relevant, Article 8 applying s.117C(6).

92.  In  that  regard,  it  is  accepted  that  the  appellant  meets   the
    requirements for Exception 1 in s.117C(4)(a) and  (b).   The  issue  is
    whether he meets the requirement in s.117C(4)(c), namely whether  there
    are "very significant obstacles" to his integration in Jamaica.

93. Subject to those preserved findings, the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal in order to  remake  the  decision  in  respect  of
    Article 8.  The appeal to be heard by a judge other than Judge  Murray.





                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            15 December 2020
