
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07663/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham City Centre Tower|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 01 August 2019                    |On 09 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                               mr Muhammad Ali
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khurram of Khurram & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  C
    Chapman issued on 16 April 2018 which refused the appellant's Article 8
    ECHR claim brought against a refusal of  leave  to  extend  stay  as  a
    student.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 29 July 1991.  Mr  Ali
    came to the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 6 October 2011.  He was
    granted further leave as a student until 21 June 2014.  On 16 June 2014
    he applied for further  leave  as  a  student.   That  application  was
    refused on 20 August 2014 as, by the time the respondent came to make a
    decision, the Certificate of  Acceptance  of  Studies  (CAS)  had  been
    withdrawn.

 3. The appellant appealed the refusal of leave and on 20 November 2014 his
    appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Matthews.  This was  on
    the basis that the withdrawal of the CAS was in no way the fault of the
    appellant and that, where this was so, he  was  entitled  to  a  60-day
    letter enabling him to seek a new educational sponsor.  The decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Matthews was upheld in a  decision  dated  21
    May 2015 by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss.

 4. The respondent implemented the decision of the Tribunal on 15 September
    2015, granting the appellant a 60-day letter, with leave valid until 14
    November 2015.

 5. On 5 November 2015 the appellant made an application for further  leave
    to remain outside the Immigration Rules.  He did not apply for  further
    leave as a student as he had not been able to obtain a new  educational
    sponsor or a new CAS.  He maintained that this was  an  unfairness  and
    breach  of  his  Article  8  ECHR  rights  where  the  timing  of   the
    respondent's 60-day letter meant that the universities or  colleges  he
    could apply to in order to continue his studies, by 15 September  2015,
    had already begun their term, had closed admissions  and  had  informed
    him that he  could  only  enrol  in  January  or  February  2016.   His
    application for leave to remain outside the Rules was on the basis of a
    short extension to enable him to do this.

 6. On 20 January 2016 the respondent refused the application and certified
    the refusal as clearly unfounded under Section 94 of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, affording the appellant only an out of
    country appeal right.

 7. The appellant judicially reviewed that decision. Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Eyre QC granted permission on 29 December 2016.  He stated as follows:

         "(6) In those circumstances the Applicant has a realistic  prospect
             of successfully contending that the decision of  20th  January
             2016 was unreasonable by reason of  a  failure  to  address  a
             relevant consideration, namely the contention  actually  being
             made by the Applicant that an extension was warranted  in  the
             particular circumstances"

    The judicial reviews was withdrawn by consent order dated 3 March 2017,
    the respondent agreed to reconsider the decision within three months.

 8. The respondent provided a new decision on 26 June 2017 and it  is  that
    decision which led to these proceedings. The decision refused to  grant
    leave outside the Immigration Rules and found that  the  appellant  did
    not qualify for leave under Article 8 ECHR.

 9. The appellant challenged the decision of 26 June 2017  and  the  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Chapman on 13 April 2018.

10. In paragraph 46 of the decision, Judge Chapman found as follows:

         "46. I note that reliance  is  placed  on  the  decision  of  Upper
             Tribunal Judge Eyre QC when finding that the  judicial  review
             proceedings had a realistic prospect of success.   The  issues
             before  him,  and  those  in  the  judicial  proceedings  were
             different from those before me in this human rights appeal.  I
             do not agree that Judge Eyre was intending in any  way  to  be
             suggesting the likely outcome of this appeal."

11. The appellant submits that  this  was  an  incorrect  approach  to  the
    permission decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Eyre QC and that the issues
    in  the  judicial  review  and  the  statutory  appeal   were   "almost
    identical". That is not correct. Judge Eyre QC was  asked  to  consider
    whether the respondent had acted unlawfully in  failing  to  take  into
    account the appellant's reasons for being unable to obtain a new CAS as
    part of the  consideration  of  whether  to  grant  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. He found it arguable that  the  respondent  had  not
    taken into account this potentially material aspect of the  appellant's
    application for leave. His decision was not determinative, only finding
    the matter to be arguable. His decision did not concern the substantive
    merits of the appellant's fairness claims which were  in  issue  before
    Judge Chapman, only whether they had been  considered  at  all  in  the
    decision of January 2016. The First-tier Tribunal did not  err  in  its
    approach to the decision of Judge Eyre QC.

12. The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings on the  appellant's
    case that the timing of the 60 day letter dated 15 September  2015  was
    unfair:

         "52.  Yet,  on  the  documents  provided  to  me,  which  show  the
             Appellant's contacts with universities and colleges  (many  of
             which are undated and do not assist), the earliest date I find
             of contact is 19 October 2015.  This is over halfway into  the
             60 day period.  Looking at all  the  evidence  in  the  round,
             although  the  Appellant  seeks  to  attribute  blame  to  the
             'uncompromising' attitude of the Respondent for him not  being
             able  to  continue  his  studies,  I  find  that  he  did  not
             demonstrate  the  desire  and  urgency  which   his   situated
             warranted.  This casts some doubt on his motives  for  seeking
             to remain in the United Kingdom."

13. The appellant maintains that this reasoning was in error as  the  judge
    should have found that  the  appellant  was  so  disadvantaged  by  the
    respondent's timing of the September 2015 60-day letter that he  should
    have been granted a short period of further leave in order to  find  an
    educational sponsor.  However, the materials before me show that  Judge
    Chapman was correct that the appellant did not provide any evidence  of
    trying to find an educational sponsor prior to 19 October and that this
    was over halfway into the 60-day period allocated to the appellant.

14. Further, as Mr Bates pointed out at the hearing, a document at page  12
    of the appellant's bundle showed that Westminster Kingsway College  had
    closed their course only at the end of September so, had the  appellant
    made full use of the 60 days from 15 September onwards, he  could  have
    found courses still open to him.

15. Further, the respondent clearly followed his own policy  regarding  the
    obligation to afford 60  days  of  leave  to  find  a  new  educational
    institution when an applicant is without a CAS for no  fault  of  their
    own.  Nothing required the respondent to issue the 60 day letter  at  a
    time that was preferential to the appellant. It will  be  obvious  that
    requiring a 60 day letter to be timed  in  order  to  suit  courses  of
    interest to an individual student would  impose  an  almost  unworkable
    burden on the respondent.

16. Further, the inability of the appellant to  obtain  a  CAS  during  the
    September to November 2015 period did not  mean  that  he  was  without
    options for  further  studies.   As  the  respondent's  refusal  letter
    indicated, having taken account of the appellant's difficulties  during
    the September to November 2015 period, the appellant  could  return  to
    Pakistan to continue his studies there or could return to  Pakistan  in
    order to apply for entry clearance to come back to the UK.

17. The grounds refer to a delay by the respondent which should have led to
    a finding of unfairness and the appeal being allowed  under  Article  8
    ECHR. I was not taken to any period of delay by  the  respondent  here.
    The decisions followed his applications  in  reasonable  time  and  his
    various appeal hearings and the judicial review proceedings  progressed
    within normal time limits. I did not find that this  argument  had  any
    merit.

18. It will be clear from the chronology set out above that  the  appellant
    has lived by far the majority of his life in Pakistan where he has  his
    immediate family.  He has only ever been in  the  United  Kingdom  with
    precarious leave.  He seeks leave to continue with his studies when  he
    can do so in Pakistan or apply to return to the UK to study in  future.
    An Article 8 case based on private life in  these  circumstances  could
    not have succeeded and the First-tier Tribunal Judge here took a lawful
    approach  in  paragraph  53  onwards  in  finding  that  there  was  no
    disproportionate breach of  the  appellant's  Article  8  human  rights
    either under the Immigration Rules or outside the Immigration Rules.

19. For all of these reasons, it is my view that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not err in the decision refusing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]                      Date: 1 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

