
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No: HU/07052/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 17 November 2016                  |on 23 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 RACHEL [T]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr G Madubuike
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was represented by Mr Madubuike,  of  Immigration  Advice
    Service, Manchester.  He explained that he is a solicitor qualified  in
    England and Wales, not in Scotland, and also qualified with  the  OISC,
    and  so  entitled  to  appear  before  tribunals  in   Scotland.    The
    respondent's representative, Mr  Matthews,  is  a  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Gabon.  She entered the UK as  a  visitor
    on 1 February 2015.  By application dated 2 June  2015  she  sought  to
    remain on the basis of family life in the UK.

 3. The respondent refused  the  application  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    decision dated 17 September 2015.  In terms of the partner  route,  the
    appellant having entered as a visitor  did  not  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements.  Relocation to Gabon might cause a degree of hardship but
    there was no evidence of insurmountable obstacles, so EX.1(b)  did  not
    apply.  In terms of the parent route, the eligibility  requirement  was
    not met, for the same reason; the appellant did not have sole  parental
    responsibility; the appellant had a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with her children,  but  as  she  failed  the  eligibility
    requirements, she did not benefit  from  the  criteria  in  EX.1.   The
    application did not meet the criteria for a private life  claim  (which
    is not in dispute).  The "particular  circumstances  set  out"  in  the
    application did not constitute  exceptional  circumstances  to  warrant
    leave outside the rules: "... you state that you are married  to  a  UK
    citizen and wish to live in the UK with your  family.   This  has  been
    carefully considered, however it is open to you to obtain  the  correct
    entry clearance for a more permanent residence in the UK ... there  are
    no exceptional circumstances ... ".

 4.  FtT  Judge  Green  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal   by   decision
    promulgated on 30 June 2016.

 5. The rather over-lengthy grounds of appeal to the  UT  and  the  further
    pleadings for the appellant in a rule 25 response are in large parts no
    more than reassertion of the appellant's case and disagreement with its
    outcome.  They mix up various points in a rather confused way and lapse
    into hyperbole - e.g. paragraph 14 of the grounds, "Fatally, the  judge
    in spite of all the evidence concludes that ... the  decision  ...  was
    not disproportionate ... these conclusions are very well misplaced  and
    inaccurate ... the judge blatantly  refused  to  give  due  respect  or
    credence to the ... SSHD's policy ... or case law".  Far  too  much  is
    made of political problems, health care deficiencies and the absence of
    an Embassy in Gabon. The oral submissions veered even  further  towards
    stridency, Mr Madubuike submitting that the  appellant  should  not  be
    required to make any further application to the respondent  because  it
    would be arbitrarily refused irrespective of its  merits,  which  would
    amount to persecution of the appellant by the Home Office.

 6. The most pertinent of the evidence appears to be as follows.

      i) The appellant, born on 18 September 1985, is a citizen of Gabon and
         of no other country.

     ii) The appellant has a daughter, [AC], born on 4  July  2001,  who  is
         also a citizen of Gabon and of no other country.

    iii) Mr Martin [T], born on 16 May 1987, is a citizen of the UK  and  of
         no other country.  He and the appellant met while he was working in
         Gabon in 2009.  They married in South Africa on 3 May 2010. In 2013
         they moved from Gabon to South Africa,  for  reasons  of  Mr  [T]'s
         work.

     iv) Mr & Mrs [T] have twin daughters, [MT]  and  [RT],  born  in  South
         Africa on 12 May 2014, who are citizens of the UK (it seems  likely
         they are also  entitled  to  Gabonese  nationality,  although  this
         possibility is denied in the grounds of appeal;  nothing  turns  on
         that).

      v) The possibility of Mr [T] adopting  [AC]  has  been  explored,  but
         nothing has been concluded which amounts to an adoption in the  law
         of the UK.  She has lived in family with  Mr  [T]  along  with  her
         mother.  Her ongoing relationship with her natural father, if  any,
         does not seem to have been mentioned.  She has  no  separate  case,
         and is her mother's dependant for purposes of these proceedings.

     vi) Mr [T]'s work contract in South Africa came to an end in 2015.  All
         five family members travelled to the UK on  1  February  2015,  the
         appellant and [AC] entering on visit visas obtained for an  earlier
         visit,  which  remained   valid.    (The   evidence   is   somewhat
         contradictory as to whether Mr [T] knew of his redundancy before or
         after they travelled to the UK; it appears  to  have  been  shortly
         after they arrived.)

    vii) At the time of the application leading  to  these  proceedings  the
         appellant was unable to meet the requirements  of  the  immigration
         rules for leave to  remain,  not  only  on  the  eligibility  point
         arising from her entry as a visitor.  Mr [T]  was  unemployed,  and
         the minimum income requirement could not be satisified.

   viii) By the time of the FtT hearing on 17  June  2016,  Mr  [T]  was  in
         employment in Peterhead.  He and Mrs [T] have bought a house there,
         where the five family members now live.  Mr [T]'s  extended  family
         lives in Peterhead.

     ix) It was not demonstrated that all the strict evidential requirements
         of the rules could be met by the time of the hearing,  but  it  did
         appear that broadly there was enough income, and the appellant  was
         likely to be able to make a successful application, although  still
         required by the rules to do so from outside the UK.

 7. The  most  coherent  points  to  be  distilled  from  the  grounds  and
    submissions for the appellant are as follows.

      i) The  judge  erred  in  law  because  Home  Office  policy,  an  IDI
         instruction  of  August  2015,   section   9,   lists   exceptional
         circumstances justifying leave outside  the  rules,  all  of  which
         circumstances were present in this case, so that the only  possible
         outcome was a grant of leave.

     ii) The judge failed to make clear findings on the  best  interests  of
         the children in the case, as required by section 55 of the 2009 Act
         and for purposes of article 8.

    iii) The  judge  failed  to  resolve  the  question  which  arose  under
         EX.1.1(a) of the rules or under section 117B (6) of the  2002  Act:
         whether it would be reasonable to expect the younger  two  children
         to leave the UK.

 8. Having heard the oral submissions, I reserved my decision.

 9. Although the point based on policy was doggedly insisted  upon,  it  is
    misconceived.  The policy lists maters to be considered,  of  a  nature
    likely to be present in  almost  every  family  life  case,  e.g.  best
    interests of children, nature of family relationships, and  immigration
    status of the various family members.  It does  not  instruct  decision
    makers that in every case where such considerations arise, they are  to
    be taken as exceptional, and leave outside the rules is to be granted.

10. The respondent's decision did deal  with  "exceptional  circumstances",
    although briefly.  There is nothing in the argument that  judge  failed
    to do so.  He dealt with all factors put to him.  The ground is only  a
    complaint that he did not reach a judgment, based on those factors,  as
    urged by the appellant.

11. It was submitted for the appellant that it went against the evidence to
    hold that the children could not be cared for  without  the  appellant.
    That submission was not well founded.  It was a position the  appellant
    and Mr [T] were unwilling to contemplate, but the judge was entitled to
    conclude that Mr [T] and his family would be able to  provide  care  if
    they had to.

12. There were various possible outcomes, if the appellant did  not  obtain
    leave to remain as a result of  these  proceedings.   The  alternatives
    contemplated in the judge's concluding paragraph [13] were:

      i) The family as a whole leaves the UK, to live long term in Gabon  or
         elsewhere.

     ii) The appellant travels to Gabon, accompanied by the children,  while
         she applies for entry clearance with a view to the family  settling
         long term in the UK.

    iii) The appellant travels to Gabon, on her own, while she  applies  for
         entry clearance with a view to the family settling long term in the
         UK.

13. The question whether it would be reasonable to expect a child to  leave
    the United Kingdom must, in context, ask whether it  is  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK with a view to living  permanently  in
    another country. It is not the question whether  it  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to make a short trip abroad, as for a holiday;  almost
    any child may reasonably be expected to do so.  Similarly, the question
    does not arise where it is contemplated that a  person  leaves  the  UK
    only for a short period, and may reasonably not be accompanied  by  the
    child.

14. The first alternative is not what the appellant and her family  wishes.
    It  presents  unwelcome  difficulties,  although  none  shown   to   be
    realistically at the level  of  insurmountable  obstacles.   The  judge
    thought that permanent relocation to Gabon would not  be  unreasonable.
    This was not realistically the determinative issue, because this choice
    is avoidable, but the judge's resolution of it has not  been  shown  to
    have involved the making of an error on a point of law.

15. The second and third alternatives were not shown to be adverse  to  the
    best interests of the children in any significant way, or to impose any
    unreasonable expectation on the children.  Either they need  not  leave
    at all, in which case the question does not arise; or they  may  do  so
    for a relatively short and reasonable period.

16. The appellant has  not  shown  legal  error  in  the  judge's  ultimate
    conclusion, namely that it  was  not  disproportionate  to  expect  the
    appellant to apply from abroad.

17. The judge held further at paragraph 13 on authority of SB that  he  was
    not entitled to take into account in his proportionality assessment the
    appellant's apparently good prospects on application from abroad.    No
    specific challenge was made  to  that  finding;  correctly  so,  as  an
    appellant in a position to make  a  successful  application  under  the
    rules can seldom if ever show a right under article 8 not to need to do
    so.

18. This does seem however to leave open a  further  alternative,  which  I
    briefly canvassed at the hearing.   The  appellant  may  now  be  in  a
    position  to  make  a  further  application  accompanied  by  specified
    evidence  meeting  all  requirements  of  the  rules,  except  for  the
    eligibility issue arising from her having entered as a visitor (and not
    having  become  an  overstayer).  She  might  choose  to  submit   that
    application from within the UK, under explanation of the circumstances,
    with a request for its consideration without leaving the UK. That might
    be a rather stronger application than the one she made previously, when
    there was no compliance with minimum income or evidential requirements.
    I do not purport to advise the appellant on how to proceed, which is  a
    matter for her and her advisers. Nor do I purport to indicate a  likely
    outcome, or to impose a view upon the Secretary of State. However,  the
    existence of this further possibility fortifies my view that there  was
    no error of law in the decision of the FtT.

19. The determination of the FtT shall stand.

20. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




            [pic]


            21 November 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




