
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07591/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th April 2018                            |On 10th May 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                  najam [u]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss F Shaw of Counsel, instructed on a direct
access basis
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Khan promulgated on 19 December 2016, in which the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the  decision  to  refuse  her  human  rights  claim  dated  22
    September 2015 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on [  ]  1947,  who  last
    entered the United Kingdom on 10 November 2014 pursuant to  a  multiple
    entry family visit visa.  She applied for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds, primarily relying on ill-health and cave given for  her
    by her immediate family.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on  22  September  2015  on  the
    basis that she did not meet the requirements for leave to remain within
    the Immigration Rules and there were no exceptional circumstances which
    warranted a grant of leave to remain outside of the Immigration  Rules.
    Specifically, the Appellant did not have a  partner  or  any  dependent
    children in the United Kingdom for the purposes of Appendix FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules, nor did she meeting the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the same because she had not been in the United  Kingdom  for
    the required  period  of  time  and  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles  to  her  reintegration  into   Pakistan.    The   Respondent
    considered the medical report submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant
    which was noted and accepted that it  would  make  travel  to  Pakistan
    difficult but not impossible with assistance.  Further, medication  and
    treatment for the Appellant's conditions were available in Pakistan.

 4. Judge Khan dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  19
    December 2016 on all grounds.  The Appellant did not attend the hearing
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  nor  did  she  put  in  any  written
    evidence, which was said to be due to her medical  condition,  although
    the sponsor, [MM], her son, did attend and gave evidence.   Judge  Khan
    did not find the sponsor to have given credible or consistent evidence,
    giving examples of contradictory and inconsistent evidence, he gave the
    view that the sponsor's oral evidence was made up as he went along  and
    that his oral  evidence  was  vague  and  evasive,  failing  to  answer
    questions asked of him.

 5. Judge Khan considered a medical report  from  Dr  M  Mathukia  dated  5
    November 2016 but  which  was  not  signed  and  contained  information
    predominantly provided by the sponsor.  There was no suggestion in  the
    medical report that the Appellant was unfit to give evidence or  unable
    to provide a statement.  The Appellant did not rely on Article 3 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights despite the claim to  be  suffering
    from a life-threatening condition, namely a brain tumour,  but  it  was
    found that there was insufficient evidence to meet the  high  threshold
    under Article 3.

 6. In relation to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    medical treatment was available  in  Pakistan  and  the  Appellant  had
    family there who would be able to assist with her needs and care.   The
    Appellant  was  financially  self-sufficient  and  the  sponsor   could
    continue to provide support from the United Kingdom if needed.  Overall
    it was found that the Appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would
    not be a disproportionate interference with her right  to  respect  for
    private and family life in the United Kingdom.



The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on four grounds, first, that there were a  number
    of factual errors and incorrect references within the decision, such as
    to the wrong country of origin, wrong duration of residence, references
    to  Immigration  Rules  relevant  to  minors,  multiple  references  to
    Appellants in the plural and oral  evidence  being  given  by  multiple
    Appellants.  Secondly, the decision contains an  inaccurate  record  of
    the documentary evidence provided by the Appellant and shows a  failure
    to properly consider all relevant evidence, in particular, four medical
    reports were submitted but only one referred to and relied upon in  the
    decision.  Thirdly, the First-tier Tribunal erred in its assessment  of
    the medical evidence that was submitted, referring only to some of  the
    conditions suffered by the Appellant and a failure to take into account
    in that her medical condition was the reason for non-attendance at  the
    hearing.  Fourthly, that the First-tier Tribunal should have considered
    whether the Appellant satisfied the requirements for leave to remain as
    an adult dependent relative.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Grant-Hutchinson  on  3  July
    2017 on all grounds.

 9. The appeal first came before the Upper Tribunal on 12 October 2017,  at
    which point I raised concerns about whether the Appellant had  capacity
    for the present appeal in light of the medical evidence in  the  bundle
    and because  there  was  no  evidence  that  she  had  had  any  direct
    involvement in the proceedings, or even the  original  application  for
    leave to remain.  She had not signed any of the paperwork  and  Counsel
    had not taken any instructions directly from her, only via the sponsor.
     The hearing was adjourned for  the  opportunity  for  evidence  to  be
    provided on capacity and to  ensure  that  legal  representatives  were
    properly instructed, with use of a  Litigation  Friend  if  needed.   A
    doctor's report subsequently received indicated a lack of  capacity  of
    the appellant to participate  in  proceedings  at  all  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal appointed the sponsor as her Litigation Friend.

10. At the resumed hearing, Counsel for the Appellant relied  primarily  on
    the second and third grounds of appeal, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to take into account all of  the  medical  evidence  before  it,
    referring only to some of the medical conditions and  one  out  of  the
    four reports.  Those  reports  showed  serious  and  long-term  medical
    conditions as well as conclusions that the Appellant  was  not  fit  to
    travel and could not safely relocate to  Pakistan.   Counsel  confirmed
    that the appeal was brought on Article  8  grounds  although  submitted
    that Article 3 had been raised and the facts  were  on  the  border  of
    meeting the threshold for that as  well.   It  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements for leave  to  remain  as  an
    adult dependent relative under the Immigration Rules  because  she  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor.

11. The Home Office  Presenting  Officer  relied  on  the  rule  24  notice
    submitted, although accepted that there was an  error  of  law  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal with regards to failure  to  consider  all  of  the
    medical evidence before it.  It was accepted that the  decision  should
    be set aside for that reason and remade.

12. No further submissions for the remaking of the decision  were  made  on
    behalf of the Appellant, who had already referred in  oral  submissions
    to the detail of the four different medical reports available  as  well
    as to the recent report on capacity submitted to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On behalf of the Respondent, it was submitted that even though this  is
    not an entry  clearance  case,  it  would  be  right  to  consider  the
    Appellant's circumstances within the framework of provisions for  entry
    clearance an adult dependent relative and in particular,  consider  the
    availability of care for the Appellant  in  Pakistan  when  considering
    whether removal would be a disproportionate interference with the right
    to respect for private and family life of the Appellant if  removed  to
    Pakistan.



Findings and reasons

 1. As has been accepted by the Respondent, I find a material error of  law
    in the decision of Judge Khan in that he failed to  take  into  account
    the full extent of the medical evidence before him in relation  to  the
    Appellant when considering her appeal on Article 8 grounds.  There were
    four different reports before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  detail  of
    which is set out below, only the last of which was referenced at all by
    Judge Khan and even then, the reference to it could only  be  described
    as a very selective quotation of the most positive aspect only.  It  is
    therefore necessary  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and remake the decision on appeal.

 2. For completeness, I also address the first ground of appeal in relation
    to factual errors in the decision of Judge Khan.  As  detailed  in  the
    grounds of appeal, these are numerous within the decision, relating  to
    the wrong country of origin, wrong number of  Appellants,  whether  the
    Appellant gave oral evidence and referred to  incorrect  provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules  only  applicable  to  minors  as  relevant  law.
    Although individually none of these errors disclose a material error of
    law (in particular as they are largely contained in the early  part  of
    the decision rather than the findings where no reliance  is  placed  on
    any of the inaccurate information), they do, individually  as  well  as
    cumulatively, show a  distinct  lack  of  care  and  attention  in  the
    decision which falls below the standard which is to be expected.

13. I go on to remake the appeal as follows.  Although  the  Appellant  has
    referred to Article 3 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights,  it
    was not submitted on her  behalf  that  the  very  high  threshold  for
    medical cases had been met in this case.   Although  Counsel  suggested
    the facts of this case may be on the border of doing so,  on  analysis,
    the medical evidence does not establish that the Appellant has  a  life
    threatening condition nor that she would meet the very  high  threshold
    set out in N v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  UKHL
    31 or even that set out by  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in
    Paposhvili v Belgium, judgment of 13 December 2016 as considered by the
    Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 64.  In these circumstances,  I  remake  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds only.

Applicable law

14. It is accepted in the present case that the Appellant cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave  to  remain,
    on private or family life grounds, nor as an adult  dependent  relative
    under Appendix FM, not least because  she  is  already  in  the  United
    Kingdom having entered as a visitor in 2014  (so  could  not  meet  the
    requirement  of  EC-DR.1.1(a)  or  (b)  of  Appendix  FM)  and  because
    financial information has not been submitted to meet  the  requirements
    of EC-DR.3.1 or 3.2.  However,  some  of  the  requirements  for  entry
    clearance or leave to remain as an adult dependent relative  provide  a
    useful framework to contribute to the assessment of Article  8  grounds
    in the present appeal, these are:

         E-ECDR.2.4    The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or  disability  require  long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.

         E-ECDR.2.5    The applicant or, if the applicant their partner  the
         sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be
         unable, even  with  the  practical  and  financial  help  with  the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country  where
         they are living, because -

             (a)  it is not available  and  there  is  no  person  in  that
             country who can reasonably provide it; or

             (b)  it is not affordable.

15. The Court of Appeal considered a challenge to the new  rules  on  adult
    dependent relatives in R (BritCits) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 368,  in  which  the  Master  of  the  Rolls
    emphasise the following at paragraph 59:

         "... The focus is on whether the care required by the ADR applicant
         can be 'reasonably' provided and to 'the required level'  in  their
         home country. As Mr Sheldon [counsel for the  Secretary  of  State]
         confirmed in his oral submissions, the provision  of  care  in  the
         home country must be reasonable both from the  perspective  of  the
         provider and the perspective of the applicant, and the standard of
         such care must be what is required for that  particular  applicant.
         It is possible that insufficient attention has  been  paid  in  the
         past to these considerations, which focus  on  what  care  is  both
         necessary and reasonable for the applicant to receive in their home
         country.  Those   considerations   include   issues   as   to   the
         accessibility and geographical location of the  provision  of  care
         and the standard of care. They are capable of embracing  emotional
         and psychological requirements verified by expert medical evidence.
         What is reasonable is, of course, is to be objectively assessed."


16. In respect of Article 8, the burden of proof of demonstration that  the
    Appellant's removal would breach this country's obligations  under  the
    Convention rests upon the Appellant and the standard of  proof  is  the
    balance of probabilities.

17. When considering an individual's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
    family life in accordance with Article 8, then the  usual  step-by-step
    approach set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, applies as follows:

          i) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?


         ii) If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


        iii) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


         iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?


          v) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
             public ends sought to be achieved?


18. When considering the public interest  as  part  of  the  assessment  of
    proportionality  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  of  the   European
    Convention on Human Rights, I  am  required  by  section  117A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  to  have  regard  in  all
    cases to the considerations listed in section 117B  of  the  same  act.
    Section 117B provides as follows:

          1) The maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in  the
             public interest.


          2) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -


               a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


               b) are better able to integrate into society.


          3) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -


               a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


               b) are better able to integrate into society.


          4) Little weight should be given to -


               a) a private life, or


               b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


          5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.


The sponsor's evidence

 3. There is no direct evidence from the Appellant  in  these  proceedings,
    but I am satisfied that the reason for that is that she does  not  have
    sufficient capacity or understanding to enable a written  statement  to
    be taken from her or for her to attend to  give  oral  evidence.   This
    conclusion is supported by the assessment of Dr J M R Cockbain dated 21
    November 2017  which  concluded  that  the  Appellant  suffers  from  a
    permanent impairment of brain function resulting  in  severe  cognitive
    impairment (she scored zero on the GP Cognitive Functioning  Assessment
    tool) and that she had no understanding  or  retention  of  information
    required to make decisions.

 4. The sponsor's oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal is  set  out
    in the decision of Judge Khan in paragraphs 18 to 23 and refers to  the
    Appellant's pension and income from a benevolent fund, that there  were
    two incidents in Pakistan in which carers stole from the Appellant, the
    second of which also involved the Appellant being tied to her  bed  for
    two days and ultimately being assisted by a  neighbour.   In  terms  of
    possible family or support in Pakistan, the Appellant had four sisters,
    one is deceased, one is married with two daughters and  the  other  two
    are being cared for by former  work  colleagues;  none  of  whom  could
    support the Appellant on return.  The sponsor's evidence was  that  the
    Appellant is vulnerable and in need of personal  care  but  there  were
    issues with that which had been arranged in the past  meaning  that  it
    could not be relied upon for the future even though the  finances  were
    available for it.

 5. Judge Khan made adverse credibility findings against the sponsor,  some
    of which have been challenged in the course  of  this  further  appeal.
    Specifically, that there  was  no  inconsistency  between  the  written
    statement and oral evidence as to incidents with carers in Pakistan.  I
    did not hear further evidence from the sponsor and there  has  been  no
    specific appeal on these points, nor any response to the findings  made
    that  his  evidence  was  vague  and  evasive  nor  as  to  the   other
    inconsistencies noted.  Ultimately the findings  in  this  appeal  turn
    predominantly on the medical evidence and family relationship,  neither
    of which have been specifically challenged by the Respondent.

The medical evidence

 6. The first medical report submitted by the Appellant was  from  Dr  N  A
    Ahmad, Consultant Physician,  dated  18  July  2015.   It  details  the
    Appellant's problems as poor mobility with a history of leg  pains  and
    an inability to weight bear such that she  has  become  bed  and  chair
    bound; breathlessness on exertion; dementia and  urinary  incontinence.
    Her  current  medication  and  a  plan  for  future  investigation  and
    treatment was set out and advice given that the Appellant was  not  fit
    to travel until has several medical problems are  assessed  and  sorted
    out.

 7. The second medical report, also from Dr Ahmad,  dated  2  August  2015,
    refers to the same health problems as before as well as dementia and an
    MRI scan showing small vessel ischaemia and cerebral atrophy  with  the
    further possibility of trigeminal neuroma or meningioma, a spinal wedge
    fracture and new prescription for antidepressants.

 8. The third medical report, also from Dr  Ahmad,  dated  25  August  2015
    refers to previous consultations, limited mobility in that she needs  a
    person to transfer and  is  not  able  to  walk,  diabetic  neuropathy,
    worsening dementia, a new diagnosis of diabetes for  which  control  is
    poor and incontinence.  The conclusion is that the Appellant  will  not
    be fit to travel and live alone in the foreseeable future and needs 24-
    hour supervision and care from her family.  There remained a number  of
    undiagnosed issues requiring follow-up once she was physically better.

 9. Finally, there is a medical report from Dr Mathukia  dated  5  November
    2016 following an assessment two days prior to that.  In refers to  the
    Appellant having multiple complex medical problems which  had  worsened
    significantly in the previous 12 months, including  incontinence,  type
    II diabetes, hypertension, dementia,  depression,  osteoporosis  and  a
    spinal which fracture.  The report continues  that  the  Appellant  has
    extremely poor mobility, spending time largely in bed and is unable  to
    walk without some support, using a frame  and  being  aided  by  family
    member  when  attempting  to  stand.   The   Appellant's   memory   has
    deteriorated in the last year, particularly for short-term events,  she
    gets confused, has visual hallucinations and only  recognises  her  son
    and daughter-in-law.  The Appellant was found to get very distressed in
    the presence of new people and lacks awareness of time.  The  Appellant
    has complications  of  diabetes  including  diabetic  neuropathy  which
    contributes to her poor mobility, leaving her at risk of falls  and  is
    not fit to travel.  At the time  of  assessment  the  Appellant's  main
    carers were her son and daughter-in-law who  she  lives  with  together
    with her two grandchildren but the family when the process of finding a
    full-time carer as the Appellants daughter-in-law was finding  it  hard
    to cope with the Appellant's needs as well as those  of  her  two  very
    young children on her own.

10. The following summary was given by Dr Mathukia:

         "In summary, this is a 69  year  old  lady  with  severe  dementia,
         depression and multiple significant physical  co-morbidities.   She
         has very poor mobility due to her physical conditions.  Her  health
         has deteriorated significantly in the last 12 months and is  likely
         to decline over time.


         She is unable to  complete  any  activities  of  daily  living  for
         herself.  She needs full-time carer support, and her  physical  and
         mental health is likely to deteriorate  further  if  she  does  not
         receive this.


         Her son has informed me that she has no other  family  in  Pakistan
         and she's not going to get the support she  needs  in  Pakistan  as
         there is no setup of such  facilities  in  the  healthcare  system.
         This presents a significant risk to the well-being of this patient.


         I am of the opinion, she is not fit to travel and it would  not  be
         medically safe for  her  to  relocate  to  Pakistan,  based  on  my
         assessment and information that has been presented to  me  at  this
         time."


11. In addition, although not before the First-tier Tribunal,  there  is  a
    report from Dr Cockbain dated 17 November  20122  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's capacity which also provides useful up-to-date  information
    as to her current mental state and almost complete  lack  of  cognitive
    ability.

Findings and reasons

12. The Appellant is currently living in the United Kingdom with  her  son,
    daughter-in-law and two grandchildren.  The medical  evidence  is  that
    she is  emotionally  and  physically  dependent  upon  her  family  and
    although there is some evidence of her being in receipt  of  a  pension
    and income from a benevolent fund in Pakistan, it seems likely that she
    is also financially supported in the United Kingdom by her family.   In
    these circumstances the Appellant has established family life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8 in the United Kingdom.  There is nothing  in  the
    previous adverse credibility findings in relation to the  sponsor  that
    detract from that.  As to private life, although the Appellant has been
    in the United Kingdom since 2014 and had previously visited a number of
    times since 2011, her claim is that she is not only housebound but also
    mainly  bedbound  and  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  she   has
    established any significant private life in the United  Kingdom  beyond
    involvement with her immediate family in the years that  she  has  been
    here.

13. It is well established that if a person fails to meet the threshold for
    Article 3 on medical grounds, that is not necessarily  fatal  to  their
    Article 8 claim, however, there must be something more than the medical
    grounds to engage Article 8.  In this case, I have  found  that  family
    life has been established between the Appellant and  her  son  and  his
    family due to the dependence upon them which  goes  beyond  that  which
    would be normally expected between adult relations,  but  there  is  no
    established private life beyond the medical treatment being received in
    the  United  Kingdom,  which  can  be  considered  together  with   the
    established family life.  The Appellant's removal to Pakistan would  be
    an interference with her right to respect for private and  family  life
    established in the United Kingdom.  The removal  would  however  be  in
    accordance with the law  as  the  Appellant  has  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant of  leave  to  remain
    and would be pursuant to the legitimate aim of the economic  well-being
    of the United Kingdom through the maintenance of immigration control.

14. The issue in this appeal is therefore whether the  Appellant's  removal
    would be proportionate to the  pursuit  of  that  legitimate  aim.   As
    above, I am obliged to take into account the factors set out in section
    117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002   when
    undertaking the balancing exercise, to the effect that the  maintenance
    of immigration control is in the public interest; that is also  in  the
    public interest for a person to speak English; that is  in  the  public
    interest for a person to be  self-sufficient  and  that  little  weight
    should be given to private and family life established at a time that a
    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

15. In the present case, there is nothing to suggest that the Appellant  is
    able to speak English, the only reference to language ability is in the
    medical evidence that an assessment was unable to be carried out  on  a
    particular occasion due to the language  barrier.   There  is  also  no
    specific evidence that the Appellant  is  financially  independent  and
    self-sufficient, although there is some  reference  to  a  pension  and
    income from a benevolent fund in Pakistan and it is reasonable to infer
    that she is being financially supported as well in the  United  Kingdom
    by family members.  There is at least some evidence of her  paying  for
    her own NHS treatment in the United Kingdom.

16. Finally, in terms of the factors in section 117B, the Appellant entered
    the United Kingdom last in 2014 pursuant to a multi-entry family  visit
    visa which expired in 2017 and in any event, this was for  the  purpose
    of a visit for a limited period or periods.  The Appellant's  continued
    presence in the United Kingdom has become unlawful as she has not  been
    granted any further periods of leave to remain here.   As  such  little
    weight is to be attached to private and family life established here.

17. It is also relevant to the weight to be attached to the public interest
    that the Appellant does not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules for a grant of either entry clearance or leave to  remain  as  an
    adult dependent relative, not least because of her entry to the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor and  the  lack  of  evidence  that  the  financial
    requirements  are  met.   Further,  although   the   medical   evidence
    establishes that  she  requires  long-term  personal  care  to  perform
    everyday tasks such that she  could  satisfy  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.4  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, I do not  find  on  the  evidence
    before me  that  the  Appellant  would  have  been  able  to  meet  the
    requirements in paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules.  The sponsor's own  evidence  is  that  care  is  affordable  in
    Pakistan and there is insufficient evidence to show that the  Applicant
    is unable to obtain the required level of care in Pakistan, because  it
    is not available or there is no person the country you  can  reasonably
    provide it.   Although  there  have  been  difficulties  with  care  is
    provided by a particular organisation in the past, there is lack of any
    evidence to show that there is  lack  of  adequate  treatment  or  care
    available in Pakistan, let alone that it would not  be  reasonable  for
    the Appellant or provider in all of the circumstances.

18. The only part of the evidence which could  support  a  suggestion  that
    care could not be reasonably provided in Pakistan (even  if  available)
    is the medical evidence that the Appellant's dementia  is  advanced  to
    the stage that she only recognises her son and daughter-in-law  and  is
    distressed by new people.  However, that is undermined by reference  in
    the  same  report  and  the  sponsor's  written  statement   that   the
    Appellant's family are seeking to employ  a  full-time  carer  for  her
    because her daughter-in-law is unable to cope with what is  needed  for
    the Appellant as well as looking after her  two  young  children.   The
    Appellant's  son  is  in  full-time  employment.   Given  the  apparent
    likelihood of care being provided  by  a  third  party  in  the  United
    Kingdom, I do not find that the Appellant has established that care  by
    a family member personally is required, necessary, nor  likely  in  any
    event  to  be  provided  and  the  situation  would  not  therefore  be
    significantly different in Pakistan  as  it  would  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom in terms of direct care.  The only difference  being  that  the
    Appellant would not be living within a family home  and  receiving  the
    additional support that that is likely to provide, but that does not of
    itself establish that care could not reasonably provided in Pakistan to
    the high threshold required in the Immigration Rules and  confirmed  in
    cases such as BritCits and Ribeli v Entry Clearance  Officer,  Pretoria
    [2018] EWCA Civ 611.

19. In the Appellant's favour  in  the  balancing  exercise,  I  take  into
    account her age, the strong family life she has  established  with  her
    son and his family which includes a very high degree of  dependence  on
    them and  her  multiple  complex  medical  conditions,  in  particular,
    advancing dementia, lack of capacity, lack of  cognitive  function  and
    lack of insight into her  own  condition,  as  well  as  the  confirmed
    medical opinion that she is unfit to  travel.   Although  for  multiple
    reasons already set out there is significant  public  interest  in  the
    Appellant's removal in this case, I find that the  combination  of  her
    circumstances and strong family life are such that her removal would be
    a disproportionate interference with her right to  respect  for  family
    life in particular and I therefore allow her appeal under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  it  as
follows.

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]         Date         4th May 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

