
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07081/2019
                                                               HU/07083/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 14 September 2020                |On: 29 October 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Miss Christen [J]
                              mr Ajibosola [J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms K Joshi, Joshi Advocates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  KR
    Moore, promulgated on 6 November 2019. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on 20 March 2020.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.

Background

 3. The respondents are siblings, currently aged 28 and 26. They arrived in
    the United Kingdom together on 11 July 2008, as minors, with  leave  to
    enter as family visitors. They applied for leave to remain outside  the
    Rules on 27 January 2014, that application being refused with no  right
    of appeal, on 10 February 2014. On 24 July 2018, the  respondents  each
    made a human rights application. It is the decisions  to  refuse  those
    applications, dated 2 April  2019,  which  are  the  subject  of  these
    appeals.

 4. The reasons for refusal were identical. In summary, Secretary of  State
    did not accept that the respondents had spent at least half their lives
    living continuously in the United  Kingdom  as  required  by  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(v) of the Rules. Nor was it accepted that there would be very
    significant obstacles to the respondents' integration in Nigeria, where
    they had resided until the ages of 15 and 14, respectively. There  were
    said to be no exceptional circumstances.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the judge heard evidence
    from the respondents as well as Doctor [O], who  knew  the  respondents
    from church. In addition, the judge took into consideration a  National
    Referral Mechanism (NRM) decision dated 26 June 2019, in which  it  was
    decided  that  the  first  respondent  was  subjected  to  an  act   of
    recruitment in respect of human trafficking, albeit a negative  grounds
    decision was ultimately arrived at. The First-tier  Tribunal  concluded
    that there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  the  respondents'
    reintegration in Nigeria. The judge further found that the respondents'
    circumstances were exceptional to the  extent  that  they  warranted  a
    grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal were as follows:

    "Failure to give adequate reasoning

    1. The Tribunal found that there are very significant obstacles to  the
       appellants returning to Nigeria citing the lack of family  home  and
       knowledge of the whereabouts of their father as the rationale (23)

    2. It is respectfully submitted that the two appellants are adults  who
       have a close bond and would be returned together. They have had  the
       benefit of a college education  received  here  in  the  UK.  It  is
       respectfully submitted that  on  return  they  could  utilise  their
       education and skills gained here in order to secure  employment  and
       establish a life in their home country where  they  have  lived  for
       more than half of their lives. On return the siblings could elect to
       continue with their close bond. It is submitted  that  there  is  no
       evidence in this case that the appellants would  face  obstacles  on
       return on that basis.

    3. In making that finding the Tribunal has erred in law."

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that "the judge may  have
    given  inadequate  reasons  for  finding  that  there  would  be   very
    significant obstacles to return. The matter must be explored further."

The hearing

 8. The hearing took place partially remotely, in that the  representatives
    attended via Skype. I heard brief submissions from  each.  Mr  Whitwell
    argued that the judge had focused on the United  Kingdom,  contrary  to
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813; that there was limited reasoning  and  that
    the judge's treatment of section 117B (5) was erroneous.  In  terms  of
    materiality, Mr Whitwell acknowledged that the grounds could only carry
    him so far given that there was a finding of exceptional  circumstances
    which went unaddressed in those grounds. In response, Ms  Joshi  argued
    that the judge looked at the circumstances  in  Nigeria,  accepted  the
    evidence before him and that there was no challenge  to  Article  8  in
    substance in the grounds. Mr Whitwell added that the siblings would  be
    removed together and therefore there would be no breach of their family
    life. He argued that the reasons given by the judge  were  insufficient
    to amount to exceptional circumstances.

 9. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision.

Decision on error of law

10. The Secretary of State defines the right to  private  and  family  life
    within the parameters of the Immigration  Rules,  in  this  case  under
    paragraph  276ADE.  There  is  no  express  exceptional   circumstances
    provision in the private life Rules, which instead  envisage  leave  to
    remain being granted outside the Rules on Article 8 grounds  where  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE  are  not  met  and  Article  8  would
    otherwise be breached. At [23], the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  stated
    that he was "satisfied that there would be very  significant  obstacles
    to the (respondents') reintegration  in  Nigeria  if  now  required  to
    leave." With this finding, he was entitled to simply allow  the  appeal
    on human rights grounds without consideration  of  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances.

11. Had the First-tier Tribunal judge allowed the  appeals  solely  on  the
    basis  that  the  respondents  met  the   requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(v), there may have  been  some  merit  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's grounds, however Judge Moore did not do so. It is apparent from
    the final (unnumbered) paragraph that the appeals were allowed  because
    the judge was "satisfied that there would be exceptional  circumstances
    which would warrant a grant of leave to remain if the Immigration Rules
    could not be satisfied." Nowhere is  it  said  that  the  appeals  were
    allowed as the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  (1)(v)  were  met.  In
    short, the circumstances considered by  the  judge  included  that  the
    respondents were brought to the United Kingdom as children, that  their
    mother continued to live in  the  United  Kingdom  and  their  father's
    whereabouts  were   unknown.   Furthermore,   the   judge   took   into
    consideration that the first respondent had been subjected to an act of
    recruitment in relation to being  pressurised  to  work  "exceptionally
    long hours" for a pastor and was vulnerable owing to have nowhere  else
    to live nor any real support from her mother.

12. In addition, the judge noted that the respondents were educated in  the
    United Kingdom and had spent their entire adult lives here.  The  judge
    further considered that the respondents had no home,  familial  support
    nor financial assistance available to them in Nigeria.

13. I should add  that  the  judge  paid  regard  to  the  public  interest
    considerations in section 117B of the 2002 Act. The grounds  of  appeal
    take no issue with the judge's assessment of exceptional  circumstances
    and consequently the Secretary of State's appeal must fail.


Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


Signed:
    Date: 26 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email



