
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/07856/2016
     Hu/07857/2016
     hu/07880/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7 February 2018                    |On 6 March 2018                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                emmanuel [n]
                                 nwando [n]
                                 obiesie [n]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Akinpelu, Spring Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellants in  this  case  are  citizens  of  Nigeria.   The  first
    appellant was born on 29 July 1963.  He applied for entry clearance  as
    a partner under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  That application
    was refused on the basis that it was not accepted that the relationship
    between the appellant and  his  sponsor,  Nneka  [N]  was  genuine  and
    subsisting.  It was further not accepted that  the  appellant  met  the
    financial requirements.   The  second  and  third  appellants  are  the
    children  of  the  appellant  and  sponsor  born  in  2001   and   1998
    respectively.  The decisions under appeal  were  made  on  18  February
    2016.

 2. The appellants appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated  on  21  June  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidson
    dismissed the appellants'  appeals  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8.

 3. The appellants appealed with permission on the grounds that:

      1) The  appellants  were  unaware  of  the  hearing  notice  and  were
         therefore unaware of the hearing on 12 June 2017  and  subsequently
         unaware of the Tribunal's determination until an email was received
         from the Tribunal on 25 September 2017 (following  the  appellants'
         enquiries to the Tribunal).

      2) The appellants had not had a fair hearing in the circumstances  and
         that a rehearing was required.

Error of Law Discussion

 4. The sponsor did not attend the hearing on 12 June 2017 at Hatton Cross,
    neither were the appellant represented.  The Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal notes, at [7] of the decision and reasons, that:

         "In the absence  of  the  Sponsor  or  any  representative  of  the
         Appellants at the hearing, no oral evidence was given  which  could
         be tested in cross-examination."

 5. The Tribunal file contained a number of emails between the appellant in
    Nigeria and the Tribunal.  This included an email on 21 September 2017,
    following an enquiry by the appellant as to when his  appeal  would  be
    listed (bearing in mind that this was after the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal), indicating that the IA30  Notice  of  Haring  had  been
    issued to all of the parties (the appellant at his address  in  Nigeria
    and his wife as well as to the respondent) on 15 March 2017.

 6. However, the Tribunal noted that the "appellant's wife's  copy  of  the
    IA30 was returned to the Tribunal on 18 April  2017  as  'undelivered'.
    Although there was no specific indication that the IA30 issued  to  the
    appellant  in  Nigeria  was   returned   as   undelivered,   subsequent
    correspondence notes that further the Tribunal's decision was  returned
    undelivered from the appellant in Nigeria.   It  is  unclear  what  the
    specific difficulty was and it is particularly  unfortunate  that  both
    the appellant and his sponsor appeared to  be  having  difficulty  with
    their post and I note that the sponsor remained  at  the  same  address
    throughout this period although she has now moved to a different London
    address.

 7. However, Ms Ahmad did  not  seek  to  defend  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision with any force, leaving it a matter for  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    She accepted that if the Upper Tribunal  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Tribunal's notices were properly served, the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal could not stand.  I am of the view that  there  is  sufficient
    doubt over service, including as indicated by the Tribunal in  its  own
    correspondence indicating that Notices to both the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor had been returned undelivered, such that the only fair  outcome
    is to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  remit  the
    appeal for a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Equally, even if I had not been satisfied that it was in the  interests
    of fairness that the decision of  Judge  Davidson  be  set  aside,  the
    judge's findings and reasons, at  [15]  of  the  decision  and  reasons
    amount to one paragraph and three and a half lines and simply  indicate
    that the appellants had not discharged their burden of proof and  again
    made reference to the lack of oral evidence.   However,  there  was  no
    engagement with any of the documents which had been submitted and  were
    in the respondent's bundle in connection with the application.

 9. If a Tribunal  does  not  accept  the  evidence  before  it,  including
    documentary evidence, it must say so in the decision  and  reasons  and
    the Tribunal must give reasons for those findings.   A  bare  statement
    that a document was not accepted, or as is the  case  in  this  appeal,
    that there was no appearance by witnesses, without any engagement  with
    the other evidence, is insufficient.  The appellant is entitled to know
    the basis of the facts on which the  conclusion  has  been  reached  to
    dismiss their appeal.   The  requirement  to  give  reasons  is  not  a
    requirement for a detailed answer to every argument, and  a  Tribunal's
    reasons need not be extensive if a decision makes sense (Shehzad [2013]
    UKUT 35 (IAC)).   However  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal provided  adequate  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appellants'
    appeal and for preferring the  respondent's  refusal  letter  over  the
    appellants' evidence, if that was the case  (see also MK (duty to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC)).

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.  No findings are to stand,  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the
    2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2, the nature and extent of  judicial
    fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is
    appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case  are
    not to include Judge Davidson.

Although one of the appellants is a minor no details are disclosed and I  do
not make an anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  2 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  2 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
