
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07096/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 August 2019                    |On 16 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE METZER


                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Karim, Counsel instructed by Eldons Berkeley,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  on  6  August  1980.   He
    arrived in the UK with leave as a visitor on 17 July 2002  expiring  on
    17 January 2003.  He overstayed and on 10 May 2011 he applied for leave
    outside the Immigration Rules.  He was granted discretionary leave  for
    3 years and applied in time for further leave which was granted.  On  7
    August 2017, he applied in time for indefinite leave to remain.

 2.  In  a  Decision  dated  5  March  2018,  the  Respondent  refused  the
    Appellant's  application  by  reference  to  paragraph  322(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules because the application was for leave for  a  purpose
    not covered by the Rules.  The Respondent considered the application by
    reference to Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    ("ECHR").  The  Appellant  did  not  meet  any  of  the  time  critical
    requirements of Paragraph 276ADE (1) of the Immigration Rules  and  the
    Respondent considered there were no very significant obstacles  to  his
    integration on return to Jamaica.  The Respondent also  considered  the
    application on the basis of the Appellant's claimed  relationship  with
    his minor child and concluded  that  he  did  not  have  sole  parental
    responsibility and had not shown he was taking an active  role  in  the
    child's upbringing.  The Respondent  did  not  accept  there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave  by  way  of
    reference to the Appellant's right  to  respect  for  his  private  and
    family life protected by Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. On 19 March 2018, the Appellant lodged notice of appeal  under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The
    grounds included a reference to the Appellant's relationship  with  his
    British citizen child from whose  mother  the  Appellant  separated  in
    2014.

    Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 4. By a decision promulgated on 1 November 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Swaniker, ("The FtJ") following a hearing on 16 October 2018, dismissed
    the appeal because she found that the Appellant had failed  to  produce
    sufficient appropriate evidence to show the nature of his  relationship
    and contact with his child and had also failed to show  he  would  face
    very significant obstacles to integration upon return to Jamaica.

 5. By an email of 6 January 2019, the Appellant claimed  that  neither  he
    nor his solicitor had received the  FtJ's  Decision.   A  copy  of  the
    Decision was sent to the Appellant and his then solicitors who had  not
    attended the  hearing  before  the  FtJ.   On  22  February  2019,  the
    Appellant through his present  solicitors  lodged  an  application  for
    permission to appeal.

 6. By a Decision  of  22  March  2019  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Grant-Hutchison, refused permission to appeal.

 7. The application for permission was renewed to the Upper Tribunal on the
    same grounds drafted by Counsel as summarised below and by  a  Decision
    of 10 May 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted  permission  on  all
    grounds.

 8. On 17 May 2019, the Upper Tribunal issued notice that the matter was to
    be heard on 6 June 2019.  By a letter dated 5 June 2019 and received by
    the Upper Tribunal on the same day, the Appellant's  solicitors  sought
    permission  to  add  additional  grounds  for  appeal  which   referred
    exclusively to the Respondent's policy  for  the  grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain to those who were granted discretionary leave before  9
    July 2012 and had accrued 6 years' continuous leave.  On 6  June  2019,
    the Appellant attended  a  hearing  as  did  a  representative  of  the
    Respondent.  On 12 June  2019,  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Shaerf,
    following submissions,  refused  permission  to  admit  the  additional
    grounds of appeal lodged on 5 June 2019.

 9. The Appellant's grounds of complaint about the FtJ's  Decision  as  set
    out in the original grounds upon which permission was  granted  can  be
    simply stated.  It is asserted that the FtJ failed to give any, or  any
    adequate, reasons for rejecting the testimony of  the  child's  mother,
    "RS" from whom the Appellant separated in 2014; erred in rejecting  the
    letters from the Appellant and RS on the grounds that they were  'self-
    serving'; and/or erred in her approach to the question of  whether  the
    Appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his
    British citizen child "R".

The FtJ's Decision

10. The FtJ summarised the basis of the Appellant's claim and the  evidence
    she heard from the Appellant and RS [9] and [10].  She made findings of
    credibility and fact  between  [13]  and  [18]  and  her  findings  and
    conclusions are to be found at [19] and [28].

11. At [13], the FtJ started her findings by stating  that  it  was  common
    ground that the Appellant has a British citizen child  in  the  UK  who
    lives with his mother and that the Appellant and  the  child's  mother,
    RS, are no longer in a relationship and that the child lives  with  his
    mother in Birmingham whilst the Appellant is resident in  London.   She
    found there to be a paucity of reliable evidence going  to  the  extent
    and quality of the Appellant's relationship with his son.

12. At [14], the FtJ noted that the child's mother attended the hearing and
    gave evidence to the effect that the Appellant  has  contact  with  the
    child and is involved in the child's  life  but  stated  that  she  was
    "struck by the failure  to  provide  reliable  supporting  evidence  to
    demonstrate such involvement".

13. The FtJ noted at [15] that the Appellant had said in his oral  evidence
    that he only received one 'request for evidence' letter from  the  Home
    Office. He had responded with his letter of 14  January  2018  and  his
    former partner's letter of 5  February  2018  but  found  that  neither
    letter was supported by any  further  documents.  She  noted  that  the
    Appellant's letter referred to the Respondent's  letter  of  6  January
    2018 whilst his former partner's letter referred  to  the  Respondent's
    letter dated 23 January 2018 and found  that  the  different  dates  in
    their letters pointed to the Appellant  having  received  two  separate
    request letters from the Respondent and "his not being  candid  in  his
    evidence in this regard", which pointed "to his not  being  an  overall
    witness of truth".

14. At [16], the FtJ set out examples of readily available  evidence  of  a
    parent with a genuine subsisting relationship with  his  child  and  an
    active involvement in their life and  therefore  did  not  accept  RS's
    account  in  her  oral  evidence  of  the  extent  of  the  Appellant's
    involvement in their child's life "to ring true" in the absence of what
    was described as the kinds of supporting evidence she considered such a
    relationship with the child would readily throw up. Nor did she  accept
    the Appellant's evidence in this regard to be reliable.

15. At [17], she found there to be an inconsistency in RS's evidence by her
    indication in her letter  of  5  February  2018  that  the  Appellant's
    contact with the child had been sporadic over the years  but  increased
    noticeably in December 2017, being different from her oral evidence  in
    which she said they had always tried to maintain contact but  this  had
    been more frequent since the latter part of 2017.  She did  not  accept
    that Ms Sergeant was "an overall credible  witness"  and  rejected  the
    explanation that the Appellant was not registered at the child's school
    because he lived far away and the name registered at the school was for
    an emergency contact. She regarded that omission as "telling".  It  was
    also regarded as significant that the Appellant did not know  the  name
    of his son's main school teacher and she stated that "a truly concerned
    and involved parent would know, even if  they  lived  a  distance  from
    their child's school".  She therefore found that the  Appellant  lacked
    any true interest and involvement in his son's life.

16. At [18], whilst the FtJ accepted the Appellant did presently have  some
    degree of contact with his child, she found that it  was  very  limited
    and sporadic and that he only sought to establish contact with his  son
    and son's mother once he received the Respondent's refusal.  She  found
    that his contact with the child and evidence of this was engineered  to
    support the claim about the Appellant's involvement in his child's life
    and therefore was created to assist the Appellant  in  his  efforts  to
    regularise his immigration status and not on account of any genuine and
    subsisting relationship between the Appellant and his child and/or  any
    real desire for the Appellant to be involved in his life.  She attached
    no weight to the letters of 14 January 2018 and 5  February  2018  from
    the Appellant and RS, both of which she found to be 'self-serving'  and
    without credible supporting evidence such as to reasonably be  expected
    of a parent with a genuine interest  and  involvement  in  his  child's
    life.

17. Accordingly, at [19] the FtJ held that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    establish he met the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  he  did
    not have sole responsibility  for  his  child  and  failed  to  provide
    reliable evidence to show he is taking and intends to  continue  taking
    an active role in his son's upbringing and therefore did not  meet  the
    requirements for leave to remain in the UK under the parent Rule.   She
    reiterated those findings at [22] and [23] and at  [24]  to  [26]  held
    further that the Appellant had provided no credible evidence  in  which
    to succeed on the basis of his private life under Article 8 of the ECHR
    outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

18. At the hearing before us, Mr Karim  accepted  he  was  limited  to  the
    original grounds.  He submitted that the FtJ did not set out adequately
    the reasons for finding the Appellant, and in particular RS, not to  be
    credible. Mr Karim referred to the potential significance (although  he
    did not rely upon it as determinative of the issue) that she had chosen
    to attend the hearing in support of the Appellant without a  continuing
    relationship with him since 2014 and without having any obvious  motive
    to support him.  He submitted that it was wrong to find that the letter
    from Ms Sergeant could properly be described as 'self-serving'  on  the
    basis that she had no interest herself in relation to  the  Appellant's
    appeal and he  submitted  that  the  FtJ  was  wrong  to  conflate  the
    reference to the paucity  of  evidence  with  the  adverse  credibility
    findings against the Appellant and  his  former  partner.   Ms  Everett
    accepted in the course of the hearing  that  there  was  some  blurring
    between findings of paucity of evidence in support of  the  Appellant's
    evidence of involvement in his child's  life  but  submitted  that  the
    findings were reasonable ones upon the evidence and should be upheld.

Our Findings

19. Having considered the Decision and the submissions with care,  we  find
    that the FtJ made material errors of law.  We are  satisfied  that  the
    FtJ failed to give adequate reasons for finding  that  the  Appellant's
    former partner was not credible in  her  evidence  in  support  of  the
    Appellant. We do not consider that the FtJ was entitled  to  find  that
    RS's evidence about the extent of the Appellant's relationship with his
    child "did not ring true" on the evidence which was available, nor  was
    she entitled to  conclude  that  the  absence  of  possible  additional
    supporting evidence adversely affected  the  credibility  of  both  the
    Appellant and RS. Even if she was entitled to make  such  findings,  we
    consider that the explanation for making adverse  credibility  findings
    against the Appellant was not adequately reasoned and in respect of RS,
    having  acknowledged  that  the  relationship  had  been  over  for   a
    considerable period, the FtJ failed adequately or at all to set out why
    nonetheless, she should not be treated as a witness of  truth  with  no
    axe to grind. We also find that the FtJ erred further in dismissing the
    significance of not simply the Appellant's  former  partner  supporting
    him but also in wrongly finding that there was a material inconsistency
    in relation to the evidence of the extent of  the  Appellant's  contact
    with his son and that there was a significant inconsistency between the
    letter of 5 February 2018 and her oral  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    extent of contact. We find there were no such material inconsistencies.
    Further, we find that there was a material error  in  the  FtJ  finding
    that the same letter of 5 February 2018 was  'self-serving'  by  RS  in
    support of the Appellant's appeal. We do not understand, in the absence
    of any further explanation,  why  that  letter  could  properly  be  so
    described given the absence of any continuing relationship between  the
    Appellant and RS.  We further find that the FtJ erred in  her  approach
    and findings as to whether the Appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his son  for  the  reasons  set  out  above,
    primarily because there was no proper or adequately  explained  reasons
    for rejecting the Appellant's and Rs's evidence of the extent of such a
    relationship between the Appellant and R.

20. It follows, therefore, that we conclude  that  the  FtJ  made  material
    errors in her assessment of the evidence of the Appellant,  his  former
    partner and the documentary evidence  in  support  of  the  Appellant's
    claim to a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his son.

21. The appropriate course is therefore for the matter to  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard before a judge  other  than  First-
    tier Tribunal Swaniker with no findings of fact preserved.

22. We have decided to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  having
    regard to paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice  Statement  of  the  Senior
    President of Tribunals.  There needs to be a full factual assessment of
    the basis of the Appellant's claim.  Despite the fact that there may be
    elements of the FtJ's decision which identify possible reasons to doubt
    the credibility of the Appellant's claim, those matters will require  a
    fresh appraisal before another judge.

Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo  before  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Swaniker with no findings of  fact
    preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Given that this appeal involves a minor, unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family, or any  other  person  anonymised  in  this  decision.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Metzer                                  12/09/19






