
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07753/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1st March 2019                    |On 26 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               Al-Zobayer [I]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant

                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms F Allen (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is a resumed hearing following  my  decision  promulgated  on  5th
    October 2018 that there was a material error in law in the decision  of
    First Tier Tribunal (Judge I. F. Taylor) (FtT) which  I  set  aside.  I
    refer to my decision for the background to this matter.

Facts
2.   The Claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh and entered  the  UK  in  2007.
    He applied for and was granted leave as a dependent on his mother  from
    May 2007 - 2010.  Once he was an  adult  he  made  an  application  for
    further leave in 2010 which was rejected as invalid application because
    he paid the incorrect fee.  Then he made a second application  in  2010
    which was initially rejected as invalid by  the  SSHD  because  it  was
    considered that he used the wrong form. It has since been admitted that
    the form used by the claimant was correct and the application was valid
    and the  rejection  of  that  application  was  incorrect.   Subsequent
    periods of leave were granted to the claimant as  a  dependent  on  his
    mother until 14.6.2018. The Claimant applied for  ILR  on  the  grounds
    that he had lived lawfully in the UK for 10 years;  a  claim  that  was
    rejected on 4th July 2017 because there was a gap  of   137  days.  The
    Claimant moved to the UK at the age of 15  years  and  suffers  from  a
    hereditary medical condition Thalassaemia major for which he requires a
    blood transfusion monthly.   Since  coming  to  the  UK  and  receiving
    treatment his health has improved.  He was advised by doctors in the UK
    not to leave the UK for more than 4 weeks  and  not  to  receive  blood
    transfusions outside the UK.

3.   I now consider the appeal under Article 8.  It  is  accepted  that  the
    Claimant cannot meet the long residence rules because  of  the  gap  in
    continuous residence.  I consider paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) and  Article
    8 outside of the Rules. I find that there are compelling  circumstances
    which justify me in consideration of Article 8 outside  of  the  Rules.
    Those circumstances are the dependence on his  mother,  the  length  of
    residence in the UK and the appellant's health issues.

4.   I have regard to the case of Patel & ors v SSHD [2013]  UKSC  in  which
    the SC concluded that any near miss under the immigration  rules  ought
    not be a matter for consideration under Article  8.  However,  in  this
    instance the issue of long residence was not the only basis for arguing
    that Article 8 was engaged given the Claimant's family and private life
    (by reason of his length of residence in the UK and the impact  of  his
    illness) in the UK.

Submissions
5.   At the hearing before me Ms Allen submitted that  taking  into  account
    all  the  factors  the  decision  to  remove  the  Claimant   was   not
    proportionate having regard to the length of lawful residence, the  gap
    in leave, the  procedural  history  as  to  invalid  applications,  the
    Claimant's age at the time of making the applications,  his  dependence
    on his mother, his serious  medical  illness  and  the  poor  treatment
    available in Bangladesh.  There was no public interest in maintaining a
    policy that was since altered by the SSHD to  allow  for  a  period  in
    which to rectify mistakes capable of invalidating an application.

6.   Mr Walker representing the SSHD relied on  a  skeleton  argument  which
    focused on the calculation of  the  period  of  leave  and  the  policy
    guidance. No submissions were made under Article 8.  Mr Walker accepted
    that the length of gap ought to have been recalculated having regard to
    the admitted error by the SSHD.  Mr Jarvis had agreed to  this  at  the
    error of law hearing but appeared to  have  reverted  to  the  previous
    position in his skeleton argument.   The  SSHD  had  not  provided  any
    recalculation of the gap.  For  the  SSHD  it  is  submitted  that  the
    Claimant has a gap of 137 days in the period of lawful  residence.  For
    the Claimant it is submitted that the period is around 70 days.

Discussion and conclusion
7.   The errors made by the FTT are set out in  my  previous  decision.  The
    FTT allowed the appeal on human rights grounds having  found  that  the
    Claimant ought to have been granted ILR and  the  SSHD's  decision  was
    unlawful. In terms of any gap in continuous residence I find  that  the
    gap is 70 days taking into account that for the second application made
    the Claimant did use the correct form. In general terms  I  agree  with
    the SSHD as to the scope of the Article 8 claim were it to focus solely
    on the failure to meet the  Rules.   But  as  stated  above  there  are
    significant aspects of the Claimant's family and  private  life  to  be
    considered and this is not simply a near miss case.

8.   In addition, I am of the view  that  the  FTT  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and what  consideration  there
    was appeared to equate the requirements with having to attain the  high
    threshold for Article 3 medical cases. I am satisfied  that  there  has
    been no challenge raised as to the Claimant's medical condition and nor
    as to the evidence produced as  to  the  poor  treatment  available  in
    Bangladesh and reduced life expectancy for sufferers of Thalassaemia in
    Bangladesh [16-19].  No challenge has been raised  that  the  Claimant,
    although an adult remains financially dependent on his mother. The main
    issue raised by the SSHD was the gap in continuous  residence  and  the
    lawfulness of the decision.  The FTT concluded that Article 3  was  not
    met [37], but did not go  on  to  make  any  decision  with  regard  to
    paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi), rather the FTT focussed  on  the  facts  that
    would previously have led to a  decision  that  the  SSHD  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

9.   The evidence in my  view  shows  that  the  Claimant  would  face  very
    significant obstacles to his reintegration in Bangladesh because of his
    medical condition and the length of time he has lawfully lived  in  the
    UK and where he has reached a good and consistent level of  health  and
    wellbeing for a considerable period of time.  All of the evidence  must
    be considered in the round and I adopt the submission made by Ms  Allen
    set out above at [5]. Whilst I fully accept that he has family ties  in
    Bangladesh and has visited on a number of occasions over the years,  he
    nevertheless remains dependent on his mother for financial support  and
    receives medical treatment for his serious  condition  requiring  blood
    transfusions on a monthly basis. He has received this treatment in  the
    UK over the past 10 years and which I regard as an integral part of his
    private life.  He has established a  life  in  the  UK  and  spent  his
    formative years in the UK.  I accept that as found by the FTT it cannot
    be concluded that Article 3 is met as the Claimant is currently in good
    health, however the evidence shows that his health will deteriorate  in
    the event that he had to return to Bangladesh  and  which  his  doctors
    have  advised  against.  His  return  to  Bangladesh  would  herald   a
    likelihood of infections, hospitalisation and complications  and  where
    there is an uncertainty  as  to  the  availability  of  medication  for
    Thalassaemia.  As  such  these  factors  amount  to  very   significant
    obstacles to his reintegration in Bangladesh and that paragraph  276ADE
    is met.

10.  Alternatively, Article 8 outside of the Rules in engaged for  the  same
    reasons.  The Claimant has established a private/family life in the  UK
    based on all factors including his length of lawful residence and as  a
    dependent on his mother who has ILR.  His  formative  years  have  been
    established in the UK and he is now in his  mid  twenties  having  been
    educated in the UK.  In addition he  suffers  a  serious  and  enduring
    condition which requires ongoing treatment in the form of monthly blood
    transfusions.  By reason of those factors he has a private  and  family
    life in the UK.  The removal to Bangladesh would create an interference
    because he would be separated from his mother, the treatment  available
    is to a much lower standard and would place him at  risk  of  infection
    and hospitalisation and which would be a regression of his present good
    health.  The interference is unlawful as paragraph 276ADE is met.   The
    ultimate question is  proportionality  and  I  consider  factors  under
    section  117B.   The  appellant  has  the  required  level  of  English
    language.  He is financially dependent on his mother.  I  fully  accept
    that his medical treatment is arguably a reliance on public funds,  but
    he has lived in the UK lawfully.  Whilst his leave  was  precarious  to
    the extent that he was dependent on  his  mother's  applications  as  a
    student, given the length of residence he has  now  attained,  over  10
    years, I place little weight on that matter.  The public interest  lies
    in maintenance of the fair and  consistent  immigration  controls.   In
    this instance the exceptional factors are such  that  when  taking  all
    matters into account, the  interests  of  this  Claimant  outweigh  the
    public interest.  This is not a case of a near miss in solely in  terms
    of the failure to meet 10 year residence.

Re making
11.  I go on to remake the decision to allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds under the rules and outside of the rules.

Decision
12.  The appeal is allowed.

                               Signed                     Date 15.3. 2019


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


NO ANONYMITY ORDER


NO FEE AWARD
