
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07179/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5 February 2019              |On 18 March 2019                |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    m E T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Pipe, Counsel instructed by Visa Inn
                    Immigration Specialists


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national
of Turkmenistan, born on 10.1.82. She arrived in the United Kingdom in
September 2008 with a valid student visa, which was subsequently extended
to 9.5.12. Thereafter she overstayed and on 6.2.17 she made a human rights
claim, based on her conversion to Christianity and very significant
obstacles to integration in Turkmenistan. This application was refused in a
decision, dated 14.3.18.

2.    The Claimant appealed against this decision and her appeal came
before First tier Tribunal Judge Clarke for hearing on 10 October 2018. In
a decision and reasons promulgated on 8 November 2018, the Judge allowed
the appeal on the basis that the Secretary of State had failed to engage
with the claim and it was thus disproportionate for that reason.

3.    The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal on the following grounds:

    (i)    the Judge failed to give sufficient reasons for her decision;
    has entirely failed to outline the evidence provided by the Claimant to
    corroborate her assertions; assess her credibility or take account of
    the fact that the Claimant did not make an asylum claim and thus her
    protection claim has not been tested. Reliance was also placed on the
    decisions in MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC)
    and Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);

    (ii)   the Judge materially misdirected herself in law as the Appellant
    could not have held any reasonable expectation of being granted
    eventual settlement;

    (iii)  the Judge failed to consider section 117B of the NIAA 2002,
    either explicitly or in spirit and has thus failed to give any weight
    to the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.

4.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by First tier
Tribunal Judge Birrell in a decision dated 21 December 2018, on the basis
that there was arguably no assessment of the Appellant's claim that she
would face insurmountable obstacles on return to Turkmenistan in practising
her religion and that the Judge simply allowed the appeal on the basis that
the Respondent had failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting the claim.



Hearing

5.    Mr Pipe, on behalf of the Claimant, submitted a rule 24 response
attempting to argue that the judgment of the First tier Tribunal Judge
should be upheld. However, following my preliminary indication that the
decision contained material errors of law, for the reasons set out in the
grounds of appeal, particularly Grounds 1 and 3, Mr Pipe accepted that
there had been no engagement by the Judge with the substance of the claim
and that the decision appears to have been taken on the basis of Greenwood
(No. 2) [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC) an approach which had been found to be
erroneous in Charles [2018] UKUT 00089 (IAC).

6.    I proceeded to find that the decision of the First tier Tribunal
Judge contained material errors of law and that I would re-make the
decision. I put the appeal back until after lunch in order to provide Mr
Lindsay with time to prepare for the resumed hearing.

7.    At the resumed hearing of the appeal, Mr Lindsay handed up an extract
from the Respondent's new Private Life guidance dated January 2019.

8.    The Claimant was asked to adopt her statement, which was undated but
had been signed prior to the hearing in October 2018. In examination in
chief she said, when asked who is most hostile to her currently in
Turkmenistan, that it was her brother, her sister and the rest of the
relatives. When asked about her mother's position, the Claimant said that
she now depends on her son, the Claimant's brother, so she does not have
much right to do or to say anything.

9.    In cross-examination by Mr Lindsay the Claimant confirmed that she
attended a Church in Turkmenistan and that this was St Nicol's cathedral.
The Claimant confirmed that this was a big church and around 100 people or
50 people would attend. She confirmed that it was still in existence now
and that she had attended Church from the age of 16 until her last visit
back home in 2011. The Claimant confirmed that the Church is registered
with the government. The Claimant was asked to comment on the position of
the Home Office that she should not be believed because she had not claimed
asylum in the UK, to which she replied that she believed she had no right
of freedom of speech nor any right to express religious beliefs which is
why she had chosen to make a human rights claim, because she had no human
rights in Turkmenistan.

10.   Upon re-examination, the Claimant was asked whether she knew whether
her Church had re-registered in 2016, to which she replied that the
government had put so many restrictions even on visitor and control
registration book i.e. who has been baptized and had banned religious books
and expression and people are not allowed to celebrate Easter anymore. She
said that she did not think it would be possible if she were to return to
Turkmenistan that she could return to her old church and carry on
worshipping.

11.   In his submissions, Mr Lindsay submitted that section 8 of the 2004
act applies because the Claimant had a reasonable opportunity to make a
claim via another route and that her credibility had been damaged because
of that. He sought to rely on the refusal decision dated 14.3.18. He
submitted that section 8(4) the failure to take advantage of the
opportunity to make an asylum claim, was precisely intended to apply in the
extant situation and this is why the reasons set out in the refusal
decision are fairly brief.

12.   Mr Lindsay asserted that his cross examination was not aimed at the
Appellant's credibility as this is a matter for a substantive asylum
interview and it remains open to her to make such an application. He
submitted that, in respect of the basic factual matrix of the claim, the
Appellant has failed to make that out and section 8(4) fatally undermines
her claim.

13.   With regard to the country information, Mr Lindsay submitted that the
gov.uk printout confirms that the constitution does not proscribe religion.
Pages 63 and 70 establish that the regime does exert close control over the
media. He submitted that the question is whether the Claimant is able to
establish on return basic aspects of private life and on all the evidence
she has not shown that she would not be able to do so. He drew attention to
the fact that one of the references in the skeleton argument is to a 2003
document at pages 81-82, where it was accepted that there are significant
problems for Jehovah Witnesses but that is not an issue for this Appellant.


14.   Whilst religious groups must be registered with the authorities, Mr
Lindsay submitted that there are churches of substantial size operating in
Turkmenistan and the Claimant would be able to practice her religion on
return. Whilst pages 90-91 refer to the teaching of Russian being banned,
this is not from a reliable source. On the objective materials he has seen
the Claimant would not have problems with language barrier. The Russian
Orthodox population is 9% and it is reasonable to suppose the Claimant
would be able to establish a private life. Mr Lindsay also took issue with
the figures at page 118, which he said could not be taken as reliable as
there is no methodology. He submitted that, following Kamara [2016] EWCA
Civ 813 at [14] integration is not confined to the mere ability to find a
job, but is a broad evaluative judgment: would the individual be enough of
an insider so as to have a reasonable opportunity to integrate there? Given
almost 10% practice Orthodox Christianity it can reasonably be supposed
that the Claimant's church has permission to operate.

15.   Mr Lindsay submitted that the Claimant has lived for the majority of
her life in Turkmenistan and so is enough of an insider to know how life
there works and can engage with it. He submitted that the Home Office's
private life guidance is wholly consonant with Article 8 and the
authorities at pages 58-59 when assessing very significant obstacles to
return, which has to be something which would prevent or seriously inhibit
integration on return eg the need to learn a new language or obtain
employment. He submitted that the Claimant would be able to establish a
private life on return and the standard of life would be reasonable
compared to others living in Turkmenistan. He submitted that the Claimant
would be able to return and attend church; that there is no likelihood of
difficulties and no reason to suppose she would not be able to form
relationships, thus there are no very significant obstacles to the
Claimant's integration on return. He further submitted that there is
nothing over and above this amounting to exceptional circumstances to
justify consideration outside the Rules and the appeal should be dismissed.

16.   In his submissions, Mr Pipe sought to rely on his skeleton argument
before the First tier Tribunal. In respect of the test for very significant
obstacles, he sought to rely on the judgment in Parveen [2018] EWCA Civ 932
at [9] where Lord Justice Underhill disapproved the former President
McCloskey J's gloss on the meaning of very significant obstacles and that
it should be interpreted as the plain meaning of the words. He submitted
that the Claimant made a proper application on Form FLR-FP, with regard to
paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules and Article 8. He drew attention to the
fact that the Home Office guidance is cited on the third page of the
application letter. Mr Pipe submitted that it is clear from the current
guidance at page 38 that prosecution, significant harassment or
discrimination as a result of religion faith or where the rights and
freedoms would otherwise be so severely restricted as to affect their
fundamental rights would constitute very significant obstacles to
integration.

17.   In respect of the fact that an asylum application has not been made,
Mr Pipe submitted that there should be no stain on the Claimant's
character. He submitted that it is clear that the Claimant was open to the
possibility of claiming asylum, but the caseworker assured her that the
private life route could be considered and that there were a number of
factors which made it relevant to consider her case as a human rights
claim. He submitted that the Secretary of State is placing an over reliance
on section 8, as did the refusal decision and there was no male fides in
the way it was being done.

18.   In terms of the Claimant's claim, this is well set out in the
Claimant's witness statement. It raises a number of cumulative factors:
residence in the UK since 2009; there have been religious developments in
Turkmenistan since her arrival; she has made short visits, most recently in
2011; the Claimant was educated in Russian and there is evidence that
schools teaching Russian have been closed; she was subjected to domestic
violence because of her behaviour and relationships; in respect of her
relationship in the UK, her miscarriage and her former partner's sexuality
were disclosed back to her family by her sister. Mr Pipe also drew
attention to the fact that in 2016 there was a requirement to re-register
Churches and that as a consequence, Orthodox priests were forced to flee
the country.

19.   Mr Pipe submitted that not only is there an absence of familial
support but there is familial hostility. He submitted that the Claimant had
been forced to sign away her rights to family property: AB pages 25-26. See
also the Claimant's mother's statement at AB 9-12 as to enquiries being
made of the Claimant and her Christian conversion, in 2013 and 2016. Mr
Pipe submitted that it is not just that the Claimant is a member of the
Russian Orthodox church but rather a combination of all the circumstances.

20.   In respect of the background evidence, the Human Rights Watch report
describes Turkmenistan as one of the world's most oppressive countries,
where all religious and political expression not approved of is banned and
torture is used. He drew attention to the fact that, as is set out in his
skeleton argument, only two groups have been permitted to re-register after
the March 2016 registration law. Mr Pipe submitted that there is reliable
evidence from the BBC to show that teaching in Russian banned and clearly
it is controlled. He submitted that there was also a breach of social mores
and a gender aspect. The August 2016 United States State Department report
states that no new religious groups were registered. Pages 94-97, Forum 18
and Refworld state that an Orthodox Church priest was forced to leave in
June 2016 and that the authorities exercise control over the Orthodox
Church. Mr Pipe submitted that the combination of factors put together
render the obstacles to return very significant: the Claimant has issues
with her family; signed over property in Turkmenistan; her Orthodox faith
now has serious controls; she is a lone woman and is Russian ethnically and
linguistically. He submitted that the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi)
of the Rules were met and thus there was no need to consider Article 8
outside the Rules.



Findings and reasons

Decision of the FtT

21.   In allowing the appeal, the FtTJ held as follows:

         "5.      I indicated the Respondent had failed to engage with the
         claim at all and no factual analysis was made or provided. I
         invited submissions on my suggestion that I allow the appeal
         because it is disproportionate for this reason. Mr Eaton took
         instructions and applied for an adjournment because the Respondent
         would not withdraw the decision and I refused this application to
         adjourn. My reason for so refusing is that it would not be fair on
         the Appellant because the Respondent has known the basis of her
         claim and there has been correspondence by her representatives to
         the Respondent trying to get the Respondent to engage with his
         human rights claim.

         6. Therefore I find the Appellant has a human rights claim, there
         would be interference to her ability to practice her new religion
         and the decision by the Respondent is disproportionate because it
         fails to consider the claim made at all and the consequence to her
         should she be removed."

22.    Given that this was the extent of the Judge's findings on the
appeal, it is apparent that those findings lack adequate and sufficient
reasons to justify allowing the appeal simply on the basis that the
Respondent had failed to engage with the claim.

23.   I set that decision aside. I heard evidence from the Claimant and
submissions from both parties, in order to re-make the decision.

24.   Dealing first with the Claimant's credibility, I find that there was
nothing inherently implausible about her claim nor was her oral evidence
inconsistent with that previously set out in her witness statement and in
the representations made to the Secretary of State by her representatives.
On the contrary, I find that her claim is plausible and consistent with the
background evidence in respect of Turkmenistan. Mr Lindsay made much of the
Claimant's failure to make an asylum claim and sought to rely on section
8(4) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004 in
support of his contention that this undermined her credibility and the
veracity of her claim. However, section 8(4) provides: "(4) This section
also applies to failure by the claimant to take advantage of a reasonable
opportunity to make an asylum claim or human rights claim while in a safe
country." Given that the Claimant made a human rights claim of her own
volition, albeit after a period of some years overstay, she is not obliged
to make an asylum claim concomitant with a human rights claim. Both section
8(1) and 8(4) make provision for the making of either an asylum claim or a
human rights claim. Thus no adverse inference can properly be drawn from
the decision of the Claimant not to make an asylum claim because she had
already made a human rights claim. Therefore, given that this was the only
credibility issue raised by the Secretary of State in both the refusal
decision and in Mr Lindsay's submissions, I proceed on the basis that the
Claimant's account is credible.

25.   The primary question I have to decide is whether there would be very
significant obstacles to the Claimant's integration in Turkmenistan,
pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules. The Home Office guidance in
respect of Private Life in the UK, last updated on 23.1.19, provides that
the starting point is to assume that the applicant will be able to
integrate into their country of proposed return, unless they can
demonstrate why that is not the case and that the onus is upon the
applicant; that the threshold is high in that the applicant would need to
show that establishing a private life in the country of return would entail
very serious hardship for the applicant. Relevant country information
should be referred to and a very significant obstacle may arise where the
applicant would be at real risk of prosecution or significant harassment or
discrimination as a result of their sexual or political orientation or
faith or gender or where their rights and freedoms would otherwise be so
severely restricted as to affect their fundamental rights and therefore
their ability to establish a private life in that country [58-59 refer].
And at page 60:

         "The decision maker must consider the degree of difficulty that
         would be faced as a result of the applicant's faith, political or
         sexual orientation or gender identity based on the situation in
         practice in the country of return and not necessarily solely what
         is provided for in law."

26.   In Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, Lord Justice Sales held as follows at
[14]:

         "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of an insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the society in that other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give
         substance to the individual's private or family life."

27.   At the heart of the claim is the Claimant's conversion from Islam to
Christianity, which occurred in Turkmenistan from the age of 16 and which
resulted in the Claimant's baptism on 20.12.03.

28.   The gov.uk document updated on 21.1.15 provides at AB 45 that:
"Individuals and religious communities still experience administrative
restrictions or various other forms of harassment." The United States State
Department Report 2016 for 2015 makes reference to registered religious
groups failing to report harassment for fear such reporting would prompt
authorities to increase harassment or monitoring of their activities [AB
58]; registered Christian groups being required to obtain approval to carry
out religious activities, including weekly services and Christian groups
were monitored reportedly through telephone and undercover surveillance [AB
59] and that there was some societal criticism and harassment of those who
deviated from traditional ethno-religious beliefs and practices and that
members of registered Christian groups reported encountering hostility due
to their religious affiliation.

29.   There is specific reference to the priest, Fr Grigory Bochurov at the
Church of St Nikolai in Ashgabad, who was forced to leave by the
authorities in June 2016 because he is a Russian citizen: AB 94. This is
reasonably likely to be the Church the Claimant formerly attended in
Turkmenistan, given that there are only currently 12 operative Orthodox
churches, all of which require re-registration under the 2016 law due to
"errors". I have also taken into consideration the letter from the
Claimant's mother dated 20.9.18 in which she states that she started
receiving telephone calls on her landline in May 2013 from the "committee"
[former KGB] questioning her as to the Claimant's whereabouts and the fact
that she has twice been summoned to the committee on 23.2.14 and 25.5.16
for interrogation about the Claimant and that her landline is being
monitored. I accept this evidence, in the absence of any challenge to it by
the Secretary of State and bearing in mind the background evidence at AB
59, noted at [28] above.

30.   I make the following findings:

    30.1.  the Claimant was born in Turkmenistan and lived there until the
    age of 26 years. She arrived in the UK in September 2008, following two
    visits in 2007 and 2008 and has lived here since, last returning for a
    visit to Turkmenistan in 2011.

    30.2.  she is 37 years of age, unmarried and with no children and would
    be returned to Turkmenistan as a single woman.

    30.3.  the Claimant was educated in Russian [17], [41] and does not
    speak or read the Turkmen language [47], [88] which hampered her in
    obtaining employment and she was only able to do so in a supermarket
    and latterly in a Turkish company as a secretary.

    30.4.  she was subjected to domestic violence by her family because of
    a relationship when she was 19 as a result of which she was badly
    beaten and incarcerated in the family home for 6 months. She was
    subjected to a virginity test but believes the woman gynaecologist lied
    to her father as she did not tell her father the Claimant was no longer
    a virgin.

    30.5.  since coming to the UK, she became pregnant by a boyfriend and
    had a miscarriage, following which her boyfriend told her he was gay.
    This was all related back to the family in Turkmenistan by her sister
    as a result of which the Claimant was considered to have brought shame
    on her family.

    30.6.  her father has died; her mother remains in Turkmenistan but has
    been subject to scrutiny and interrogation by the authorities
    concerning the Claimant. This evidence was not challenged by Mr
    Lindsay. The Claimant's mother and the rest of the family are Muslim.
    The Claimants' grandmothers were Orthodox Christian but both have died.
    The Claimant no longer has any property rights in Turkmenistan, having
    been pressurised by the extended family to disavow these, as per the
    document at AB 25-26. It was not explained what the effect of this is,
    however, I find, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, that
    the Claimant could reside with her mother.

    30.7.  I find that there has also been a change in circumstances since
    the Claimant came to the UK and that is the requirement pursuant to a
    new Religion Law adopted in March 2016 that religious groups are
    required to register and that anyone attending an unregistered
    religious groups will face penalties under the 2014 Administrative Code
    and criminal charges. It would appear that this has resulted in Russian
    Orthodox priests being forced to flee the country and the 12 Russian
    Orthodox churches, having registered, having to apply to be re-
    registered.

31.   In respect of the Claimant's ability to practice her religion, I have
taken into consideration the judgment of Lord Dyson in RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]
UKSC 38, applying the judgment in HJ (Iran) [2011] 1 AC 596 to the
Convention reason of religion, stating at [28]:

         28.      In the context of religious belief, the United Nations
         High Commissioner for Refugees has said (in my view, rightly):
         "Applying the same standard as for other Convention grounds,
         religious belief, identity or way of life can be seen as so
         fundamental to human identity that one should not be compelled to
         hide, change or renounce this in order to avoid persecution":
         Guidelines on International Protection: Religion-Based Refugee
         Claims (2004) para 13."

32.   Whilst I am not determining an asylum claim, as no application has
been made, the major plank of the Claimant's human rights claim is her
concern at her ability to practice her religion without harassment in
Turkmenistan. I find that her concern is this respect has substance and
that, in light of the background evidence, there is a risk that the
Claimant would be subjected to harassment and discrimination on account of
her Christian faith, which would directly impinge upon her ability to
practice it. Thus, in accordance with the Home Office guidance [25 above
refers] this amounts to a very significant obstacle to her integration, due
to the impact on her private life.

33.   The Claimant has been absent from Turkmenistan since 2008; she cannot
speak, write or read the Turkmen language, which impacted on her ability to
find employment before she came to the UK. According to the background
evidence, the repression of minorities, including the ethnic Russian
minority and the use of the Russian language has increased since she came
to the UK. I find that, when taken together, along with my finding at [32]
above as to the impact on the Claimant's ability to practice her Christian
faith, these factors do amount to very significant obstacles to the
Claimant's integration in Turkmenistan, within the meaning of paragraph
276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

34.   I allow the appeal on the basis that removal of the Claimant would
thus be disproportionate and contrary to Article 8, in light of the
judgment of Lord Justice Longmore in TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 at
[34]:

         "... where a person satisfies the Rules, whether or not by
         reference to an article 8 informed requirement, then this will be
         positively determinative of that person's article 8 appeal,
         provided their case engages article 8(1), for the very reason that
         it would then be disproportionate for that person to be removed."



Decision

35.   The decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Clarke contained material
errors of law. I set that decision aside and re-make the decision, allowing
the Claimant's appeal. I make an anonymity order in order to protect the
Claimant's private life.


Rebecca Chapman
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

Dated 12 March 2019

