
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07103/2019 (P)




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 November 2020                |On 16 November 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                 MUMTAZ [B]

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Mr M A Rana of Counsel instructed by Shahid Rahman
                    Solicitors

For the respondent:    No submissions received



                            DECISION AND REASONS




Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 24 June
         2020 (served on 14 August 2020) against the determination of First-
         tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davey,  promulgated  on  31  December   2019
         following a hearing at Taylor House on 13 September 2019.

      2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 1 January  1944.  She
         arrived in the UK as a visitor on 21 July 2011 and overstayed.  She
         appeals against the respondent's decision of 2 April 2019 to refuse
         her application for leave to remain on private/family life  grounds
         made on 27 September 2018. No reason is given for her long delay in
         seeking to regularise her  stay.   She  claims  to  suffer  from  a
         variety of health issues and argues that she has  several  sons  in
         the UK and no one to look after her  in  Pakistan.  The  respondent
         considered that her health issues could be managed in Pakistan  and
         that there was no basis on which she should be permitted to  become
         a burden on the state.  She had previously visited in 2006. She was
         widowed in March 2003.

      3. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davey.  He  heard
         oral evidence and submissions before concluding that  the  evidence
         had not adequately addressed the issues, that the appellant had not
         shown that she could not receive  care  and  medical  treatment  in
         Pakistan and that  the  respondent's  decision  was  proportionate.
         Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.

      4. The appellant successfully sought permission  to  appeal.  Although
         this was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wilson  on  1  April
         2020, it was granted upon renewal to the Upper Tribunal.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      5. The appeal would then have normally been listed for hearing but due
         to the pandemic this could not be done and  instead  the  grant  of
         permission, sent out on 14 August 2020, encompassed  directions  in
         which Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley expressed  the  view  that  the
         appeal could be decided on the papers. The parties were invited  to
         make further submissions within certain time limits. The  appellant
         has responded to the directions and has not  objected  to  a  paper
         determination but I note that the appellant's  representatives  did
         not serve the respondent  with  a  copy  of  their  submissions  as
         directed to do. Nevertheless, I am satisfied  that  the  respondent
         was properly served with the Tribunal's directions and  has  failed
         to comply. I now proceed to determine  the  matter  on  the  papers
         having satisfied myself that it I am fairly and justly able  to  do
         so.

         Discussion and conclusions

      6. I have considered the evidence, the determination, the grounds  for
         permission, the grant of permission and the  submissions  forwarded
         by  the  appellant's  Counsel.  The  case  for  the  appellant  was
         essentially that she could not travel to Pakistan  because  of  her
         ill health, that she had no one there to care for her and that  she
         was looked after here by her sons.

      7. Three grounds are put forward. The first is that the  judge  failed
         to consider the appellant's dementia and did not clarify the weight
         he gave to that or to the  concerns  the  GP  expressed  about  the
         appellant's mobility and risk  of  getting  lost  or  to  the  best
         interests of her grandchildren. The second is that  the  judge  did
         not properly reason his dismissal  of  the  appeal.  Third,  it  is
         argued that the judge erred in rejecting the  locum  psychiatrist's
         conclusion that the appellant was not fit to travel. I now consider
         each in turn.

      8. The first ground takes issue  with  the  judge's  consideration  of
         factors argued for the appellant and the weight apportioned to  the
         evidence. On the issue of the appellant's  ill  health,  the  judge
         plainly  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  been
         diagnosed  with  dementia.  He  noted  that  the   respondent   had
         recognised that the appellant had health issues (at  3),  he  noted
         the appellant's statement which set  out  her  dementia  and  other
         conditions (at 4) as well as the statements of family members which
         confirmed the conditions (at  6).  He  considered  the  psychiatric
         report noting that Dr Hussain had not engaged in any discussion  of
         the appellant's dementia or physical conditions (at  7).  He  noted
         that the GP had confirmed that the  appellant  had  been  diagnosed
         with dementia in 2018 but had not  addressed  how  the  appellant's
         health issues needed to be managed or her ability to travel  (at  9
         and 10). He found that there was no evidence to  suggest  that  the
         appellant's medication would not be available in Pakistan (at  11).
         Most importantly, he found that there  was  very  limited  evidence
         before him in terms of the analysis and prognosis of  the  dementia
         (at 15). He also found that the evidence did not adequately address
         the extent to which her physical care  required  the  attention  of
         family members or why care and support could  not  be  provided  in
         Pakistan. He found that may not be as  satisfactory  as  care  from
         family but that it was not an option that had even  been  addressed
         before him. He noted that there was no  evidence  as  to  what  had
         happened to the home she had lived in or to  how  she  had  managed
         before her visit (bearing in mind that she had been widowed as long
         ago as 2003) and no details  as  to  the  type  of  assistance  she
         received here that she could not receive from  carers  in  Pakistan
         (at 15).

      9. The claim of poor mobility conflicts somewhat with the  claim  that
         she could get lost outdoors on her own, but these were both matters
         the judge was aware of as  can  be  seen  from  the  determination.
         Again, the difficulty was that the evidence  before  him  was  very
         limited (at 15). Dr Hussain's report  did  not  touch  upon  either
         matter (at 8) and the GP's letter simply mentioned these as  issues
         without providing any further information or details (at 10).    It
         is for the appellant to make out her case and it can be  seen  from
         the evidence in this appeal that very limited information had  been
         provided. Over half of the appellant's bundle consists of documents
         contained in the  respondent's  bundle;  the  additional  documents
         include hospital letters relating to the  treatment  for  cataracts
         the appellant has had on the NHS even though she had no entitlement
         to use these resources and a psychiatric report.

     10. It is also  argued  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  best
         interests of  the  appellant's  grandchildren  but  other  than  an
         assertion that the children enjoyed her company after school, there
         was no evidence whatsoever before the judge of the nature of  their
         contact with her, how many there were or how often they spent  time
         together, what they did together or how her  absence  would  affect
         them. As the judge noted at least three children  (born  in  August
         2007, December 2005 and January  2001)  were  old  enough  to  have
         prepared  statements  but  nothing  from  any  of  them  had   been
         submitted. Nor had any details of their contact  been  included  in
         the witness statements from other  family  members  that  had  been
         adduced. There are not even any photographs to show  contact.  Were
         the appellant to be removed, the children  would  remain  in  their
         homes, would continue to be cared for by their  parents  and  would
         continue with their lives at school/college and  with  friends  and
         other relatives. They would also be able to visit the appellant  in
         Pakistan. Without any evidence at all as  to  how  the  appellant's
         departure would impact upon them, the judge could not possibly have
         found that the appellant's departure was disproportionate for  that
         reason.

     11. Ground 2 complains that the decision was not properly reasoned  but
         as can be seen from the above, the judge did consider the  evidence
         and give reasons for his decision. He was severely hampered by  the
         limited evidence. That  is  acknowledged  to  some  extent  in  the
         submissions which maintain that more evidence would be  adduced  if
         the appeal were to be remitted for a fresh hearing;  however,  that
         evidence should have been produced for  the  hearing  before  Judge
         Davey and there is no explanation why it was  not  made  available.
         The appellant was represented throughout and her  solicitors  would
         have been well aware of the kind of detail and information that the
         Tribunal required to make a well informed decision.   It  is  plain
         when reading the determination as a whole that the  judge  was  not
         satisfied with the limited evidence before  him,  that  there  were
         several matters which had not been addressed and that on the sparse
         evidence he  did  have,  it  had  not  been  established  that  the
         appellant could not be cared for in Pakistan where  she  still  has
         children and grandchildren. The claim that she has had  no  one  to
         look after her since she was widowed is not made out given that her
         husband died in 2003, that she had visited the UK  after  that  and
         had returned to Pakistan and  that  she  has  family  remaining  in
         Pakistan (who were omitted completely from her application  to  the
         respondent). The judge took  her  health  conditions  of  dementia,
         diabetes,  cataracts,  blood  pressure  and  kidney  problems  into
         account but found that these were not serious enough to  warrant  a
         grant of leave. It may be seen that  the  respondent's  COI  report
         referred to in the decision letter set out  the  medical  treatment
         that would be available to the appellant in Pakistan. Whilst it may
         not be of the same standard as in the UK, as the respondent  points
         out, the UK cannot afford  to  be  the  world's  hospital  and  the
         settled population has a prior right to its  finite  resources  (JA
         (Ivory Coast) and ES (Tanzania) [2009] EWCA Civ 1353).

     12. The third ground takes issue  with  the  judge's  rejection  of  Dr
         Hussain's claim that the appellant was unfit to travel.  The  judge
         had regard to the fact  that  she  was  a  psychiatrist,  that  her
         opinion was based on what  the  sponsor  had  said  at  a  one  off
         interview of one hour and that she had not had any information from
         the appellant's GP. Her statement that the  appellant  was  not  at
         present fit to fly due to her physical health problems and state of
         mind was made at the very end of her  report  without  any  further
         clarification or reasoning. No consideration has been given  as  to
         whether the  situation  would  be  different  if  she  were  to  be
         accompanied by a family member. In the  circumstances,  given  that
         the appellant's own GP who has had more contact with the  appellant
         over time and has not made any declaration as  to  her  fitness  to
         fly, it was open to the judge to reject that conclusion.

     13. I note that the appellant's application was made in 2018 some seven
         years after her visit visa expired. No reason has  been  given  for
         her long period of overstaying. The judge  noted  the  respondent's
         case that the appellant was a burden on the  state  and  given  her
         extensive use  of  the  NHS's  limited  resources  even  since  the
         decision (and notwithstanding the sponsorship declaration in  which
         the sponsor vowed to support her himself), that was a  matter  that
         weighed against her in the balancing exercise.

     14. There are many other shortcomings in the  evidence  although  these
         have not been relied on by the judge. No reason is  given  for  why
         the  appellant  delayed  for  so  many  years  before  seeking   to
         regularise her stay, why she could not make an entry  clearance  as
         an  elderly  relative  in  the  appropriate  way,  why   she   gave
         conflicting information in her application for  leave  and  in  her
         witness statement as to the number of children she had  in  the  UK
         and in Pakistan, why the claim of domestic violence by a  daughter-
         in-law in Pakistan made by  her  representatives  (RB:B1)  was  not
         mentioned anywhere else  in  the  evidence,  why  her  GP  has  her
         registered at a different address to  the  sponsor  with  whom  she
         claims to have lived since  her  arrival  and  why  the  Tribunal's
         correspondence until December 2019 was also  sent  to  a  different
         address.

     15. For the reasons given in paragraphs 6-13, I find that  the  judge's
         decision does not contain any material errors  of  law  and  it  is
         upheld.

         Decision

     16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any  error
         of law. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

         Anonymity

     17. No request has been made at any time for an anonymity order  and  I
         see no reason to make one.




    Signed


    R. Keki?
    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 11 November 2020


