
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/07743/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 August 2020                    |On 17 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SANEEYA KAMIL QURESHI
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India, born  on  30  July  1988.   On  18
    February 2019, she applied for leave to remain in the UK, based on  her
    marriage  to  Mohammad  Majid  Malik.   The  respondent  refused   that
    application on 8 April 2019, because the appellant had been in  the  UK
    without leave since 22 February 2014, and  there  were  no  reasons  to
    allow the appeal outside the rules.

 3. The application met the requirements  of  the  rules,  apart  from  the
    immigration status requirement.

 4. FtT  Judge  Howorth  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 1 August 2019.  The sponsor's circumstances at the  time
    of the hearing in the FtT did not enable  the  appellant  to  meet  the
    financial requirements, but the judge at [44] thought  it  very  likely
    that would change in the  very  near  future,  and  at  [47]  found  it
    disproportionate to expect her to leave the UK to apply from India.

 5. The SSHD appealed to the UT.  In a decision promulgated on 10  February
    2020, Deputy Judge I A Lewis did not uphold ground 1, on likely ability
    to meet the financial requirements;  was  reluctant  to  set  aside  on
    ground 3, on the significance of the appellant's care for her mother-in-
    law; but upheld ground 2, on the proportionality of being  required  to
    apply from abroad.  The decision was retained in the UT to be remade:

         "on the narrow issue ...  of  article  8  in  the  context  of  the
         appellant returning to India to  apply  ...  to  return  ...  as  a
         spouse".

 6. The case has been  transferred  for  completion  of  that  decision  by
    another judge, or judges.

 7. The UT issued directions, dated 31 March 2020, with a view to resolving
    the case without an oral hearing, observing  that  it  seemed  unlikely
    that the essential facts would be in dispute, and that the case  turned
    on applying Chikwamba and subsequent authorities to those facts.

 8. In a response, dated 17 April 2020,  the  respondent  argues  that  the
    appellant has not shown evidence of the sponsor's income and that  even
    if she did, that should form the basis of a separate  application  from
    outside the UK.

 9. On 6 May 2020, the appellant filed a response,  including  evidence  of
    the sponsor's income from November 2019 to April 2020.

10. The UT issued further directions,  dated  26  June  2020,  giving  both
    parties the chance to submit further, and seeking the  SSHD's  position
    on the documents submitted.

11. In a response, filed on 18 July 2020, the appellant says that she meets
    the requirements of Appendix FM, based on the  sponsor's  salary  being
    more than adequate; and argues further on family circumstances  in  the
    UK, and difficulties in India.  She refers  also  to  current  problems
    arising from the pandemic.

12.  In a response, dated 21 July 2020, the SSHD says  that  the  appellant
    has still not submitted  "all  the  specified  evidence"  to  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM, and maintains her position  that  even  if
    the evidence does meet those requirements, the appellant  should  apply
    again from outside the UK.

13. The appeal may now be decided fairly and  justly,  in  accordance  with
    rules 2 and 34, on the written materials filed.

14. The  appellant  has  not  specified  precise  compliance  on  financial
    support, at a date  beyond  her  original  application,  nor  with  the
    further requirement to show compliance by specified documents.

15. It would be impossible to show literal compliance at  any  later  date,
    because the rules  in  Appendix  FM-SE  require  that  to  be  done  by
    documents submitted with the application.

16. In this case, however, the appellant complied with both  financial  and
    evidential requirements in her  application,  which  failed  for  other
    reasons.  By reference to more recent evidence, the SSHD  simply  says,
    rather vaguely, that the  appellant  has  not  submitted  all  evidence
    required.

17. It appears that apart from a short interruption prior to the hearing in
    the FtT, the sponsor's finances have generally been adequate to support
    an application.

18. On this point, the SSHD essentially seeks to renew ground 1, which  she
    failed to establish at the "error of law" stage.

19. It carries some weight in the  appellant's  favour  that  the  original
    application  would  have  succeeded  on  all  aspects,  but   for   the
    immigration status requirement.

20. As an overstayer for 5 years, the appellant's  immigration  history  is
    adverse, although not  among  the  worst.   This  carries  some  weight
    against her.

21. Muslims face discrimination and difficulty in India,  but  not  to  the
    point that the appellant could  not  return  there,  even  temporarily,
    being Muslim. Her submissions on this  aspect  are  exaggerated.   This
    does not contribute anything significantly in her favour.

22. The appellant's submissions about her contribution  to  her  mother-in-
    law's care are also exaggerated.  She is not the only or even principal
    carer, and this matter could be coped with in  her  absence.   However,
    there is no reason to doubt that she makes a useful  contribution,  and
    is a valued member of the wider family, so this carries some weight  in
    her favour.

23.  Circumstances  now  are  different  from  those  applying   when   the
    application was made.  Even without specific evidence from either side,
    it is within judicial knowledge that administrative delays are greater,
    and that travel to and residence in India is difficult to arrange, more
    expensive, carries an element of health risk,  and  is  generally  ill-
    advised, unless for strong reasons.

24. It might be a fine question whether it is proportionate to  expect  the
    appellant to make a fresh application from within the UK, coupled  with
    a request to waive the rule on immigration status; but the SSHD has not
    taken that "intermediate" point, and it is undesirable to multiply  and
    prolong procedure.

25. There are good reasons of public policy underpinning  the  rules  about
    when applications must be made from abroad.  However,  looking  at  all
    the above circumstances, I find that on balance  it  is  not,  at  this
    date, reasonable to require the appellant to make a fresh  application,
    which is likely to succeed, from outside the UK.

26. The decision of the FtT has been set aside.  The  decision  substituted
    is that the appeal, as brought to the FtT, is allowed.

27. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    10 August 2020







                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

