
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07561/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 September 2019                 |On 20 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                DENIZ KAYIKEI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Ruth promulgated on 8 May 2019, in which the Appellant's appeal against
    the decision to refuse her human rights claim dated  11  May  2015  was
    dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Turkey, born on 15 September  1965,  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom on  4  May  2003,  with  entry  clearance
    conferring leave to enter as  a  student  until  1  January  2004.  The
    Appellant had continuous leave in that category until 31 January  2005.
    Following  a  further  application  in   a   different   category   and
    subsequently refused, the Appellant married a British citizen, Mr  Ziya
    Balkan (hereafter "the Sponsor"), on 8 July 2011. This relationship and
    the Appellant's diagnosis of paranoid  schizophrenia  primarily  formed
    the basis of her application which was refused and was the  subject  of
    the appeal before Judge Ruth.

 3. Prior to the appeal before Judge Ruth, a previous  appeal  hearing  was
    adjourned by Judge Swaniker on 7 November 2018  because  the  Appellant
    had been hospitalised. The hearing was relisted for  8  April  2019.  A
    further written request was made by the Sponsor for an  adjournment  of
    the hearing on the basis that the Appellant  remained  unwell  and  was
    unable to attend. It is not clear  whether  that  written  request  was
    actioned by the First-tier Tribunal, and on the date of hearing neither
    the Appellant nor the Sponsor attended.

 4. Before Judge Ruth the Respondent opposed the adjournment and relied  on
    a file note taken by his representative at the hearing  on  7  November
    2018 before Judge Swaniker. Judge Ruth observed the file note  recorded
    that Judge Swaniker had advised the Sponsor  that  there  would  be  no
    further adjournments, and that he should be ready to proceed  with  the
    appeal on the next occasion. The contents  of  this  file  note  caused
    Judge Ruth to  make  telephone  enquiries  through  his  clerk  of  the
    Sponsor's whereabouts. That enquiry was met with a  response  from  the
    Sponsor that he was on his way to work and could not  attend  and  that
    the Appellant was ill.

 5. In reliance on the advice given to the Sponsor at the previous  hearing
    by Judge Swaniker and the delay in resolving  the  appeal,  Judge  Ruth
    proceeded to hear and then dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on two  grounds,  first  that
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to adjourn the hearing when  it  was  in
    the interests of justice to do so, involving a  failure  to  apply  the
    guidance  and  failing  to  have  regard  to  material  considerations.
    Secondly, that the judge erred in his proportionality assessment  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin  on  24
    July 2019 on the basis that it was arguable the judge erred in refusing
    to adjourn the appeal in the absence of a direction by  Judge  Swaniker
    that the hearing should proceed.

 8. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was unrepresented and  did  not
    appear, but the Sponsor did appear. I  explained  to  the  Sponsor  the
    purpose of the hearing and he provided correspondence sent to the First-
    tier Tribunal on 10 and 11  April  2019  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    mental health. Following a discussion of  the  events  set  out  above,
    which were undisputed, Mr Singh accepted that Judge Ruth erred if Judge
    Swaniker had not made a direction and invited the Tribunal  to  confirm
    the same. Upon checking the Tribunal's file, I could see no evidence of
    a direction being made to this effect by Judge Swaniker and in view  of
    this, Mr Singh accepted that Judge Ruth erred in  refusing  to  adjourn
    the appeal and conceded the appeal on that basis.

 9. This was explained to the Sponsor together with my  decision  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law and that the appropriate course in the
    circumstances was to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
    rehearing.

Findings and reasons

10. Judge Ruth's reasons for refusing the application  for  an  adjournment
    were essentially for the reasons indicated earlier.

11. Although Judge  Ruth  took  into  account  what  was  required  in  the
    interests of justice, he did not refer to the Upper Tribunal's decision
    in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 and it is  far  from
    clear from the reasons he gave refusing the adjournment that he applied
    the principles contained within it.  In  Nwaigwe,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    found, in summary, as follows:
         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

12.  In  the  present  appeal,  Judge  Ruth's  reasons  for  refusing   the
    application for an adjournment were primarily focused on  the  contents
    of the Respondent's file note and the delay in  resolving  the  appeal.
    While these were legitimate observations Judge Ruth placed too great an
    emphasis on these factors rather than on whether a fair  hearing  could
    still be achieved in the absence of an adjournment. It is accepted that
    no direction was made by Judge Swaniker that the hearing  must  proceed
    on the next occasion, and even if there had been, Judge  Ruth  did  not
    address  the  real  question  of  whether  the   refusal   in   present
    circumstances would involve any deprivation of the Appellant's right to
    a fair hearing. For these reasons the refusal  of  an  adjournment  was
    unfair  and  there  was  a  failure  to  apply  the  correct  test  for
    consideration of the application.

13. In all of the circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal  made  a  material
    error of law in refusing the application for an adjournment and as such
    it is necessary to  set  aside  the  decision.   The  parties  were  in
    agreement that if an error of law  was  found,  this  case  would  most
    appropriately be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing.

14.   The Sponsor indicated that he believed that the  Appellant  would  not
    be in a position to give evidence and that he would be seeking  medical
    advice and legal  representation.  While  that  is  a  matter  for  the
    Appellant  and  her  Sponsor,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  in   the
    circumstances consider it appropriate to list the  matter  for  a  Case
    Management Review Hearing so that the Appellant's current position  can
    be clarified before a further substantive hearing date is set.





Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  appeal  will  be
reheard on all issues by a judge other than Judge Ruth and  Judge  Swaniker.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Date:       8th  February
    2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


