

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07918/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|On the papers                                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 24 November 2020                               |On 14 December 2020            |




                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  SAID [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Feeney ('the Judge') promulgated  on  the  15  March
        2019 in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  human
        rights grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted on a renewed  application  by  the
        Upper Tribunal on 21 September 2020,  the  operative  part  of  the
        grant being in the following terms:


        3.   I find that the application was made on 3 July  2019,  as  per
             the fax confirmation from the solicitors. It is argued that it
             should be admitted despite being made  10  days  out  of  time
             because the applicant had  no  access  to  funds  to  instruct
             lawyers for the reasons set out in the witness statements from
             the family explaining their situation.  I  find  that  because
             this application raises potential errors of law in an  Article
             3 ECHR medical claim on  behalf  of  a  person  with  paranoid
             schizophrenia  that  time  should  be  extended  so  that  the
             application can be admitted as it was reasonable  for  him  to
             have reliance on solicitors to take this step.


        4.   The grounds of appeal contend, in summary, as follows.  It  is
             argued that firstly that the fact that the First-tier Tribunal
             accepted that the appellant has severe mental health  problems
             ought to have led to the appeal being allowed under Article  3
             ECHR but this  did  not  happen  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             unlawfully required a worsening of the  appellant's  condition
             for it to meet the required level of severity  when  that  was
             illogical as it had been severe all  along;  and  because  the
             conclusion that there is treatment in Algeria is  contrary  to
             the  country  of  origin  evidence,  and  without  appropriate
             treatment the view of the  two  psychiatrists  is  that  there
             would  be  a  significant  decline  in  the  appellant's  life
             expectancy even if he had access to  his  mother  and  younger
             brother in his country of origin. Both grounds are arguable.


     3. The parties were provided with the opportunity to make observations
        in relation to the  method  by  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  to
        determine the question of whether the Judge made an  error  of  law
        and if such error was material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal, and to provide the opportunity for further  submissions  to
        be made. Both parties have responded.
     4. Having considered the judgment of  the  High  Court  in  The  Joint
        Council for The Welfare of Immigrants (Applicant) v  The  President
        of the Upper Tribunal (IAC) (Respondent) and  The  Lord  Chancellor
        (Interested Party) [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin), in which  neither  the
        Pilot  Practice  Direction  issued  by  the  Senior  President   of
        Tribunals on 19 March 2020 nor Rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 were declared  unlawful,  consideration
        can still be given to the appropriate venue for the next hearing of
        this matter in light of the overriding objectives.
     5. Paragraph 4 of the Practice Direction reads as follows:  "Decisions
        on the papers without a hearing:  Where   a   Chamber's   procedure
        rules  allow decisions  to be  made  without  a hearing,  decisions
         should usually  be  made  in  this   way,  provided  this  is   in
        accordance  with  the  overriding  objective,  the   parties'  ECHR
        rights   and   the  Chamber's  procedure  rules  about  notice  and
        consent."
     6. The  Overriding  Objective  is  contained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
        Procedure Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing  with  a  case
         fairly  and  justly  includes:  dealing with  it   in   ways  that
        are  proportionate   to   the   importance   of   the   case,   the
        complexity   of   the    issues,    etc;    avoiding    unnecessary
        formality   and   seeking  flexibility    in    the    proceedings;
        ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,  that the parties are able  to
        participate fully in the proceedings; using any  special  expertise
        of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay,  so  far  as
        compatible with proper consideration of the issues.
     7. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the Upper Tribunal  to
        further the overriding objective; and to cooperate with  the  Upper
        Tribunal generally.
     8. Rule 34 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
        provides:


        34.-
        (1)  Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may make
             any decision without a hearing.
        (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a
             party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider  any
             matter, and the form of any such hearing.
        (3)  In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper Tribunal
             must hold a hearing before making a decision which disposes of
             proceedings.
        (4)  Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper  Tribunal
        to-


        (a)  strike out a party's case, pursuant to rule 8(1)(b) or 8(2);
        (b)  consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;
        (c)  determine an application  for  permission  to  bring  judicial
             review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or
        (d)  make a consent order disposing  of  proceedings,  pursuant  to
             rule 39, without a hearing.


     9. The Secretary of State submits that given  this  is  a  deportation
        case involving significant public interest in  the  deportation  of
        the appellant, the error of law issue should be determined  by  way
        of a remote hearing at which oral submissions  could  be  made  and
        answers given to any questions  arising  from  the  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge. Other than this, no further explanation is given as  to  why
        an oral hearing is necessary.
    10. The appellant's position is that this question can be determined on
        the papers.
    11. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to exercise the
        discretion provided in  Rule  34  by  enabling  the  error  of  law
        question to be determined on the papers as opposed to directing  an
        oral hearing.  Nothing on the facts or in law  makes  consideration
        of the issues on the  papers  not  in  accordance  with  overriding
        objectives at this stage, a breach of  the  parties'  ECHR  rights,
        and/or UTIAC's procedure rules about notice and consent.



Background


    12. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria  born  on  7  July  1993  who
        entered the United Kingdom on 4  June  2011  with  his  mother  and
        younger brother as visitors, but overstayed. The appellant  is  the
        subject of an order for his deportation  from  the  United  Kingdom
        following his conviction of attempted  robbery  for  which  he  was
        sentenced to 12 months imprisonment at a Young Offenders  Institute
        on 4 April 2013.
    13. On 6 December 2015, the appellant was  detained  under  the  Mental
        Health Act. On 20 June 2016, his first appeal against the making of
        a deportation order on 16 October 2015, on  human  rights  grounds,
        was dismissed by a judge of the First-tier Tribunal. The  appellant
        became appeal rights exhausted on 6 September 2016.
    14. The appellant made a series of further submissions resulting  in  a
        fresh decision being made refusing the  claim  in  2018  which  was
        appealed before the Judge.
    15. There was no protection claim before the Judge as it had  not  been
        raised before the decision  maker,  was  considered  to  be  a  new
        matter,  in  relation   to   which   the   Secretary   of   State's
        representative did not give consent for it to be considered on  the
        day.
    16. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [36] of the decision under
        challenge.    At [35]  it  is  noted  the  appellant  suffers  from
        paranoid schizophrenia for which he has been treated  but  that  he
        would benefit from additional treatment.
    17. The Judge commenced consideration of the decision of the  Court  of
        Appeal in J v SSHD before concluding at  [42]  that  the  appellant
        could not satisfy the test set out in that judgement.
    18. Having considered section 399A and section 117C (4) - Exception  1,
        the Judge did not find significant obstacles to  reintegration  had
        been made out.
    19. In relation to paragraph 398(c) the Judge concludes  there  are  no
        exceptional circumstances  and  no  very  compelling  circumstances
        warranting a grant of  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
        Rules.
    20. The appellant refers to the medical evidence  from  two  Consultant
        Psychiatric Experts, Dr Hussain and Dr Cater which it was  accepted
        by the Judge showed:


        "the appellant has substantial mental health difficulties and has a
        severe  and  enduring  mental  health  problem"   namely   paranoid
        schizophrenia [29].


        "If the appellant relapses he will need hospitalisation" [30].


        "Paranoid symptoms are present" and "in the absence of  appropriate
        treatment, the appellant will be exposed to the serious  rapid  and
        irreversible decline in his state of  health  resulting  suffering.
        His  significant  weight  loss,  appearance,  attacks  by  the   is
        significant others and suicidal ideation point towards this.  There
        will be a significant reduction in his life expectancy". [30].


    21. The grounds assert the Judge was wrong to find the test  in  J  had
        not been met on the basis the appellant had not been  admitted  for
        treatment since 2017, there had been  a  limited  increase  in  his
        medication and that any deterioration  had  not  been  reported  to
        treating physicians even though the family  were  fully  conversant
        with those responsible for the appellant's care.  It  is  submitted
        this is a finding not open to the Judge in light of the findings by
        the clinicians that the appellant suffers substantial mental health
        difficulties and has severe and enduring  mental  health  problems.
        The Grounds assert that no further  deterioration,  hospitalisation
        or increase in medication was required to show that the  subsisting
        mental health condition was serious, severe and endures.
    22. The appellant also criticises the Judge's finding that treatment is
        available in Algeria and that  if  returned  to  Algeria  with  his
        mother and younger brother he would have help and be able to obtain
        advice and medication from physicians there. The appellant  asserts
        such finding was not open to the Judge  in  light  of  it  what  is
        recorded at [33] of the decision in which the Judge writes:


        33.  At this stage I turned to  consider  the  country  information
             regarding the type of treatment that is available in  Algeria.
             The report provided by the Home Office state that  the  MedCOI
             database  shows  there  are  psychiatric  care  facilities  in
             Algeria and there are psychiatrists in Algeria who  can  treat
             people  with  psychotic  disorders.  The  report  states  that
             Fluoxetine and Olanzapine are available in Algeria. A  further
             report  on  psychiatric  services  from  BJPsych  Int.   dated
             February 2017 looked at the current provision for  psychiatric
             services in Algeria. The report states that the state provides
             psychiatric care free of charge. Most psychotropic drugs  even
             atypical antipsychotics are available free of  charge  to  the
             people who have  a  chronic  mental  illness.  It  is  further
             reported that in an agreement between the Ministry of National
             Solidarity and the public national insurance  company,  people
             with chronic mental disorders with insurance coverage  receive
             a disability pension (it is not  however  known  whether  this
             will apply to this particular appellant).  There  are  however
             limitations to care. I observe the  report  also  states  that
             there  is  an  even  distribution   of   hospitals   providing
             psychiatric  care  across  the  country.  Outpatient  care  is
             limited to  providing  consultation  and  no  other  forms  of
             community care is available for adults. There are no community
             residential rehabilitation programs. The number of psychiatric
             beds has dropped even though the population has  grown.  There
             is a shortage of medical staff. More  efforts  are  needed  to
             reform the mental health system.


    23. The evidence of Dr Hussain was that  in  addition  to  the  chronic
        ongoing schizophrenia, which has gone  on  for  a  long  time,  the
        appellant is not responding to  his  antipsychotic  medication.  As
        such the availability of medication  in  Algeria  is  said  by  the
        appellant to be no answer to his condition.
    24. The appellant also asserts the Judge erred in failing  to  consider
        whether what was available could amount to  appropriate  treatment,
        the absence of which would result in a serious rapid and reversible
        decline causing a significant reduction  in  the  appellant's  life
        expectancy.  This  is  said  to  be  the  situation  even  if   the
        appellant's mother and  brother  were  able  to  accompany  him  to
        Algeria.
    25. The appellant argues  the  question  of  public  interest  and  the
        proportionality of the decision does not  arise  in  a  case  where
        article 3 ECHR is engaged.
    26. The Secretary of State, in arguing no  legal  error  arises,  notes
        there is no challenge to the  Judge's  findings  made  pursuant  to
        article 8 ECHR.
    27. At [7-9] of the respondent's submissions it is written:


        7.   [3.1] of the Grounds of Appeal contend that the FTTJ] erred at
             [39] in requiring a worsening of the Appellant's mental health
             for the J threshold to be met. The Respondent does not  agree.
             The background  is  that,  on  20  June  2016,  FTTJ  Mitchell
             dismissed the Appellant's previous appeal,  finding  that  the
             deportation of the Appellant to Algeria would not  breach  his
             human rights including those based on his mental  health  [see
             [7], [30-35]  and  [58-76]  of  Annex  N  of  the  Respondents
             bundle]. Correctly applying Devaseelan principles, FTTJ Feeney
             treated the decision of FTTJ Mitchell as  his  starting  point
             and directed himself to  consider  whether  the  new  evidence
             about the Appellant's mental health was  such  that  he  could
             reach different findings on Article 3 and 8 [34]. Before  FTTJ
             Feeney, Counsel advanced the Appellant mental health claim  in
             terms of the risk of suicide or other  self-harm  for  him  in
             Algeria [13] [36]. In the Respondent's  submission,  the  FTTJ
             properly considered at  [37-39]  whether  the  new,  post-2016
             evidence about the Appellant's mental  health  met  the  first
             test in J, that is whether the severity of the treatment faced
             by the Appellant on removal from the UK attained  the  minimum
             level of severity. The FTTJ conducted the required  assessment
             and gave adequate reasons finding that this first test was not
             met.


        8.   In response to [3.2.1] of the Grounds of  Appeal,  Dr  Hussain
             wrote this report some five months  before  the  hearing.  The
             FTTJ was aware of Dr Hussain's statement  that  the  Appellant
             had not  responded  to  anti-psychotic  medication  [30].  The
             evidence before the FTTJ was that,  since  this  antipsychotic
             medication did not seem to have the beneficial effect  on  the
             Appellant's well-being that it previously had, an increase  in
             the dosage of the medication had been recommended, although Dr
             Hussain was unclear as to why the increase  had  not  happened
             [37]. Therefore, using the terminology  of  this  Ground,  the
             answer to the Appellants condition  was  an  increase  in  the
             dosage of his current medication. The  Respondent  notes  that
             the  Grounds  do  not  challenge  the  FTTJ's   finding   that
             antipsychotic medication would  be  freely  available  to  the
             Appellant in Algeria [46] [47] [50] [52].


        9.   In response to [3.2.2-5] of the Grounds of  Appeal,  the  FTTJ
             considered the evidence before him about the  availability  of
             medication and treatment for mental health issues  in  Algeria
             [33]. He noted evidence about the availability  of  drugs  and
             psychiatric care which was free of charge; and other  evidence
             that there was some "limitations to care". The FTTJ applied to
             the evidence at [41] when - addressing the sixth test in  J  -
             he considered whether  Algeria  had  effective  mechanisms  to
             reduce the risk of  suicide.  It  was  open  to  the  FTTJ  to
             conclude that "treatment is available in Algeria" and that "if
             return (sic) Algeria with his mother and younger brother  [the
             Appellant] would have helped and he will  be  able  to  obtain
             advice and medication from physicians in Algeria".



Error of law


    28. It is not disputed that article 3 ECHR provides absolute protection
        and that if engaged it is not  subject  to  an  assessment  of  the
        proportionality of the decision.
    29. The Judge, having considered the evidence was not satisfied that it
        had been made out that article 3 was engaged on the  basis  of  the
        appellant's mental health.
    30. The Court of Appeal has recently  reminded  all  those  considering
        whether another judge has made an error of law to only make such  a
        finding if such a claim is made out on the basis  of  the  material
        before the Judge. Another judge  may  disagree  with  the  findings
        being considered but that, per se, does  not  warrant  a  grant  of
        permission to appeal.
    31. The Judge took as his starting point in this case the  decision  of
        the earlier judge of the First-tier Tribunal noted in the  decision
        and pleadings. Relevant findings had been made by the  other  judge
        of the First-tier Tribunal that there was no bar to the appellant's
        return to Algeria at the date of the hearing of the first appeal in
        2016.
    32. The Judge does not treat the earlier decision as determinative  and
        clearly goes on  to  consider  whether  the  evidence  provided  in
        support of this  appeal  warrants  a  departure  from  the  earlier
        findings.
    33. The Judge assesses this question by reference to  the  decision  of
        the Court of Appeal in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 in which it was
        found that in a foreign  case  the  Article   3   threshold   would
        be  particularly  high  and  even  higher where the alleged inhuman
        treatment was not the direct or indirect  responsibility   of   the
        public  authorities  in  the  receiving  state  and  resulted  from
          some   naturally   occurring   illness   whether   physical    or
        mental. That is the situation in this appeal.
    34. The more recent decision of  AXB   (Art   3   health:  obligations:
        suicide)  Jamaica  [2019]  UKUT  397   considered   the   case   of
        Savran  and  held  that  (i)  In  a  case  where   an   individual,
        asserts  that  his  removal  from   the   Returning   State   would
        violate   his   Article   3   ECHR   rights    because    of    the
        consequences   to   his   health,    the    obligation    on    the
        authorities  of  a  Returning   State   dealing   with   a   health
        case  is   primarily   one   of   examining   the   fears   of   an
        applicant as to what will occur following return and assessing  the
        evidence.  In order to   fulfil   its   obligations, a    Returning
         State   must   provide "appropriate   procedures"  to  allow  that
        examination and assessment to be carried out. In   the   UK,   that
        is  met  in  the  first  place  by  an  examination  of  the   case
        by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  then  by  an   examination   on
        appeal  by  the  Tribunal and an assessment of the evidence  before
        it; (ii) There is no free-standing  procedural  obligation   on   a
        Returning  State  to  make  enquiries  of the    Receiving    State
        concerning    treatment     in     that     State     or     obtain
        assurances  in  that  regard.    Properly   understood,   what   is
        referred  to  at  [185]   to   [187]   of   the   Grand   Chamber's
        judgment  in  Paposhvili  concerns the  discharge   of   respective
        burdens  of  proof;  (iii) The  burden   is   on   the   individual
        appellant to establish that, if he is removed, there is a real risk
        of a breach of Article 3 ECHR to the standard and  threshold  which
        apply.  If the  appellant  provides  evidence  which   is   capable
        of  proving  his  case  to  the   standard   which   applies,   the
        Secretary  of  State   will   be   precluded   from   removing  the
        appellant unless she is able to  provide  evidence  countering  the
        appellant's  evidence  or  dispelling  doubts  arising  from   that
        evidence. Depending on the particular circumstances  of  the  case,
        such evidence might include  general  evidence,  specific  evidence
        from the Receiving State following  enquiries  made  or  assurances
        from the Receiving State concerning the treatment of the  appellant
        following return.
    35. There was no evidence of any enquiries  having  been  made  of  the
        Algerian authorities seeking assurances  concerning  treatment  the
        appellant will be able to access following return or to  show  that
        the treatment referred to in the country material  was  either  not
        available or insufficient despite this having been an issue in  the
        2016 decision and the refusal of the human  right  claim  dated  19
        March 2018, which is the decision being appealed against.
    36. In J v SSHD, which should now be read in light of ABX, the Court of
        Appeal set out the test in Article 3 cases as  follows.   (i)   the
        feared ill treatment must be of  a  minimum level of severity; (ii)
        a causal link must be shown between the  act  of  removal  and  the
        inhuman treatment relied on; (iii) in a foreign case the Article  3
        threshold will be particularly  high.  (iv)  in  principle  it  was
        possible for an Article 3 case to succeed on the basis of  a   risk
        of  suicide  and  (v)  in  a  foreign  case  of  suicide  risk   it
        would  be  relevant to consider whether the fear of  ill  treatment
        in the receiving state was objectively well founded; if  not,  this
        would weigh against there being a real  risk  of  there   being   a
        breach;  and  (vi)  it  would  also   be   relevant   to   consider
        whether   the   removing   and/or   the   receiving    state    had
        effective  mechanisms  to  reduce  the   risk;   if   there   were,
        this  would  also  weigh  against there being  a  real  risk  of  a
        breach.  The Court of Appeal went on to say that the  Tribunal  was
        correct to consider separately the risk of  treatment  contrary  to
        Article 3 in the UK, in transit and in Sri Lanka.     In   relation
        to  the  risk  in  the  UK  it  was  open  to   the   Tribunal   to
        conclude  that  the  risk  of  suicide   in   the   UK   would   be
        adequately  managed   by   the   UK   authorities   and   that   in
        combination  with  the  support  of  the  appellant's family   they
        could  bring  the  risk  of  suicide  to  below   the   Article   3
        threshold    when  the  decision  to   remove   was   taken.     In
        relation  to  the  risk  of  suicide  on  route  the  Tribunal  was
        entitled to infer that the  Secretary  of  State  would  take   all
        reasonable  steps  to  discharge  his  obligations  under   section
        6  of  the Human  Rights  Act  and  take  judicial  notice  of  the
        arrangements that  the  Secretary   of   State   made   to   escort
        vulnerable  persons  on  return.    In  relation  to  the  risk  of
        suicide in Sri  Lanka  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  take  into
        account  the  evidence  that  there  would  be  family  support  on
         return,  that  the  claimant  would   have   access   to   medical
        treatment,   and   that   his   fears  of  persecution   were   not
        objectively justified.
    37. Even if the nature or range of medical treatment available  to  the
        appellant in Algeria is not the same as  that  in  the  UK,  in  GS
        (India)  and  Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40 at  paragraph  67  Lord
         Justice Laws endorsed the views in N v UK  that  "aliens  who  are
        subject to expulsion  order   cannot   in   principle   claim   any
        entitlement  to  remain  in  the  territory of a contracting  state
        in order to continue to benefit from medical, social or other forms
        of assistance and services provided by the expelling State".
    38. See also - AS   v    Switzerland    (Application    No    39350/13)
        ECtHR   (Second   Section) (2015) in which the asylum  seeker  from
        Syria sought to argue that a Dublin Convention  removal   back   to
        Italy  breached  Articles  3  and  8  because  he  had severe  post-
        traumatic  stress  disorder  and  back  problems  following torture
         in  Syria,   because   he   was   emotionally   reliant   on   two
        sisters  who resided  in  Switzerland and  because  of   systematic
        deficiencies  in  the  Italian  reception  system  which  meant  he
        would not benefit from adequate medical   treatment   there.     It
        was   held   that   the   decision   to   remove    an    applicant
        suffering  from  a  serious  physical  or  mental  illness   to   a
        country  where  treatment  facilities  were   inferior   to   those
        in  the  Contracting  State  could raise an issue under  Article  3
        only in very exceptional cases where humanitarian  grounds  against
        removal were compelling. It did not do so in this case.
    39. The Judge clearly considered the availability of medical treatment,
        recognising not only the evidence setting out  what  was  available
        but also limitations upon the same. The  Judge  clearly  took  into
        account with the required  degree  of  care  the  medical  evidence
        provided in the case and the finding that the first test set out in
        J had not been met has not been shown to be a finding  outside  the
        range of those available to the Judge on the evidence.
    40. The Judge went on, however, to consider the remaining  elements  of
        the test, in the alternative, in [40] and it is not  made  out  the
        Judge's assessment that there was in existence effective mechanisms
        to reduce the risk of suicide as a result of  the  availability  of
        medical treatment and presence of the appellant's family members in
        Algeria, is outside the range of findings reasonably  open  to  the
        Judge on the evidence.
    41. Expert evidence clearly refers to the need for medical intervention
        at an appropriate degree of prescription. The Judge notes that  the
        evidence relied upon was historic rather than having been  provided
        shortly before the date of the  appeal  hearing,  and  even  though
        noting limitations in the provision of care for those  with  mental
        health needs in Algeria at [33], it was  not  made  out  that  this
        appellant could not access the nature of the  assistance  and  help
        that he himself required. There is no finding by the Judge, made or
        warranted on the evidence, that the appellant would not be able  to
        access treatment
    42. The Judge's finding that the high threshold of Article  3  had  not
        been found to be crossed and that the  decision  was  proportionate
        pursuant to article 8 ECHR has not been shown to be a finding  that
        is either perverse, irrational,  or  outside  the  range  of  those
        available to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence.  While  the  appellant
        disagrees with  this  outcome  and  suggests  through  his  lawyers
        preferred possible alternative  findings,  they  do  not  establish
        arguable legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal
        sufficient to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in
        this matter.

Decision

    43. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    44. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 24 November 2020












