
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07313/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 November 2020                |On 20 November 2020                |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



                                   Between

                               REETU CHAMLING

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, instructed by Everest Law Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



                         DECISION AND DIRECTIONS (V)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, a national of Nepal with date of birth given as 9.11.82,
    has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated   30.1.20   (Judge   Aujla),
    dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision of  21.2.19  to
    refuse her application made on 3.1.19 for entry clearance to the UK  as
    the adult dependent child of her parents, settled in the UK since  2012
    as a former Gurkha and his wife.

 2. In granting permission  on  14.4.20,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Gumsley) found it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to
    properly apply the test of real, effective  or  committed  support  and
    erroneously applied higher requirements of support  of  necessity,  and
    something  beyond  'normal  emotional  dependency,'  when   considering
    whether there was family life engaging article 8 ECHR. The grounds also
    argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its  approach  to  the
    financial evidence.

 3. On 2.7.20, the Upper Tribunal  issued  directions  proposing  that  the
    error of law issue be determined without a  hearing  and  provided  for
    further   written   submissions.   In   response,    the    appellant's
    representatives submitted further written  submissions,  dated  8.7.20,
    together with further evidence. On 23.7.20 the Upper Tribunal  received
    the respondent's written submissions in reply.  All  these  submissions
    are now in the Tribunal's case file.

    The Error of Law Findings

 4. In summary, both parties agreed that there were such errors of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it to be set
    aside. Neither party sought an oral hearing. Accordingly, I  determined
    the error of law issue on the papers, pursuant to Rule 34.

 5. In respect of the grounds  relating  to  the  financial  evidence,  the
    respondent accepts that at  [39]  the  First-tier  Tribunal  overlooked
    evidence of financial support and made an incorrect finding, which  was
    material to the conclusion under article  8(1).   The  respondent  also
    agrees that an error of law is disclosed in the finding at [43] of  the
    impugned decision in that the judge appears to have concluded that  the
    respondent's decision was proportionate simply  on  the  basis  of  the
    parents' choice to relocate to the UK. Whilst the  respondent  did  not
    accept that the First-tier Tribunal Judge set the bar too high  in  the
    assessment of family life, it was conceded that this point will need to
    be reconsidered on a remaking of the appeal.

 6. Having carefully  considered  the  grounds  and  submissions,  for  the
    reasons set out in my error of law decision, I found such error of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require it to  be  set
    aside and remade.

 7. In particular, I was satisfied that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    factual error as to the evidence in relation to financial  support.  At
    [39] the judge found that there were no remittances prior to 2018, when
    the evidence in the bundle disclosed remittances back to early 2015 and
    the witness statement evidence was  that  the  parents  were  regularly
    sending both the appellant and her brother money to share between  them
    and granted access to their bank account.

 8. I was also satisfied that at [35] and [36] the judge  appears  to  have
    approached the consideration of the evidence on the basis that  it  was
    for the appellant to demonstrate that emotional and  financial  support
    was made  of  necessity,  when  there  is  no  such  requirement.  More
    significantly, at [38] of  the  decision  the  judge  also  erroneously
    sought something beyond 'normal  emotional  dependency,'  an  incorrect
    formulation of the test, probably combining 'something more than normal
    emotional ties'  and  the  requirement  in  Gurung  that  a  degree  of
    'emotional dependence' is  required.  In  deciding  whether  there  was
    family life, the judge should have considered whether such  support  as
    the appellant received was 'real, effective or committed.'

 9. Having set the decision aside, I proposed that it could  be  remade  in
    the Upper Tribunal at  a  resumed  hearing,  held  remotely.  I  issued
    directions  providing  the  opportunity  to  make  written  submissions
    objecting to a remote hearing, and directing the  compilation,  lodging
    and service of a  consolidated  bundle  for  the  resumed  hearing.  No
    objection to a remote hearing was made.

10. I have in the Tribunal's case file the appellant's bundles prepared for
    the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing, the  respondent's  bundle,  and
    the  appellant's  skeleton  argument.    I   have   also   received   a
    supplementary appellant's  bundle,  submitted  by  email  on  13.11.20,
    outside the time limits provided  for  in  the  directions.  The  email
    refers to a consolidated bundle submitted on 12.11.20 and containing  7
    attachments, but I have not received this. Mr Moriarty  explained  that
    the missing documentation was little more than that  which  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, together  with  the  Tribunal  directions  and
    decisions since then. Mr McVeety had not seen either  sets  of  bundles
    but during the hearing was able to access  the  emails  containing  the
    bundles and took no issue on the late service and confirmed he was in a
    position to proceed.

11. The  appellant's  father  and  sponsor  Mr  Rai  attended  the  hearing
    remotely, as did a  Nepalese  interpreter,  Ms  Ranabhat.  Mr  Moriarty
    explained that whilst the appellant's mother was in the  room,  he  did
    not intend to call her but would have a few  questions  of  Mr  Rai  to
    bring the situation up to date. Following the oral evidence of Mr  Rai,
    the interpreter was released and the hearing proceeded  by  submissions
    only.

12. I have carefully considered the issues in the appeal in  the  light  of
    the submissions made to me and the documentary and oral evidence of  Mr
    Rai.




    Relevant Background

13. The adult appellant, now 38 years of age,  is  the  daughter  of  Kadam
    Bahadur Rai, a retired Gurkha soldier, and his wife  Ratana  Sila  Rai,
    who came to the UK from Nepal in 2013  and  have  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain. They are the sponsors to the appellant's application for  entry
    clearance as their adult dependent child, made at a time when  she  was
    36 years of age.

14. The appellant's father served in the Brigade of  Gurkhas  for  some  15
    years,  retiring  in  1969.  Following  a  change  of  policy  and   in
    recognition of his service, in 2013 he was granted Indefinite Leave  to
    settle in the UK. However, by that time the appellant was 18  years  of
    age and under the policy she was unable to apply to accompany  or  join
    her parents in coming to the UK. It is asserted that had not the  long-
    standing historical injustice against family members of former  Gurkhas
    not taken place, the appellant's father would not have been deprived of
    the right to settle in the UK many  years  earlier  and  the  appellant
    would either have been born in the UK or at the very least been able to
    accompany her parents whilst she was still a minor.

15. The application was refused following consideration of the Secretary of
    State's policy  in  respect  of  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  HM  Forces
    dependants over the age of 18 as amended (the policy), paragraph  EC-DR
    1.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, and article 8 ECHR outside
    the Rules. The Entry Clearance  Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant met the terms of Annex K of the policy as she  was  over  the
    age of 30 and had lived apart from her  parents  for  over  two  years.
    Neither  was  it  accepted  that  the  evidence  submitted   with   the
    application demonstrated  that  she  was  financially  and  emotionally
    dependent on her parents, or that there were more  than  the  emotional
    ties normally to be expected between an adult child and a  parent.  The
    Entry Clearance Officer noted limited evidence of contact  between  the
    appellant and her parents, together with some money transfer  receipts,
    but  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was   financially   and
    emotionally dependent. In  the  premises,  it  was  not  accepted  that
    article 8 was engaged on the limited evidence of  family  life  between
    the appellant and her parents. The respondent's case is  that  even  if
    article is engaged, the historic injustice has  not  been  such  as  to
    prevent the appellant from living a normal life, and therefore did  not
    outweigh the public interest of enforcing  immigration  control  to  be
    considered in the proportionality balancing exercise.

16. The refusal decision was reviewed but maintained by the Entry Clearance
    Manager on 18.11.19, considering that article  8  was  not  engaged  in
    terms of family life and that there were no exceptional circumstances.

17. The appellant accepts that she does not fall within the  terms  of  the
    2009 policy, or Appendix FM, but maintains  that  this  is  a  historic
    injustice case and relies on extant family life pursuant to article  8.
    In any event, under s82(1) the appeal can  only  be  pursued  on  human
    rights grounds. It is for the appellant to demonstrate on  the  balance
    of probabilities that she continues  to  enjoy  family  life  with  her
    parents within the meaning of article 8(1). It  is  submitted  that  in
    historic injustice cases the public interest in  enforcing  immigration
    control is outweighed by the evidence of extant family life.

18. In Gurung v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8, the Court of Appeal held that if  a
    Gurkha could show that but for the historic  injustice  he  would  have
    settled in the UK at a time when his now adult  dependent  child  would
    have been able to accompany him as a dependent child under the  age  of
    18, that is strong reason to find it proportionate to permit the  child
    to join his parent in the UK. The historic wrong suffered by Gurkha ex-
    servicemen should be given substantial weight.

19. Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 held that there is no presumption of
    family life and that blood ties and  the  concern  and  affection  that
    ordinarily goes with them are not sufficient to constitute family  life
    within the meaning of article 8. The protection of  family  life  under
    article 8 does not extent  to  relationships  between  adult  relatives
    "without evidence of further elements  of  dependency,  involving  more
    than the normal emotional ties." Dependency is not limited to  economic
    dependency, but requires real, or committed or effective support.

20. In Ghising and others (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong:  weight)  [2013]
    UKUT 567 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held that where article 8 is  engage
    and that but for the historic  wrong  the  appellant  would  have  been
    settled in the UK long ago, that fact would  ordinarily  determine  the
    outcome of the article 8 proportionality assessment in the  appellant's
    favour, where the public interest factors relied on by  the  respondent
    consists  solely  of  the  public  interest  in  maintaining   a   firm
    immigration policy.

21.  Neither  reaching  the  age  of  majority  nor  voluntary   separation
    necessarily ends family life within the meaning of article 8.  However,
    a degree of emotional dependence must continue,  which turns on whether
    the appellant has had and continues to enjoy support which can properly
    be described as 'real, or effective  or  committed,'  pursuant  to  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer  Delhi
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320. The support  provided  does  not  need  to  be  of
    necessity or irreplaceable. Each case must be analysed on its own facts
    in order to decide whether family life exists  within  the  meaning  of
    article 8(1).

22.  In support of her claim, the appellant relies on extensive documentary
    evidence, which it is claimed, demonstrates that her parents  have  and
    continue to provide her with real, or effective and committed emotional
    and financial support, thereby demonstrating that family life  engaging
    article 8(1) continues.

23. In relation to the public interest,  the  respondent  does  not  assert
    anything over and above the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm
    immigration policy.

24. The unchallenged facts can be summarised as follows:

      a. The parents chose to apply  for  settlement  at  a  time  when  the
         appellant was already an adult and in the knowledge that under  the
         policy then in force adult children did not  automatically  qualify
         for settlement;

      b. However, the father was deprived of the opportunity  to  settle  in
         the UK long before he was able to do  so  and  when  the  appellant
         might have been either born or raised as a child in the UK;

      c. The appellant remains unmarried, unemployed  and  without  her  own
         family unit;

      d. She has been living apart from her parents for over two years since
         they came to the UK and now over 6 years;

      e. However, she has six elder siblings still living in Nepal;

      f. She continues to live in accommodation provided by her parents.  At
         the present time and for the past year, her brother Sandesh Rai  is
         living with her, although he normally  lives  in  the  UK.  Mr  Rai
         explained that he has been unable to return to the  UK  because  of
         the Covid-19 pandemic restrictions;

      g. She enjoys good physical, emotional and mental health;

      h. Her parents have provided at least some financial support, set  out
         in the appellant's documentary evidence which dates from  2015.  Mr
         Rai's  witness  statement  confirmed  that  he  provided  financial
         support from before 2015.  In  his  oral  evidence  before  me,  he
         confirmed that he continued to make financial  remittances  to  the
         appellant,  as  demonstrated  by   the   documents   in   the   new
         supplementary bundle.

25. As noted above, when considering whether there was extant  family  life
    engaging article 8(1) the First-tier Tribunal Judge erroneous relied on
    a finding that the appellant did not need continuing emotional  support
    from her elderly parents and doubted what kind  and  level  of  support
    they could provide at their very advanced ages.  The  judge  considered
    that if she needed such support, she could  call  on  her  siblings  in
    Nepal.

26. Whilst the fact of the age of the appellant, the age of her parents and
    their ability  to  provide  financial  or  emotional  support  are  all
    relevant factors, as is the likely availability of at  least  emotional
    support from her siblings  in  Nepal,  including  for  the  time  being
    Sandesh, it matters not whether the support she in fact  receives  from
    her parents is provided of necessity.

27. I accept the unchallenged assertion in the father's  witness  statement
    that he always wanted to settle in the UK. He explained that  he  first
    heard about new rules for ex-Gurkha  soldiers  and  their  families  in
    2009. By that time his children were over the age of 18. He stated that
    he couldn't afford the application fee and didn't intend to  apply  but
    later changed his mind, borrowing the money. In the UK,  he  relied  on
    housing benefit and pension credit as his only source of income, saving
    some of that to send to the appellant and to save up for return  travel
    to Nepal. Having been able to assess Mr Rai at the  remote  hearing,  I
    accept as credible his evidence that had the policy been  available  to
    him when he retired from military service  he  would  have  raised  his
    family in the UK and his daughter  would,  therefore,  have  been  born
    here.

28. In relation to financial support, as noted above the appellant's bundle
    contains remittance receipts  going  back  to  2015  and  the  father's
    witness statement suggests that he has been providing financial support
    since he and his wife arrived in the UK in January 2013. As stated,  he
    confirmed the continuation  of  financial  support,  evidenced  by  the
    remittal documents in the supplementary bundle. I also note and  accept
    as genuine the evidence of continued telephone or social media contact.



29. I also note that the parents have visited the appellant in Nepal  three
    times, in 2015, 2016, and 2018.

30. In his evidence before me, Mr Rai confirmed that he sent the  appellant
    between 7,000 to 8,000 Rupees each month, though there  had  been  some
    problems over the past two or three months because of the pandemic.  He
    also confirmed that apart from the appellant and Sandesh living in  his
    former home in Nepal, there were other  children  living  independently
    elsewhere in Nepal.

31. In his submissions, Mr McVeety very fairly accepted that there could be
    little doubt that on the facts  of  this  case  family  life  continues
    between the appellant  and  her  parents,  with  credible  evidence  of
    emotional support by regular visits and telephone contact, as  well  as
    continuing financial support. He also accepted that  the  appellant  is
    unmarried, single, and still  living  in  the  family  home  in  Nepal,
    entirely financially supported by her parents. In the premises, he  did
    not challenge the claimed dependency and that it continues.

32. On the evidence and facts applied to the relevant legal criteria, I  am
    satisfied that despite her mature  age,  the  appellant  has  been  and
    remains dependent  on  the  financial  and  emotional  support  of  her
    parents. I am satisfied that family life existed  between  them  before
    the  parents  came  to  the  UK  and  has  continued  thereafter.   The
    documentation submitted with the application may have been insufficient
    to persuade the Entry Clearance Officer but I  am  satisfied  that  the
    support provided to the appellant is  real,  effective  and  committed,
    extending  beyond  mere  financial  support.  In  the  premises,  I  am
    satisfied that there exists  between  the  appellant  and  her  parents
    family life which engages article 8 ECHR.

33. Given the historic injustice factors which apply to this case, and that
    there are no public interest considerations other than  maintenance  of
    immigration  control,  I  am  satisfied   that   in   the   article   8
    proportionality balancing exercise, there is strong reason to find that
    the public interest  is  outweighed,  so  that  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance was disproportionate.

34. It follows that the appellant should be allowed entry clearance to join
    her family in the UK.

    Decision

    For the reasons set out out above,  I  find  that  the  making  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an  error
    on a point of law such that the decision should be  set  aside  and  be
    remade by allowing the appeal.

                    I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

                    I remake the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  on
                    family life human rights grounds, pursuant to article  8
                    ECHR.

                    I make no order for costs.

                    I make no anonymity direction.




                    Signed   DMW Pickup


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated 16 November 2020


