
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07325/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On July 14 2017                              |On 17 July 2017               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          mr jermaine trevor barton
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Rutherford, Counsel (Direct Access)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent in these proceedings was the appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  From hereon I have referred to the parties as they were
    in the First-tier Tribunal so  that,  for  example,  reference  to  the
    respondent is a reference to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.

 2. I do not make an anonymity direction under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 3. The appellant is a Jamaican national.  On July 28, 1997  the  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom. On December 23, 2015 he applied  to  remain
    on the basis of his  relationship  with  his  un-married  partner.  The
    respondent refused this application on February 26, 2016

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal against that decision  on  March
    10, 2016 under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002.  His appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bell
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on November 23, 2016 and in a decision
    promulgated on December 14, 2016 the Judge allowed the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. The respondent appealed this decision on December 22, 2016.  Permission
    to appeal was given by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Gillespie  on
    May 17, 2017.

 6. The matter came before  me  on  the  above  date.   The  appellant  was
    present.

 7. Miss Rutherford accepted that there was an error  in  law  because  the
    Judge did not have the power to allow the appeal  under  the  Rules  as
    this was a decision taken post April 6, 2015 and it did not fall within
    any of the exception set out in the transitional provisions.

 8. In the circumstances I agreed that I would remake  the  decision  under
    article 8 ECHR as this was the only power available to me.

 9. Mr Bates advised that the appellant had now been here for twenty  years
    and were he to submit a fresh application he  would  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) HC 395.  He  took  a  pragmatic  view  that  there  were  no
    countervailing circumstances that would make removal proportionate  and
    in the circumstances he invited me to allow the appeal under article  8
    ECHR based on his twenty years residence in this country.

10. Miss Rutherford had no submissions to make and invited me to allow  the
    appeal.

    FINDINGS

11. Having already found an error I indicated to the parties that  I  would
    remake the decision under article 8 ECHR.

12. I am grateful to Mr Bates for his  pragmatic  approach.  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Gillespie  had  pointed  out  the  Judge  had  not
    addressed the issue of the  appellant's  relationship  with  a  British
    national but based on the  fact  he  would  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE HC 395 if he were to submit an application today I  am
    satisfied that the appellant had demonstrated  private  life  and  that
    removal would interfere with that. Based on the period of time  he  had
    been here and the fact there are no countervailing circumstances I find
    that requiring him to return to a country he has been absent  from  for
    twenty years would be disproportionate having  regard  to  the  private
    life he has created here. Whilst I  acknowledge  that  he  formed  this
    private life whilst here unlawfully  the  fact  remains  he  would  now
    satisfy the Immigration Rules and that together with Mr Bate's approach
    are my reasons for allowing this appeal

    NOTICE OF DECISION

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside that decision.

14. I remake the decision and allow the appeal under article 8 ECHR.

Signed                              Date     14.07.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

Although I have  allowed  this  appeal  I  have  allowed  based  on  changed
circumstances so I make no fee award.


Signed                              Date     14.07.2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

