
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07482/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2018                           |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                              miss Lay Lay Nwe
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ceallaigh of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Myanmar.  She was  born  on  13  February
    1980.

 2. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision dated 30  June
    2017 to refuse her leave to remain.

 3. The appeal was dismissed in a decision by Judge D. Ross promulgated  on
    12 July 2017.   Whilst  the  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    established a private life in the United Kingdom because she had  lived
    here for almost ten years, he did not consider that the interference by
    the respondent in the appellant's private and family life was  of  such
    gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.  The judge
    considered  the  appellant  had  submitted  a  false  English  language
    certificate and attempted to remain here on a  false  basis.   He  took
    into account s.117B.  He found the appellant's immigration  status  had
    been precarious since her leave was curtailed on 15 October  2015  such
    that he did not give much weight to any private life established  since
    then.  He found the respondent's decision was proportionate.

 4. The grounds claim the judge misdirected himself regarding the test  for
    an innocent explanation.  See SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of
    Proof) [2016] UKUT 222 (IAC).  The judge failed  to  properly  appraise
    himself of the decision in SM and  Qadir  in  that  he  suggested  that
    Professor French's report was before the Tribunal in that case, when it
    was not.

 5. At [12] the judge said the appellant "can produce no explanation as  to
    why somebody else's voice appears on the tape".  The grounds claim  the
    judge erred in failing to direct himself as to what was required by the
    appellant in discharging the burden upon  her.   Shen  (Paper  appeals;
    proving dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC).  The appellant merely  needs
    to proffer an  innocent  explanation  that  meets  "a  basic  level  of
    plausibility" in which case "the burden switches back to the  Secretary
    of State to answer that evidence".

 6. Accordingly, the judge set the benchmark for an explanation  too  high.
    In essence, the judge placed the legal burden upon the appellant.

 7. The level of offending behaviour relied upon by the  respondent  (which
    allegations were refuted by  the  appellant)  did  not  even  at  their
    highest, come within  the  scope  of  the  provision  under  which  the
    decision was made.  The guidance sets a very high threshold  which  had
    not been met.

 8. Judge Povey granted permission on 8 October 2018 inter alia as follows:



         "2.  The primary issue was whether  the  appellant  had  previously
             obtained an English language certificate  by  deception.   The
             grounds submitted that the judge had applied the  wrong  legal
             test to the appellant's evidence and fallen into  misdirection
             regarding  the  background  information  and  the  Immigration
             Rules.

         3.   The first ground of appeal is arguable.  At  [12],  the  judge
             determined the English language certificate  issue.   Reliance
             was placed by the judge on the tape recording to conclude that
             'it is clear' that the  respondent  had  discharged  both  its
             evidential and legal burdens.  The determination recited  that
             the judge had looked at the 'rest of the evidence'.   However,
             it was unclear how the judge had  weighed  or  determined  the
             appellant's evidence of attending the test centre, sitting the
             test, requesting the audio recordings to prove  her  innocence
             or her shock at finding someone else's voice on them.  It  was
             arguable that the judge had applied the various evidential and
             legal burdens of proving correcting and failed  to  adequately
             explain the conclusions reached".

Submissions on Error of Law

 9. Mr O'Ceallaigh relied upon the first ground, submitting that the  judge
    misdirected himself regarding the test for an innocent explanation.

10. Mr Jarvis conceded there had been  a  material  error  in  the  judge's
    approach.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11.  The  judge  was  clearly  suspicious   regarding   the   circumstances
    particularly because the tape recording produced  for  the  appellant's
    test was admitted by the appellant not to be a recording of her voice.

12. The case law has established what is required in terms of the burden of
    proof.  In simple terms, the respondent's generic evidence of  cheating
    was sufficient to establish the respondent's  evidential  burden.   The
    appellant then has the burden  of  establishing  the  circumstances  in
    which the test was taken, following which the burden goes back  to  the
    Secretary of State.

13. Mr O'Ceallaigh identified the failings referred to in Saha [2017]  UKUT
    00017 (IAC) in particular, those mentioned at  [40][ii],  [iii],  [iv],
    [ix], [x], [xi], [xiv],  [xx],  all  of  which  were  common  with  the
    appellant's circumstances as were those matters highlighted at [42][b],
    [d], [g] and [43].  Mr Jarvis did not seek to challenge that  position.



14. Majumder [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 was an appeal from  SM  and  Qadir.   See
    [18]:

         "I have stated that the UT decided that the Secretary of State  had
         discharged the evidential burden that lay on the Secretary of State
         so there was a burden, again an evidential one, on Mr Majumder  and
         Mr Qadir of raising an innocent explanation.  The UT  accepted  (at
         [69]) the submission on behalf of the Secretary of State,  that  in
         considering  an  allegation  of  dishonesty  the  relevant  factors
         included the following: what the person accused had  to  gain  from
         being dishonest; what he had to  lose;  what  is  known  about  his
         character; the cultural environment in which he operated;  how  the
         individual accused of dishonesty performed under cross-examination,
         and whether the Tribunal's  assessment  of  that  person's  English
         language proficiency is commensurate with his or her TOEIC  scores;
         and whether his or her academic achievements are such that  it  was
         unnecessary or illogical for them to have  cheated.  There  was  no
         criticism in this court by Mr Kovats of that approach".

15. Whilst the judge correctly identified at  [12]  of  his  decision,  the
    correct approach, he failed to take account in his  decision  that  the
    appellant had a BSc in chemistry studied in English in her own country.
     She had an MBA from Coventry University, obtained the  same  year  she
    was meant to have cheated.   She  had  attended  and  obtained  various
    certificates following English language courses in this  country.   All
    of this documentation was contained in  the  appellant's  bundle.   The
    judge's approach was to require the  appellant  to  explain  ("she  can
    produce no explanation as to why someone else's voice  appears  on  the
    tape") thus reversing the burden  and  setting  the  benchmark  for  an
    explanation too high.  Saha was authority for various  explanations  as
    to the lack of integrity of the various test systems which  might  have
    resulted in the admittedly bizarre result that the voice  on  the  test
    was not that of the appellant.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of
    law, is set aside and will be re-made in the First-tier following a  de
    novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 23 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

