
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07701/2018
     HU/07704/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th January 2019                          |On 15th February 2019         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr K M (first Appellant)
                        master F R (second Appellant)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms T Srindran, solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The appeal is brought by the Secretary of State against the decision of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  1st  November   2018   with
    permission granted at the First-tier Tribunal.  In that decision First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devittie allowed the Appellants' appeal brought  on
    human rights grounds against a refusal of leave to remain.

 2. The adult Appellant is the father of the second and minor Appellant who
    was born in Indonesia on 1st September  2010.   The  grounds  on  which
    permission were granted are essentially that the judge has allowed  the
    appeal based on a conclusion that there are insurmountable obstacles to
    the family continuing their family life in Indonesia, and that although
    the judge has correctly self-directed as to the test of  insurmountable
    obstacles at paragraph 6, his decision  subsequently:  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles is unreasoned.

 3. I find no merit in the grounds.  To my mind  the  grounds  misread  the
    judge's decision.  A careful reading shows  that  at  paragraph  9  the
    judge concludes that there would be no insurmountable obstacles to  the
    parties continuing family life outside the United Kingdom. In that and,
    contrary to the position in the grounds,  the  judge  agrees  with  the
    respondent.  The reasoning for allowing the appeal is that despite that
    position there are exceptional circumstances operating which mean  that
    nonetheless the appeals should succeed. As Ms Isherwood has pointed out
    it was not said on behalf of the Appellant  in  the  skeleton  argument
    that the rules were satisfied, and it is clear from  the  skeleton  the
    basis upon which the case was put was  the  exceptional  or  compelling
    reasons.

 4. I am satisfied the judge has found, contrary to the grounds, that these
    Appellants do not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules and
    the judge has moved on to take those findings forwards when  concluding
    that  immigration  control  represents  the  public  interest,  and  at
    paragraph 13(1)  of  the  decision  treated  control  as  a  compelling
    consideration to be weighed in the balance against the circumstances of
    the family life in the United Kingdom. It is in  that  context  he  has
    considered the best interests of  the  child,  and  concluded,  in  the
    context of a family which, and it appears there  was  no  challenge  to
    that position, there is certainly none raised in  the  grounds  of  the
    application  for  permission  to  appeal,  that  would  succeed  in  an
    application for entry clearance from abroad.

 5. An important point to note is that the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    on the day has placed no reliance on the  suitability  requirements  in
    the context of  the  parent's  adverse  immigration  history.  That  is
    relevant to  the  rules  in  terms  of  Appendix  FM  and  the  gateway
    requirements to EX1 for the father, but also in the overall  Article  8
    balancing exercise, including the weight to be given to the  assessment
    of weight to give the best interests of the child vis a vis the  public
    interest.

 6. Accordingly what the  judge  was  assessing  on  the  case  as  it  was
    presented on the day was whether or not it would  be  proportionate  to
    expect the family to either be separated or leave as a  unit  in  order
    that an application be made from abroad, and in this  context  assessed
    whether or not the public interest required there should be  disruption
    to the child for  that  process  to  take  place,  and  the  judge  has
    concluded that it would not be proportionate to  expect  the  child  to
    return to Indonesia for that purpose. You can see that that is the  way
    in which the judge has reasoned this case  because  he  refers  at  the
    final paragraph to the issue as being that described in the decision of
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40

 7. For those reasons I am satisfied that the  challenge  to  the  decision
    based on misdirection or misapplication of the insurmountable obstacles
    Rule is  simply  unwarranted.  I   mentioned  to  the  parties  at  the
    beginning  of  the  hearing  that  on  its  face  the  outcome  is  not
    inconsistent, as the grounds imply, with the case of  Agyarko,  because
    that case at 51 and 52 makes provision  for  the  fact  that  in  these
    circumstances the question of whether or  not  it  would  be  right  to
    expect a family  to  relocate  in  order  to  make  an  application  is
    something that the judge could properly take into account, so  that  it
    is not a decision which in terms of its  outcome  is  perverse  in  the
    context of current jurisprudence.

 8. I am satisfied that the judge did not make any material  error  of  law
    and the decision allowing the appeal stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Anonymity having previously been ordered  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
there being no application to remove the order, I see no  reason  to  do  so
and the order remains in place.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.   This  order  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this order could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

[pic]

Signed                              Date 08 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and no issue of fees arises.

Signed   [pic]    Date 08 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
