
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07851/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 January 2019                             |On 30 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                     Arsherr Gayaneth Sanjitha Fernando
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Anzani, Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, date of  birth  14  July  1996,
    appealed against the ECO's decision to refuse entry clearance  made  on
    22 June 2017.  His appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K
    Swinnerton who, on 30 July 2018, in  a  brief  decision  dismissed  the
    appeal made outside of the Rules but with reference to  paragraph  352D
    in relation to family reunion.

2.   The Judge's decision was appealed and permission to  appeal  was  given
    in the Upper Tribunal on 16 November 2018 on the basis:-

         "Arguably the Judge made factual errors as set out in  the  grounds
         which impacted upon his findings.  It  is  also  arguable  that  he
         unreasonably concluded that the Sponsor, who  has  refugee  status,
         could visit the Appellant in Sri Lanka".

3.   The appeal before the Judge raised significant issues and,  bearing  in
    mind the age of the Appellant, a reference to a degree to  his  current
    circumstances in Sri Lanka was  obviously  material  to  the  issue  of
    whether there were, were it under the Rules, the kind of exceptional or
    sufficiently compelling circumstances.

4.   It is  clear  that  the  Judge  in  two  points  in  the  decision,  in
    paragraphs 22, 23 and 24, had plainly formed a view that  the  personal
    circumstances of the Appellant in Sri Lanka were unconnected, as he had
    claimed, to  the  issue  of  reporting  to  the  authorities  and  that
    essentially what was being said was that he had the current support  of
    family members, grandparents and so forth in Sri Lanka, irrespective of
    the fact, of course, that he was absent of, and had been  absent  from,
    his mother for a number of years.

5.   The basis on which the Judge could form that view on  the  motivational
    issues is tackled in the grounds, particularly by reference to evidence
    that was before the Judge from which the  inference  was  being  drawn,
    that the Appellant's personal circumstances were affecting his  ability
    to continue in education as he needed to do.

6.   The Judge did not, in that sense, give reasons as to  why  he  rejected
    the views about the  impact  of  the  Appellants'  life  in  Sri  Lanka
    affecting his achievements.  The  Judge  identified  to  a  degree  the
    evidence that he received, but did not, indicate why  he  rejected  the
    inferences that they drew from the circumstances in which the Appellant
    was living in Sri Lanka.

7.   The second ground is really,  in  fact,  of  no  particular  relevance,
    although it plainly was an error  of  fact,  in  that  the  Appellant's
    mother (the Sponsor) had been granted refugee status  in  2016  on  the
    basis of ill-treatment at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities.  The
    suggestion that she could go back to visit from time-to-time really had
    no merits and it was difficult to see why the Judge could say  that  he
    was not clear why the Sponsor cannot  visit  Sri  Lanka.   Mr  Whitwell
    submitted that that is an error, but it is not material, ultimately, to
    the decision.  The point not particularly taken, but  I  was  concerned
    that the Judge gives nearly no real  reasons,  with  reference  to  the
    Rules, for the conclusion that there were  no  exceptional,  compelling
    circumstances.  The Judge may be right,  but  I  find  the  explanation
    given in the decision somewhat insufficient.  Nevertheless,  I  do  not
    find an error of law on that discrete basis.

8.   Having considered the matter I find that  the  first  ground  has  some
    merit and that it could be a different  Tribunal  properly  considering
    the evidence would reach  a  different  conclusion  on  this  issue  of
    enabling family reunion outside of the Rules.  Accordingly, I find that
    the Original Tribunal's decision should not stand.  The matter will  be
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined in accordance with
    the law.

DIRECTIONS
(1)  List Hatton Cross not before FtTJ Swinnerton.

(2)  Time - two hours.

(3)  No interpreter required.

(4)  Any further evidence to be served in  accordance  with  any  directions
    given at a CMRH or a PTR if one takes  place,  but  in  any  event  any
    further statements relied upon particularly clarifying the  Appellant's
    current position needs to be produced not less than seven working  days
    before the date for the further hearing and served  on  the  Respondent
    and Tribunal accordingly.

(5)  No anonymity order was sought nor is one required.


Signed                                  Date 16 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey









