
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU075322015
     hu075352015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19 June 2017                              |On 06 July 2017                |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                                     c l
                                     d l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Worthington, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Malawi.   The  first  appellant  is  the
    father of the second appellant who was born in  2014.   By  a  decision
    promulgated on 2 May 2017, I found that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law and I set aside its decision.  My reasons for doing so are
    as follows:

         1.   I shall refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent  and
         to the respondents as the appellants (as they appeared respectively
         before the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellants,  CL  and  DL  are
         citizens of  Malawi.   DL  is  the  minor  daughter  of  the  first
         appellant CL and is aged 2 years.   I  shall  refer  to  the  first
         appellant as  "the  appellant"  throughout  this  decision.   By  a
         decision dated 23 September 2015, the appellants were refused leave
         to remain in the United Kingdom.  They  appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Howard) which, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  29
         September  2016,  allowed  the  appeals  on  human  rights  grounds
         (Article 8, ECHR).   The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,  with
         permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The Grounds of Appeal are brief.  The judge  established  that
         the appellants did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  HC  395.   He
         proceeded to conduct an assessment under Article 8, ECHR, but it is
         submitted that he  failed  to  properly  apply  the  provisions  of
         Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as
         amended).

         3.   I find that the appeal should succeed and that the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.  My reasons for  doing
         so are as follows. The appellant had arrived in the United  Kingdom
         as a student in  May  2002.   He  had  sought  to  vary  his  leave
         unsuccessfully in 2004 and made no further  application  until  the
         present application which is  the  subject  of  this  appeal.   The
         appellant's relationship with the  second  appellant's  mother  had
         begun in 2013.  It appears that the  appellant  did  not  tell  the
         mother of the second appellant that he had no status in the  United
         Kingdom until after she had fallen pregnant.   The  mother  of  the
         second appellant was also a Malawian citizen.  The  mother  of  the
         child has discretionary leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as
         the primary carer of a 5 year  old  child  (S)  who  is  a  British
         citizen.  The judge's analysis of the appeal under Article 8,  ECHR
         commences at [18].  He sets out the familiar guidance contained  in
         Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and then states  that,  "in  addressing  [the
         Article 8 appeal] I look firstly to ... part 5 of the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."  Thereafter, he sets out  Section
         117B of the 2002 Act.  He observes that  there  is  "an  inevitable
         tension" between Section 117B and Section 55 of the UK Borders  Act
         2007.  The judge observed that the family could  live  together  in
         their country of nationality, Malawi.  However, he considered  that
         this

             "causes the burden to fall on (S)  and  her  father  as  their
             family life as it now is would end.  Added to  that  they  are
             both British citizens  so  it  further  involves  the  British
             citizens compromising their family life a situation that  must
             not be brought about lightly. "

         The judge concluded by observing that, "given that ... children are
         separated from one another or their natural parents, removal is not
         in the circumstances necessary."

         4.    As  Mr  Worthington  observed,  there  are  two  interrelated
         families and the complexities are such that outcome of  any  appeal
         is by no means clear.  Unfortunately, the analysis of Judge  Howard
         is equally without clarity.  It is  not  enough  for  the  Tribunal
         simply to quote  statute  law  (in  this  case  Section  117B)  and
         thereafter in the analysis make no attempt whatever  to  apply  the
         detailed provisions of the statute to the facts  as  found  by  the
         Tribunal.  The judge identifies the difficulty at the heart of this
         appeal but he makes no attempt to resolve the difficulties  in  the
         case by a clear application of the law to the facts.   Instead,  he
         observes vaguely that "compromising the  family  life"  of  British
         citizens  should  not  be  carried  out  "lightly"  while   stating
         categorically   yet   without   any   consideration   of   possible
         countervailing factors that the separation of children  from  their
         siblings or their natural  parents  is  not  "necessary";  such  an
         observation may be the outcome of  analysis  but  not  a  predicate
         unsupported by any argument.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 29
         September 2016 is set aside.  None of the findings  of  fact  shall
         stand.  The Upper Tribunal will remake  the  decision  following  a
         resumed hearing on a date to be  fixed  in  Bradford  before  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Clive Lane.

 2. I heard evidence at the resumed hearing from the  first  appellant  and
    his partner, D C.  That the appellant told me that he had lived at  his
    present address since December 2015, that he lived there with D  C  and
    her child by a previous relationship, S, who is a British citizen.  The
    appellant's partner D C is not  a  person  who  currently  has  settled
    status in the United Kingdom.  D C  works  as  a  carer  for  Rotherham
    Council working nights (8pm - 7am).  Cross-examined by  Mrs  Pettersen,
    the appellant CL told me that S spends time with her father  who  lives
    in the United Kingdom.  Staying contact occurs at  the  father's  home.
    Contact takes place on a regular basis.

 3. The witness D C told me  that  her  leave  to  remain  had  expired  in
    September 2016.  She had leave to remain on account of caring  for  her
    British child, S.  She has applied (before the expiry of  her  previous
    leave) for an extension of her leave to remain.  She has yet to receive
    a decision on that application.  Cross-examined by Mrs Pettersen,  D  C
    told the Tribunal that S goes away every other weekend to be  with  her
    father two or three days.  D C was not aware that  the  father  of  the
    child is currently in a relationship.  However, the  father  does  live
    with two of his nephews (aged 15 and 13 years).   The mother  of  those
    children lives in France.

 4. The burden of proof in the appeal is on the appellants and the standard
    of proof is the balance of probabilities (in the  Article  8  appeal  -
    there is no appeal on  any  other  ground).   The  credibility  of  the
    witnesses was not challenged and I accept that the evidence which  they
    gave (which I have summarised above) is truthful and accurate.

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. As I noted in my error of law decision, the relationships in this  case
    are somewhat complex.  Whilst I have summarised the evidence above, the
    written witness statements add further detail.   The  matters  which  I
    will set out below appear to be not controversial;  this  evidence  has
    not been challenged by the respondent and  I  accept  it  as  true  and
    accurate.  The father of the child S does not consent to S leaving  the
    United Kingdom with the appellants and D C to live in Malawi.  D C says
    that she will not leave  the  United  Kingdom  if  the  appellants  are
    removed to Malawi.  Child S lives with the appellants and D C save  for
    periods of staying contact with her father and there is  no  suggestion
    that daily care for the child S  should  pass  to  her  father  at  the
    present time or in the  future.   If  the  family  depart  together  to
    Malawi, then the relationship between S and her United  Kingdom  father
    would be severed.  I accept that there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship between S and her father although I  accept  that
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act (as amended) does not  directly  arise,
    in the context of the instant appeal,  to the father of S and the child
    S.  If the appellants were to be removed and D C and S  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom then the relationship between the  appellants  and  D  C
    (which I accept is genuine and  subsisting  but  is  not  a  qualifying
    relationship, because D C is not a settled person)  will  be  ruptured.
    Indeed, it is difficult to see how  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    second appellant to leave the daily care of her natural  mother,  D  C,
    and go to Malawi.

 7. Mr Worthington, for the appellants, relies on SF and Others  (guidance;
    post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120.  The Upper Tribunal  in  that
    case held the respondent's policy does not require the primary carer of
    a British child to be forced to leave the European Union regardless  of
    the age of the child.  I accept that it is likely that D C was  granted
    leave to remain  in  2014  on  account  of  this  policy,  there  being
    "insurmountable obstacles" to D C relocating with her family in  Malawi
    because S should not be expected to leave the European Union.

 8. The grounds of appeal challenge the previous Tribunal for having failed
    to apply the statutory provisions in the 2002 Act (as amended)  to  the
    facts of this case.  In his skeleton argument, Mr Worthington has  very
    helpfully sought to apply the law to the facts Section 117 provides  as
    follows:

         117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         ....

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)  In this Part-

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
             of seven years or more;

         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the  meaning
             of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

         (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,

             (b)  who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
             offence, and

             (c)  who-

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                  least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                  serious harm, or

                  (iii)    is a persistent offender.

         (3)  For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person subject to  an
         order under-

             (a)  section 5 of the Criminal Procedure (Insanity)  Act  1964
             (insanity etc),

             (b)  section 57 of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act  1995
             (insanity etc), or

             (c)  Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland) Order
             1986 (insanity etc), has not been convicted of an offence.

         (4)  In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to
         a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-

             (a)  do not include a person  who  has  received  a  suspended
             sentence (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence
             or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);

             (b)  do not include a person  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
             period of imprisonment of that length of time only  by  virtue
             of being  sentenced  to  consecutive  sentences  amounting  in
             aggregate to that length of time;

             (c)  include a  person  who  is  sentenced  to  detention,  or
             ordered or directed to be detained, in  an  institution  other
             than a prison (including, in  particular,  a  hospital  or  an
             institution for young offenders) for that length of time; and

             (d)  include a person who  is  sentenced  to  imprisonment  or
             detention, or ordered or  directed  to  be  detained,  for  an
             indeterminate period, provided that it may last for  at  least
             that length of time.

         (5)  If any question arises for the purposes of  this  Part  as  to
         whether a person is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
         asserting that fact to prove it."

 9. Mr Worthington submitted that the appellants are Malawian citizens  but
    also fluent speakers of English.  The family has no recourse to  public
    funds; they are supported by D C who works  as  a  care  assistant.   I
    accept that the appellant has previously worked in the  United  Kingdom
    and, if granted leave, it is likely to do so again.  I  note  that  the
    relationship between D C  and  the  appellant  was  formed  whilst  the
    appellant was living here unlawfully (the first appellant has  been  an
    overstayer since 2004).  As regards the operation of Section 117B(6), I
    note that the section refers to "a parental relationship with a British
    child" [my emphasis].  Had it been intended to restrict the application
    of this sub-section to relationships between British children and their
    natural parents, I see no reason why the provision would not have  said
    so in terms.  The use of the expression "parental relationship" is,  in
    my opinion, intended to include relationships beyond a blood  tie.   It
    permits the possibility of a parental  relationship  occurring  between
    parties who are not related by blood.  In the present appeal, I am told
    that the first appellant looks after the child S taking her to and from
    school and, significantly, caring for S overnight when her mother, D C,
    is away from the family  home  working  as  a  carer.   Mr  Worthington
    invites me to find that there is, for the purpose of Section 117B(6), a
    parental relationship between S and the first appellant.  On the  facts
    as I have found them, I find that to be  the  case.   For  the  reasons
    given above, I find that it is also not a reasonable  to  expect  S  to
    leave the United Kingdom.   It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  public
    interest does not require the removal of the first appellant.

10. I have had regard to the age of the children involved in this case.   I
    have had regard also to the fact that they live together as  a  family.
    I do not find that it is in the best interests of the second  appellant
    to be removed from that family, and in  particular,  removed  from  the
    care and control of her father, the first appellant.

11. It follows from the findings which I have made above, that it would  be
    disproportionate for the first and second appellants to be  removed  to
    Malawi.  I therefore allow their appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

These appeals are allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 3 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

