
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07211/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2019                     |On 20 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                           miss durga devi gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum of Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Nepal born  on  13  October  1983.   She
    applied for entry clearance to join her father and sponsor, Suk Bahadur
    Gurung, who was a former Gurkha soldier who became settled in the UK on
    18 August 2016.  The application for entry clearance was refused on  17
    May 2017. The appellant appealed against that decision, her appeal came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson for hearing on 2 August  2018
    and in a decision and reasons promulgated on 22 August 2018, the appeal
    was  dismissed.   The  Appellant  made  an  in-time   application   for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and following a  hearing  on
    29 November 2018, I found material errors of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and set that decision  aside  for  a  resumed
    hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   A  copy  of  that  decision  is
    appended.

     Hearing

 2. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Jesurum sought to rely  on
    his skeleton argument dated 10 March 2019.  Mr Avery on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State agreed that there  had  been  no  challenge  to  the
    judge's finding that there is family life between the appellant and the
    sponsor and although the sponsor attended court  and  was  willing  and
    able to give evidence through a Nepalese interpreter, the parties  were
    content to proceed on the basis of submissions only.

 3. In his submissions, Mr Jesurum stated that the fundamental reason  that
    Gurkha cases are different is causation and that a  different  approach
    to proportionality is required.  He submitted that the only reason that
    the appellant was not born a British citizen was due  to  the  historic
    injustice suffered by the father.  He submitted that  this  is  at  the
    heart of the ratio of the historic injustice  cases  see  Patel  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 17. The Court of Appeal in Gurung [2013] 1 WLR 2546 found they
    were bound by that decision, projecting the view  taken  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Ghising [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC) that a distinction  ought  to
    be drawn between British Overseas Citizens and the Gurkhas.  At [41] of
    Gurung  the  court  emphasised  that  Article   8   rights   in   these
    circumstances should be vindicated notwithstanding immigration  policy,
    which Mr Jesurum submitted is unusually strong language from the Master
    of the Rolls.

 4. He submitted that it was clear the  Court  considered  that  they  were
    dealing with people who should already have been in the UK.  Mr Jesurum
    submitted that a decision founded upon an injustice means that  removal
    is not necessary in a democratic  society  and  therefore  it  is  also
    unnecessary to go on to look at proportionality.  He submitted it would
    appear from the approach taken in Patel (op cit)  albeit  not  expanded
    upon, is that the  issue  is  whether  it  is  powerfully  relevant  to
    necessity.  Whether one sees it as necessity or an absence of weight on
    the respondent's side or increased weight on the appellant's  side,  Mr
    Jesurum submitted the outcome is the same.

 5. In respect  of  family  life,  he  submitted  one  cannot  assess  what
    otherwise the family life would have been  had  it  not  been  for  the
    injustice.  He further submitted that the respondent's insistence  that
    the issue had arisen because of the sponsor's choice was  an  incorrect
    approach, given that the  sponsor  has  not  attained  settlement  e.g.
    through a PBS route and secondly that he had to wait for  44  years  to
    come to the UK and was then only given a month to decide whether or not
    he  wished  to  avail  himself  of  British  citizenship.   Mr  Jesurum
    submitted that a restitutionary approach would  clearly  be  a  correct
    course of action and that the appeal should be allowed.

 6. In his submissions Mr Avery essentially sought to rely on the  position
    set out by the Entry Clearance Officer and  the  statutory  obligations
    set out in Section 117B of the NIAA 2002.

 7. In reply Mr Jesurum sought to rely on page 27 of his grounds of appeal,
    where it was clear from the sponsor's evidence that he would have  come
    to the UK earlier if he had been able to do so and this was also  clear
    from [10] of his statement in the respondent's bundle.   I  reserve  my
    decision, which I now give with my reasons.

     Findings and reasons

 8. As Mr Jesurum correctly identified at [2] of his skeleton argument,  in
    light of the  findings of fact by the First tier  Tribunal  Judge  that
    there was family life between the Sponsor and  the  Appellant  and  the
    refusal was an interference with her right to a private and family life
    and that these findings were unchallenged by the Respondent, the issues
    that require determination are:

    (i)  whether there is support between the Appellant and her father  and
         sibling which is real, effective or committed: Rai [2017] EWCA  Civ
         320 at [36];

    (ii) whether the Respondent relies on anything more than  the  ordinary
         interests of immigration control e.g. a bad immigration history  or
         criminality?

    (iii)    if not, the injustice will normally require a decision in  the
         Appellant's favour.

9.   Mr Jesurum submits and I accept, that  the  historic  injustice  Gurkha
    cases represent an exception to  the  normal  approach  to  immigration
    control. This was the position of then Master of the Rolls, Lord  Dyson
    in Ghising (op cit) at [41]:

         "The crucial point is that there was an historic injustice in  both
         cases, the consequence of which was that  members  of  both  groups
         were prevented from settling in the UK. That is  why  the  historic
         injustice is such an important factor to be taken into  account  in
         the balancing exercise and why the applicant dependant child  of  a
         Gurkha who is settled in the UK has such a strong claim to have his
         article 8(1) right vindicated, notwithstanding the potency  of  the
         countervailing  public  interest  in  the  maintaining  of  a  firm
         immigration policy."

10.  The Sponsor's evidence is that the Appellant remains  wholly  dependent
    on him financially and that she continues to reside in the family  home
    in Rupandehi. Her mother died in 2015 and her remaining  four  siblings
    are all married and live  with  their  own  families.  The  Appellant's
    younger sister resides with the Sponsor in the UK.  This  evidence  has
    not been challenged  by  the  Respondent.  There  is  evidence  in  the
    addendum  bundle  of  ongoing  contact  between  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant in the form of telephone calls and messages and  of  extended
    visits by the Sponsor to Nepal. I am mindful of the guidance set out by
    Lord Justice Lindblom in Rai at [42] that the crucial issue is  whether
    family life between the parties subsisted at the time the Sponsor  left
    Nepal and was still subsisting at the  time  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    decision.  In  light  of  the  evidence  in  the  addendum  bundle   of
    screenshots of ongoing contact in  the  form  of  telephone  calls  and
    messages, I find not only that family life was subsisting at  the  time
    the Sponsor left Nepal but that it continues to date and that there  is
    real, effective and committed support at the heart of the  relationship
    between the Sponsor and the Appellant.

11.  Notably, in the covering letter to the entry clearance application  the
    Sponsor stated at [7]: "I would have moved to  the  UK  soon  after  my
    discharge had I been allowed  to      do  so.  It  would  have  made  a
    profound  impact  in  my  life  by  providing  me  with  so  much  more
    opportunities to make better lives for myself and my family. During  my
    years in service,  such  an  opportunity  was  something  that  we  (my
    colleagues and I) all wished for  but  could  not  have."  Again,  this
    evidence was not challenged  by  Mr  Avery.  I  find,  therefore,  that
    historic injustice is relevant in this case in that the  Sponsor  would
    have moved to the UK at an earlier stage had he been permitted  to  and
    that he would have brought the Appellant with him if he had  been  able
    to do so.

12.  The Respondent did not seek to rely on  anything  in  addition  to  the
    ordinary interests of immigration control. I find that, in light of the
    role of historic injustice, as relied upon  by  Mr  Jesurum  [4.  above
    refers], that the continued exclusion of the Appellant is not necessary
    in a democratic society. I have, in any event,  proceeded  to  consider
    whether the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  is  proportionate
    and I have concluded in light of the historic injustice  jurisprudence,
    that it is not. In light of the judgment of Lord  Justice  Lindblom  in
    Rai (op cit) at [55]-[57] the public interest considerations set out in
    sections 117A-D of the NIAA 2002 do not assist the Respondent, in light
    of my finding that Article 8 is engaged.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 18 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where full  award
not justified) for the following reason.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 18 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07211/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2018                           |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                           Miss Durga Devi Gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
                    Solicitors (19-20 Chambers)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nepal born on 13 October 1983.  She
    applied for entry clearance to join her father and Sponsor, Suk Bahadur
    Gurung, in the United Kingdom. Mr Gurung is a former Gurkha soldier who
    settled in the United Kingdom on 18 August 2016.  The Respondent
    refused the application for entry clearance on 17 May 2017 on the basis
    that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of either the
    Immigration Rules or the policy in respect of the 2009 discretionary
    arrangement for the dependants of former Gurkha soldiers.

 2. The Appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson for hearing on 2 August 2018.  In a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 22 August 2018, the judge dismissed
    the appeal, finding that the issue of historic injustice was not
    relevant to this Appellant and finding that although the decision to
    refuse entry clearance was an interference with her right to private
    and family life, the refusal was proportionate, taking into account the
    Respondent's legitimate aim in exercising and managing immigration
    controls.

 3. An application for permission to appeal, in time, was made to the Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge had erred in that there had been
    procedural unfairness in relation to the issue of historic injustice.
    It was submitted that the judge heard no evidence or submissions
    regarding whether the Sponsor would have settled earlier in the UK
    because the point was never in issue in that it was not raised in the
    refusal decision or the Entry Clearance Manager's review, the Sponsor
    was not cross-examined on the point nor did the Respondent make any
    submissions on the point and there is no record of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge having raised the issue at the hearing.  It was
    submitted that the issues in dispute had been identified by the
    parties, in particular in the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer,
    and it was arguably procedurally unfair for a judge to take an issue of
    his or her own motion without giving the parties the opportunity of
    addressing it and if necessary obtaining evidence.  This all relates to
    the finding at [18} that: "I have heard no evidence or any submission
    that that Sponsor would have come to the United Kingdom at an earlier
    date", which was the basis of the judge's conclusion at [19] that the
    issue of historic injustice is not relevant to the appeal.

 4. It was further submitted that the point in any event had been unfairly
    dealt with for the following reasons:

There was in fact evidence on the point: the Sponsor made very clear in his
letter to the Respondent (dated 6 March 2017, included at page 41 of the
Respondent's bundle "I would have moved to the United Kingdom at the time
of my discharge had I been allowed to do so" and this evidence was not
disputed by the Respondent.

Secondly, the approach is arguably illogical in that the Respondent has
impliedly accepted that the Sponsor would have applied for settlement on
discharge by granting him settlement in recognition of the injustice done
to him and his family, and

that the judge fails to ask the right question, which is not "would" the
Sponsor have done in terms of settling earlier but "might" he have settled
earlier: see Patel v ECO (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ 17 at [13] to [15] per
Sedley LJ.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford in a
    decision dated 2 October 2018, on the basis that it was arguable that
    there was a lack of procedural fairness in the manner in which the
    Tribunal dealt with the Appellant's appeal.



     Hearing

 6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Jesurum on behalf of the
    Appellant sought to rely on the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that
    the judge at [18] appears to just make a passing reference to historic
    injustice.  He submitted that the policy in its current form was not
    promulgated until 2015 and thus the Appellant was unable to apply for
    settlement as her father's dependant during her minority as she was 22
    by that time. He drew my attention to the letter from the Sponsor,
    which formed part of the application for entry clearance dated 6 March
    2017, in which he expressly stated that he would have come to the UK at
    an earlier date if he had been able to.

 7. In her submissions, Ms Pal for the Respondent submitted that the
    Appellant had been represented, albeit by different Counsel, at the
    appeal hearing.  She submitted that the judge heard no submissions as
    to whether or not the Sponsor would have settled earlier and the point
    was raised in the refusal decision at pages 2 to 3.  She submitted that
    it was then a live issue and the parties should have engaged with it
    and, as a consequence, there was no procedural unfairness.  This was
    the basis of the judge recording at [18] that she had heard no evidence
    or submission that the Sponsor would have come to the UK at an earlier
    date.  She submitted that the judge ought to have been referred to the
    letter from the Sponsor in the course of the hearing, rather than hope
    that the judge might read it and then raise it as a point later on.
    She submitted that whilst at [23] the judge found that the decision
    represented an interference with the Appellant's private and family
    life, this was proportionate and that there was no material error of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. In reply, Mr Jesurum submitted that, contrary to Ms Pal's submission,
    the refusal decision of 17 May 2017 does not address the issue of
    whether the Sponsor would have settled in the UK upon being discharged.
     All the Respondent says about this, having referred to the judgment in
    Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and Ghising [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC), is that
    he was satisfied that the reasons for refusal outweigh the
    consideration of historical injustice and that the effect of historical
    injustice has not been such "that you have been prevented in leading a
    normal life" and therefore does not outweigh the proportionality
    assessment.

 9. Mr Jesurum submitted rather than, as the Respondent suggested, it being
    for the Appellant to draw attention to the evidence, the judge was not
    entitled to ignore evidence that was before her.  He submitted that how
    would the representative know that this point was troubling the judge
    since it has not been raised in order to give her the opportunity to
    comment or draw attention to the evidence on the point.  In particular,
    the judge at [12] noted the judgments in Gurung and Ghising and their
    findings, providing as follows: "If the Gurkha would have settled in
    the United Kingdom earlier if he had been allowed to, and at that time
    the Appellant would have been under 18, that is a strong reason for
    holding that it is proportionate to permit the adult child to join the
    family now."  That being the case, it was incumbent upon the judge, if
    she was troubled that she had not heard evidence or submissions on this
    point, to raise it in order to give both parties the opportunity to
    make submissions.

10. Mr Jesurum submitted that the judge accepted at [23] that the decision
    represented an interference with the Appellant's right to a private and
    family life and the only point which prevented the operation of the
    judgment in Ghising was the finding that there was no causation, i.e.
    an absence of evidence as to whether the Sponsor would have come to the
    UK at an earlier date.  He submitted that, given the Sponsor had put
    forward undisputed evidence, which had not been challenged by the
    Respondent, this point was met.

11. Mr Jesurum further sought to rely on the Sponsor's certificate of
    service following his service for twelve years until his discharge in
    1972 and the fact that he had been described therein as an honest man.

     My Findings

12. I find material errors of law in the decision of Judge Davidson. I find
    in light of the fact that at [12] the judge was aware of the importance
    of determining whether or not the Gurkha Sponsor would have settled in
    the UK earlier if he had been allowed to that it was incumbent upon her
    to determine this issue on the basis of the evidence before her. At
    [18] the judge held: "I have heard no evidence or any submission that
    the Sponsor would have come to the UK at an earlier date".

13. The difficulty with this, in my finding, is twofold.  Firstly, there
    was evidence before her in a letter from the Sponsor dated 6 March
    2017, in which he clearly stated that he would have come to the UK
    earlier if he had been able to.  That being the case, then his daughter
    would clearly have been a minor dependant and would have been able to
    accompany him, along with the rest of the family. Secondly, whilst I
    accept it clearly would have assisted the judge had the Appellant's
    representatives drawn her attention to the letter from the Sponsor, it
    is the case that the Respondent did not cross-examine the Sponsor on
    this point nor make any submissions as to why his evidence in this
    respect should not be accepted.

     Notice of decision

14. In light of the fact that this is a key issue in the appeal, I set the
    decision aside and adjourn the appeal for a hearing de novo before the
    Upper Tribunal. I make the following directions:


                                 DIRECTIONS

    1.   The appeal shall be listed for 1 and a half  hours  on  the  first
    available date.

    2.   A Nepali interpreter shall be required.

    3.   If the parties wish to rely on any further evidence this should be
    served on all parties 5 working days prior to the resumed hearing date.


Rebecca Chapman
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman                   13 December 2018

