
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU 07664 2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 December 2016                           |On 11 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     m u
                       (Anonymity direction in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     He did not appear and was not represented.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the reasons for the decision  involve  consideration
    of minor children who are entitled to privacy.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on 25 September 2015 refusing him leave to remain on
    human rights grounds.

 3. His personal circumstances are a little complex.  He says that he is in
    a close relationship with a woman who for convenience I will call "SK".
    He says that they have an Islamic marriage and they entered  into  that
    arrangement on 1 January 2015.  SK has several children but they do not
    live with her.

 4. There is particular concern about one of SK's  children,  her  daughter
    aged 14 who I will call "D", because it is  said  that  she  is  in  an
    emotionally frail state and there is talk that  she  is  suicidal.   If
    there is any truth in that  it  is  entirely  understandable  that  her
    mother would not want to be very far away even though she does not live
    with the child.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant was not in a  parental
    relationship with that child and therefore  the  case  was  not  within
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Although
    this is a finding that concerned the judge who gave permission I see no
    error in it whatsoever.  The child is not the child of  the  Appellant,
    does not live with the Appellant  and  I  do  not  see  any  basis  for
    criticising the decision that the Appellant does not have a  subsisting
    parental relationship with that child or indeed with any  other.   With
    that finding then the biggest barrier to his leaving the United Kingdom
    disappears.

 6. Clearly he will have strong feelings towards the woman  that  he  lives
    with but the grounds do not  say  why  a  reasonably  short  period  of
    separation from his partner in the United Kingdom whilst he sorted  out
    his immigration status from Pakistan is unacceptable  or  indeed  if  a
    short period of separation of his partner from her daughter  and  other
    children in the United Kingdom would be  unacceptable  if  his  partner
    chose to travel with him.

 7. I emphasise that although very serious claims are made about the mental
    health of the partner's child there is no medical  evidence  whatsoever
    to substantiate it and that is an extremely surprising  omission.   The
    First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied that there was in fact  any  such
    threat and there was good reason for that dissatisfaction.   Once  that
    is appreciated it is hard to see how this decision can be criticised.

 8. This is a very common story of a person in a relationship in the United
    Kingdom that is not a marriage or a  durable  relationship  within  the
    rules and I  see  no  basis  for  criticising  the  decision  that  the
    Appellant's removal would not  interfere  disproportionately  with  his
    private and family  life.   Any  disruption  would  be  essentially  of
    limited duration  whilst  he  organises  his  affairs  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Rules if that is what he wanted to do and there  is
    no basis in law for finding that that is  contrary  to  anyone's  human
    rights.

 9. I made this decision without the benefit of  any  submission  from  the
    Appellant.  The case came before me for  consideration  at  about  half
    past twelve. Enquiries were made to ensure there was no  trace  of  the
    Appellant  in  the  building.   There  was  not.   There  is  no  legal
    representation.  The papers show that the  service  of  the  notice  of
    hearing and indeed a Rule 24 response from the Secretary of  State  was
    sent to the person's last known address.

10. In the circumstances I am satisfied on the evidence that he has  proper
    knowledge and in the absence of proper explanation or  any  explanation
    for his absence I proceeded to continue with the appeal which I dismiss
    for the reasons given above.




    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 January 2017                |

