
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07881/2016
     HU/08228/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 April 2018                              |On 23 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mrs Dhaneshree Wahib
                       Mr Zaki Zaki Ali Mohmoud Wahib
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms U Miszkiel, Counsel instructed by Kulendran
Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of  State  the  respondents
    are Mrs Dhaneshree Wahib and Mr Zaki Zaki Ali Mohmoud Wahib.   For  the
    purposes of this appeal I refer to the parties as they were before  the
    First-tier Tribunal where Mrs Wahib and  her  son  Mr  Wahib  were  the
    appellants.

 2. Mrs Wahib the first appellant is a  citizen  of  Mauritius  born  on  3
    February 1958.  The first appellant applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on 17 September 2015.  Her application was refused  on  9  March
    2016.  The second appellant is the son of the first appellant, born  on
    8 April 1998, and also a citizen of Mauritius, who applied on the basis
    of family and private life as the dependant of the first appellant.

 3. In a decision and reasons promulgated on  18  August  2017,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shaw allowed the appellant's appeals on the  basis  that
    the first appellant had satisfied  the  requirements  of  the  ten-year
    residence route and the second appellant had  therefore  satisfied  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.

 4. The respondent appeals with permission on the basis that the rights  of
    appeal were restricted to human rights grounds only by the  Immigration
    Act 2014 as the application was made on or after 6 April  2015  and  no
    proportionality assessment was carried out by  the  Tribunal.   It  was
    submitted that the respondent maintained the decision was proportionate
    and there were no compelling circumstances to justify the consideration
    of the appellant's case outside the Immigration Rules.  And  there  was
    no finding of any private or family life such as to invoke  Article  8.
    Permission was also granted on the ground that the judge  had  arguably
    made a procedural error by refusing to grant an  adjournment.   SM  and
    Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof): UTUK 21 April 2016 found that
    the Secretary  of  State's  generic  evidence  combined  with  evidence
    particular to an appellant did discharge the initial evidential  burden
    in relation to such cases.  It was argued that had the respondent  been
    allowed an adjournment to demonstrate deception had occurred, at  least
    to the initial evidential burden, the burden of proof would  then  have
    shifted to the appellant.

Error of Law Discussion

 5. Ms Everett initially established  that  neither  the  parties  nor  the
    Tribunal had ever received the respondent's bundle in relation  to  the
    ETS case; it being asserted in the Reasons for Refusal Letter that  the
    first appellant had taken a TOEIC speaking test  with  the  Educational
    Testing Service (ETS) on 27 June 2012  and  that  the  certificate  was
    fraudulently  obtained.   Although   Ms   Everett   stated   that   the
    respondent's system indicated that a bundle was served on 3 July  2017,
    which was the date of hearing of the First-tier Tribunal, she  conceded
    that she herself did not have that bundle and  it  was  confirmed  that
    neither the Tribunal nor the appellant's representatives  had  received
    such a bundle.

 6. On the basis of that confirmation Ms Everett  quite  properly  conceded
    the appeal.  There can be no error of  law  on  grounds  of  procedural
    unfairness: in the absence of any evidence, even at  the  date  of  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing, the Secretary  of  State  cannot  rely  on  any
    claimed  procedural  irregularity.   The  finding  of  the   First-tier
    Tribunal, that the appellants'  applications  were  made  in  September
    2015, nearly two years prior to the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and
    meant that considering the overriding objective it  was  fair  for  the
    hearing to proceed, given the absence of any reasonable explanation for
    the absence of any such evidence, is not properly challengeable and  Ms
    Everett did not seek to do so.

 7.  In respect of the second ground,  Ms  Everett  conceded  this  ground,
    submitting that it would be  disingenuous  to  suggest  that  the  Home
    Office did not  treat  the  appellants'  application  as  human  rights
    applications  (and  indeed  the  refusal  letter  indicates  that   the
    respondent considered the application as a  "human  rights  application
    for indefinite leave to remain").  Given that the  respondent  had  not
    established that the first appellant had been party to fraud  and  that
    the respondent accepted that the appellant met the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules but fell for refusal under the character, conduct and
    associations test, which fell away  on  the  basis  of  the  Tribunal's
    findings of fact that deception had not been proved, there was no error
    in the judge's approach, such that the decision should be set aside, in
    finding that no separate  consideration  was  needed  under  Article  8
    outside of the Immigration Rules.

 8. Bearing in mind the concession of  Ms  Everett  that  the  respondent's
    appeal could not succeed, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law  and  shall  stand.   The
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought or nor are there  any  issues  that  might
require such a direction and none is made.


Signed                                  Date:  23 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date:  23 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
