
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/07394/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 July 2019                       |       On 16 July 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                               mr arslan ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K. McCarthy, Counsel instructed by Sunrise
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of Arslan Ahmed.  He is a Pakistani citizen who  was
    born on 4 March 1978 and is now aged 41.

 2. He appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Roots
    whose determination was promulgated on 18 December  2018  in  which  he
    dismissed the appeal of the appellant.  It is accepted  that  there  is
    one issue only in this appeal and that is whether there were  obstacles
    which are sufficiently serious to  prevent  the  appellant's  wife,  Ms
    Islam, who was born on  18  January  1983,  from  relocating  with  her
    husband to Pakistan.

 3. The appeal before me now is the re-making of the decision following the
    decision I made on 26 April 2019 that there was an error of law in  the
    findings that were made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I can do  no
    better than annex the reasons for finding  an  error  of  law  to  this
    determination because it sets out the background.  In  paragraph  1,  I
    set out that Ms Islam was diagnosed with kidney  failure  in  2001  and
    received a kidney transplant in 2002.  That is now some seventeen years
    ago.   Due   to   the   transplant   she   has   been   taking   strong
    immunosuppressive medication and has not been generally well since  the
    transplant.  She is able  to  do  very  little  physical  activity  for
    herself.

 4. There were various reports which I need not set out here.  All  I  need
    say is that when the judge came to make his decision he said:

         I accept that Ms Islam will have some significant  difficulties  if
         relocated to Pakistan but do not accept that they have  shown  that
         healthcare will not  be  available  and  do  not  accept  that  the
         significant difficulties will amount to insurmountable obstacles.

 5.  I  found  that  sentence  troubling  because  it  appears  to  draw  a
    distinction between significant difficulties and the  very  significant
    difficulties which are the hallmark  of  insurmountable  obstacles.   I
    found that the judge had failed  to  take  properly  into  account  the
    material  evidence  from  Dr  Rumjon  and  the  continuing   need   for
    surveillance in the United Kingdom as a result of the transplant.

 6. I was not, however, prepared at that stage  to  re-make  the  decision.
    Although I knew that Ms Islam was subject to four-monthly check-ups,  I
    was not specifically told what the consequences would be, were  she  to
    return to Pakistan.  It was for  this  reason  that  I  suggested  that
    further medical evidence be provided.

 7. This has now been done.  It takes the form of a report from  Dr  Rumjon
    dated 3 May 2019 in which he sets out the history and  deals  with  the
    future prospects for Ms Islam.

 8. He states on page 2 of his report that the risk of  recurrence  of  the
    ANCA vasculitis affecting her transplant in  the  same  fashion  as  it
    affected her native kidneys was low.   In  other  words  what  occurred
    requiring her transplant in 2002 was not likely to  recur  at  a  later
    stage.  It was however difficult to predict the life expectancy of  her
    transplant; that the graft would  be  at  risk  if  she  developed  any
    serious medical problems even if not directly related  to  her  kidney,
    such as an infection or cancer.

 9. The report of Dr Rumjon continues:

         As the function of a kidney transplant  starts  to  decline...plans
         are made to either  begin  haemodialysis  or  prepare  patients  to
         receive another transplant.  In Ms Islam's case it  is  anticipated
         that she would be  sufficiently  physically  robust  enough  to  be
         considered  for  re-transplantation  in  the  first  instance   but
         patients receiving a second kidney transplant require more  complex
         investigations as their immune systems have been modulated  by  the
         presence of the first transplant.  Kidney  transplant  function  is
         associated with an increased risk of death as the need for dialysis
         approaches and the highest quality evidence  shows  that  immediate
         repeat  transplantation  offers  the  best  survival  outcomes  and
         quality of life compared to re-transplantation after  a  period  of
         haemodialysis even if this is short.

         Furthermore, by any measurable outcome survival and quality of life
         with a kidney transplant is far superior to that seen  in  patients
         who are  on  haemodialysis.   The  provision  of  haemodialysis  in
         Pakistan is poor.  There are only about 150 nephrologists serving a
         population of about 195,000,000 people and only an estimated  5  to
         15% of patients who need haemodialysis are able to obtain it.

         The provision of renal care  in  Pakistan  was  examined  in  great
         detail by a report commissioned by  the  International  Society  of
         Nephrology.  Transplantation activity fell woefully short of demand
         with inadequate financial  support  and  a  lack  of  an  organised
         deceased donor programme being major  stumbling  blocks.   Deceased
         donors  were  poorly  utilised  because  of  an  ineffective  organ
         procurement network.  Organ trafficking remains an endemic  problem
         and a report  following  36  European  patients  who  travelled  to
         Pakistan to obtain kidney transplant revealed that  seven  patients
         died while sixteen patients developed wound infections.   Only  80%
         of the patients with transplanted kidneys survived to one year post
         transplant compared to a rate of 98% in the United Kingdom.

         The available data suggests that if Ms Islam relocated to  Pakistan
         she would not have access to the same level of care for her current
         kidney transplant.  However this would be  dwarfed  by  the  issues
         that  would  confront  her  when  her  current  kidney   transplant
         eventually fails.  She will not have ready  access  to  life-saving
         haemodialysis and even if she were able to find a unit  that  would
         be able to provide her with  this  treatment,  it  is  an  inferior
         treatment to a second transplant.

         However even if she  were  to  receive  a  kidney  transplant,  the
         provision of transplantation  in  Pakistan  is  currently  poor  in
         comparison to that provided in the United Kingdom.  I believe  that
         if she were relocated to Pakistan there will be an  extremely  high
         likelihood  that  her  life  expectancy  would   be   significantly
         shortened.

10. My function in remaking  this  decision  is  to  consider  whether  the
    problems faced by Ms Islam amount  to  very  significant  difficulties.
    Were that to be the case, this would inevitably result in a  conclusion
    that there were insurmountable obstacles.  I am wholly satisfied  that,
    as a result of the evidence before  me,  there  would  indeed  be  very
    significant difficulties for Ms Islam were she to accompany her husband
    to Pakistan.  This are graphically illustrated in  Dr  Rumjon's  latest
    report. In such circumstances, I am satisfied that the appellant  meets
    the requirements for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

11. Accordingly, I re-make the decision allowing Mr Ahmed's appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse him further  leave  to
    remain.

NOTICE OF DECISION

          i) The appellant's appeal is allowed.
         ii) I re-make the decision allowing  the  appellant's  application
             for further leave to remain.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                          Date: 11 July 2019


                                  APPENDIX

                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW
                        (with paragraphs re-numbered)

 1. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  appeals  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Roots  following  a  hearing
    that took place on 21  November  2018.   The  issue  before  the  judge
    covered a number of grounds but, for the purposes of the appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, the issue has been confined to  a  single  argument  in
    relation to whether or not the evidence was  properly  managed  by  the
    judge in the determination in relation to the  sole  issue  before  me,
    namely whether the appellant's partner, Miss  Islam,  would  face  very
    significant difficulties  in  continuing  their  family  life  together
    outside the United Kingdom which could not be overcome or would  entail
    very serious hardship for the  partner.   That  is  the  definition  of
    insurmountable obstacles and it is the  evidence  in  support  of  that
    allegation which is material to my consideration.   There  were  before
    the judge two material pieces of evidence.  There was a letter from the
    Morecambe surgery in which the situation is described in these terms:

         "Miss Islam was diagnosed with kidney failure in 2001 and  received
         a kidney transplant in 2002.  Due to the transplant  she  has  been
         taking strong immunosuppressive medication.   Miss  Islam  has  not
         been generally well since her transplant and is  able  to  do  very
         little physical activity for herself.  When  she  was  residing  in
         Manchester her family were mainly involved  in  looking  after  her
         needs.  Miss Islam was able to do very little physical activity for
         herself and she tended to stay inside the house.  She then  married
         and moved to London and has been registered  with  us  since  2014.
         Unfortunately she has been gradually deteriorating in terms of  her
         physical ability and finds that she becomes very  tired  even  with
         walking a very short distance.  She now uses a walking aid to  help
         give her support when she is outdoors.   She  does  not  leave  the
         house unless she is with someone for support."

 2. The GP's letter was augmented by a letter from  the  Royal  Free  Renal
    Transplant Clinic and from Dr Adam Rumjon the consultant  nephrologist.
    His report is found at pages 27 to 28 and it is dated  after  a  clinic
    appointment on 24 July 2018.  The material part of the letter  is  that
    it shows that Miss Islam who was born on 18 January 1983 was 16 at  the
    time she was diagnosed  with  a  rare  disease  called  ANCA-associated
    vasculitis.  She was then 16.  She received haemodialysis initially but
    was  switched  to  peritoneal  dialysis  following  a  series  of  line
    infections.  She was 35 years old at the date the  letter  was  written
    and has been a renal patient for the best part of  twenty  years.   The
    doctor refers to the kidney transplant  in  2002  and  that  her  renal
    function had been stable over this time with a baseline  creatinine  of
    110.  There then developed  in  2016  some  toxicity  and  her  immune-
    suppression regime was switched to Azathioprine.  It is  a  feature  of
    Miss Islam's condition that she continues to be under the care  of  the
    renal transplant clinic at the Royal Free  notwithstanding  the  twenty
    years that have elapsed since her transplant.

 3. The material words in the report relied upon by Ms McCarthy  on  behalf
    of the appellant are these:

         "From my point of view she  is  a  renal  transplant  patient  with
         moderate  function  and  our  general  standard  of  care  includes
         appointments to review transplant  function  at  least  on  a  four
         monthly basis.  From my perspective I  do  not  advise  any  of  my
         transplant patients to be out of the country  for  more  than  this
         length of time and the same applies to Miss Islam."

 4. The only proper inference that one can draw from this is that there  is
    a risk which has to  be  met  by  four  monthly  visits  to  the  renal
    transplant clinic and that the risks have evidenced themselves over the
    years by changes in medication and by constant regular reviews  without
    which there is  obviously  a  problem  that  might  result  in  serious
    consequences.  The problem is not one of  a  kidney  transplant  albeit
    that this is a transplant that took place many years ago nor  is  it  a
    problem about dialysis but is  a  problem  about  the  review  that  is
    currently conducted by the Royal Free Hospital with a  view  to  seeing
    whether there is either a need for a change in medication or  for  some
    other form of treatment.  It cannot therefore be said that this is just
    a routine test to see if the patient is  continuing  to  be  well.   It
    appears to be a genuine process of  examination  and  adjustment  where
    necessary and it also follows that, were there to be a failure to  pick
    up such a change, then those consequences  might  be  very  severe.   I
    entirely accept that the evidence is not as strong as it should be in a
    case of this type but it seems to me that  it  clearly  suggested  that
    Miss Islam should not be removed from the United Kingdom to Pakistan.

 5. There was evidence before me (I am not certain whether it was  evidence
    before the judge) about the Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  on
    Pakistan of August 2018 dealing with medical and healthcare issues.   A
    copy was appended to the grounds but  the  relevant  passage  reads  as
    follows:

         "This  policy  addresses  kidney  disease   treatment   and   organ
         transplant services (liver transplant) in Pakistan at pages  14  to
         15.  The only treatment for kidney disease mentioned in the CPIN or
         in the hyperlinks within it is dialysis.  The policy suggests  that
         kidney transplant services are not available at  all  in  Pakistan.
         The evidence is  that  a  centre  for  liver  transplantations  was
         established with assistance from specialists from  the  Royal  Free
         Hospital, (Ms Islam's current medical team).  This  unit  then  lay
         dormant for five years due to the absence  of  qualified  staff  to
         perform surgery and support services.  There is a hope that Chinese
         staff may arrive to help the centre to commence work."

 6. The current information is in the same Country  Information  of  August
    2018.  Section 10 deals with kidney diseases:

         "To meet the ground needs of the patients Fatima Memorial  Hospital
         has been providing clinical  evaluation  of  all  kinds  of  kidney
         diseases  and  haemodialysis  to  patients  suffering  from  kidney
         diseases through its dialysis centre operational since 2004.   Most
         of the patients are dialysed twice weekly which takes around  eight
         hours per week and certain dialysis machines  have  been  dedicated
         exclusively for hepatitis C patients.  An average of 7,000 dialysis
         are done annually at Fatima Memorial Hospital out of which 50%  are
         either free of cost or  at  subsidised  rates.   The  treatment  is
         expensive thus not affordable by most of the patients and the costs
         are borne by the hospital directly and through  the  generosity  of
         philanthropists."

 7. The material  was  not  dealt  with  expressly  by  the  judge  in  the
    determination.

 8. In his determination, the judge correctly identifies  in  paragraph  23
    the definition of insurmountable obstacles.  It should be understood in
    a practical and realistic sense  rather  than  referring  to  obstacles
    which made it literally impossible for the family to live  together  in
    the country of origin of the non-national concerned.  It then refers to
    very significant difficulties which could  not  be  overcome  or  would
    entail very serious hardship.

 9. Miss Islam is a British citizen, she has always  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She has never lived in Pakistan and there is  no  issue  that
    she is in a continuing relationship  with  the  appellant.   The  judge
    found at paragraph 64 the appellant has  not  produced  any  persuasive
    evidence that simply moving to Pakistan will significantly  affect  her
    kidney function and consequently he found at paragraph  74,  "I  accept
    that Miss Islam will have some significant difficulties if relocated to
    Pakistan but do not accept that they have shown  that  healthcare  will
    not be available and do not accept that  the  significant  difficulties
    will amount to insurmountable obstacles."  He therefore appears to draw
    a distinction between significant  difficulties  and  very  significant
    difficulties.   Had  he  found  that  there   were   very   significant
    difficulties  he  would  inevitably  have   found   that   these   were
    insurmountable obstacles.  It is not clear upon  what  basis  he  draws
    that distinction but, in doing so, he does not deal with the fact  that
    the appellant's partner has for many years since her kidney  transplant
    been in receipt of what must be  complicated  immune-suppressive  drugs
    and in particular the judge does not seem to have  taken  into  account
    the fact that the four monthly review  which  is  carried  out  is  not
    something which is merely a well-care check such as  many  people  have
    but it is a more active form of consideration of her  kidney  function.
    There is no evidence that this level of care is available in  Pakistan.
    Indeed the evidence suggests that the  care  in  Pakistan  is  directed
    simply towards dialysis.  Whilst the example provided  in  the  country
    information in relation to liver transplant should not  be  treated  as
    being the same as the situation in relation to kidney disease, it  does
    suggest that there is a difficulty in running clinics which  deal  with
    transplantation cases.

10. In these circumstances I do not consider that the judge  properly  took
    account of the significance of  the  letter  from  Dr  Rumjon  and  the
    continuing treatment that she has in  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    immune-suppressive drugs or the requirement that the condition  has  to
    be constantly monitored. I find that there is an error of law and I set
    aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

11. I am not prepared at this stage to remake the decision on the basis  of
    the material that was before the judge.   In  my  judgment  there  were
    shortages in what Dr Rumjon was saying.  In  particular,  he  does  not
    make it plain  what  the  consequences  would  be  if  these  follow-up
    examinations at four monthly intervals were not to take place.  Nor  is
    there evidence about the changes that have occurred in the drug regimes
    or the need for there to be a constant  re-evaluation  of  the  immuno-
    suppressive drugs that the appellant's partner has to  receive.   There
    is no evidence about the availability of drugs generally  in  Pakistan.
    Were there to be a real risk  of  the  appellant's  partner  not  being
    provided with an adequate regime of drugs and that this would lead to a
    deterioration in her  health,  (a  deterioration  which  is  apparently
    continuing as far as her physical health is concerned), this may amount
    to very  significant  difficulties  which  would  entail  very  serious
    hardship for her.  In these circumstances the medical  evidence  should
    be augmented by clearer evidence as to what would be  the  consequences
    of her removal to Pakistan.  At the moment it is confined to perhaps  a
    precatory wish that the patient should not travel out  of  the  country
    for more than four months.

12. I direct that the hearing takes place in the Upper Tribunal and  it  is
    limited to further medical evidence.  That may include the availability
    of drugs.
