
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07766/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th November 2020                |On 17th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ASTRIT CAHANI
                              (aka ASTRIT MIJA)
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Uddin, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

   1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for
      the Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is Mr
      Cahani.  However, for ease of reference, in the course of this
      decision I adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I
      refer to Mr Astrit Cahani (also known as Mr Astrit Mija) as the
      appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


   2. The hearing before me on 10th November 2020 took the form of a remote
      hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  I sat at
      the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I was addressed by the
      representatives in exactly the same way as I would have been if the
      parties had attended the hearing together.  I was satisfied: that this
      constituted a hearing in open court; that the open justice principle
      has been secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar
      as there has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is
      justified as necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was
      in the interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding
      objective to proceed with a remote hearing because of the present need
      to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid
      delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter
      is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the
      importance of the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and
      the anticipated costs and resources of the parties.  At the end of the
      hearing I was satisfied that both parties had been able to participate
      fully in the proceedings.


The Background


   3. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 22nd
      January 2019 to refuse a human rights claim was allowed by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Landes on Article 3 grounds for reasons set out in a
      decision promulgated on 19th August 2020.


   4. The background to the appeal is set out in paragraphs [2] to [7] of
      the decision of Judge Landes.  For present purposes it is sufficient
      to note that the appellant arrived in the UK and claimed asylum in
      April 1999.  He claimed to be Astrit Cahani, an ethnic Albanian who
      was born and lived in Kosovo prior to his arrival in the UK.  On 5th
      June 2003 he was found guilty of the manslaughter of Arben Basha on
      the grounds of diminished responsibility at Ipswich Crown Court. He
      was sentenced on 18th July 2003 to life imprisonment.  The sentencing
      judge considered the appellant would continue to represent a serious
      danger to the public for an indefinite time.  The sentencing judge
      concluded that the appropriate determinate sentence to be served for
      the period of punishment or retribution and deterrence was one of four
      years, with a minimum of two years.


   5. On 30th May 2013 the respondent decided that the automatic deportation
      provisions applied. The appellant's appeal against that decision was
      dismissed for reasons set out in the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Law promulgated on 18th February 2015.  As to events thereafter,
      at paragraph [7] of her decision Judge Landes stated:


         "In August 2018 the respondent decided that the appellant was in
         fact Astrit Mija, an Albanian national born on 30 January 1971,
         and, in December 2018 gave him notice that they would seek to
         deport him to Albania (CC1).  In response the appellant repeated
         that he was Kosovan, that he feared his victim's family and that if
         he were returned to Kosovo he would not be able to receive
         medication (DD1).  On 22 January 2019, the respondent made a
         decision refusing the appellant's human rights' claim. The
         appellant did not appeal within time and he was transferred from
         prison on 30 April 2019 in preparation for removal.  His solicitors
         obtained an injunction preventing his removal to Albania and he was
         returned to prison."


   6. Judge Landes summarised the respondent's decision of 22nd January 2019
      at paragraph [9] of her decision.  It was common ground at the hearing
      of the appeal that the issues in the appeal included the nationality
      of the appellant, the extent to which, if any, the Tribunal should
      depart from previous judicial findings, and whether the appellant's
      removal would be contrary to Article 3 in light of his mental health
      and the decision of the Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) [2020] UKSC 17.




   7. The appellant's nationality is addressed by Judge Landes at paragraphs
      [23] to [33] of her decision.  Having carefully analysed all the
      evidence before the Tribunal, Judge Landes was satisfied on the
      balance of probabilities, that the appellant is Astrit Mija, an
      Albanian national whose date of birth is 30th January 1971.  For
      reasons set out at paragraphs [34] to [36] of her decision, she was
      not satisfied that the appellant is at real risk upon return to
      Albania from a blood feud.  Those findings are not challenged by the
      appellant.


   8. The Article 3 claim advanced by the appellant is addressed at
      paragraphs [37] to [71] of the decision of Judge Landes. It is
      uncontroversial that the appellant has been diagnosed as suffering
      with paranoid schizophrenia.  Judge Landes rejected the claim made by
      the appellant that he would be at high risk of attempting suicide even
      if he was able to access medication in Albania. Judge Landes noted, at
      [42], that the appellant does not present as obviously mentally
      unwell, he has insight into his illness, good compliance and a strong
      motivation to comply with taking his medication. She was nevertheless
      satisfied that if the appellant is unable to obtain his medication he
      is likely to relapse and whilst that relapse might not be absolutely
      immediate, it is likely to happen reasonably quickly.  At paragraph
      [45] of her decision, Judge Landes referred to the decision of the
      Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) and at paragraph [46], she said:


         "I consider that if the appellant could not access medical
         treatment then there is indeed a substantial risk of relapse which
         may not be immediate but would be reasonably quick. As I have
         already indicated there is a likelihood of the appellant then
         listening to and acting on the voices telling him to harm himself I
         consider there are substantial grounds for believing that the
         appellant would do himself serious harm or indeed kill himself,
         thereby coming within the test in Paposhvili as endorsed in AM
         (Zimbabwe)."


   9. At paragraphs [47] to [52], Judge Landes considered the circumstances
      to which the appellant would return.  Judge Landes noted that Judge
      Law had not been satisfied that upon return to Kosovo, the appellant
      would be completely without family support.  Quite properly, Judge
      Landes referred to that finding as her starting point, albeit noting
      that the appellant would be returning to Albania and not Kosovo.  On
      the evidence before her, Judge Landes was satisfied that the appellant
      is not in contact with family, and concluded that the appellant will
      be without family support on return to Albania.  She concluded the
      appellant would therefore have nowhere obvious to live on return to
      Albania.  She noted that she had no information at all about what
      support would be available to an Albanian citizen who is unemployed
      and does not have housing, but she was not satisfied that there is no
      support available.


  10. At paragraphs [53] to [60] of her decision, Judge Landes considered
      the material before the Tribunal regarding mental health in Albania
      and the facilities available. At paragraph [55], she noted there are
      clearly relevant facilities and drugs available, even if the
      facilities and treatment fall far below the standards of the rest of
      Europe.  At paragraphs [56] to [58], Judge Landes referred to the
      opinions set out in the report of Mr Kosumi that was relied upon by
      the appellant.


  11. Although she acknowledged that the conditions in some psychiatric
      hospitals in Albania are not only much worse than in the UK but very
      poor indeed, at paragraph [61] Judge Landes rejected the claim that
      treatment in a psychiatric hospital in Albania, however bad the
      conditions, would itself breach the appellant's Article 3 rights.
      However, she found the appellant would have real difficulty accessing
      treatment and the appeal was allowed on Article 3 grounds only for
      reasons set out at paragraphs [61] to [70] of the decision.


The appeal before me


  12. The respondent advances three grounds of appeal. First, the respondent
      claims that in finding that the appellant would have real difficulty
      accessing treatment in Albania, Judge Landes relied upon material set
      out in the report of Mr Kosumi, a recognised expert on Albania/Kosovo,
      but with no expertise on the Albanian healthcare system.  The
      respondent claims Judge Landes gives inadequate reasons to explain why
      the opinions of Mr Kosumi, regarding matters on which he does not
      claim to be an expert, are preferred to the CPIN of May 2020 regarding
      mental health in Albania.  Second, the respondent claims Judge Landes'
      finding that the appellant will not be able to access services and the
      appropriate medication, and without medication or treatment, there are
      substantial grounds for believing his mental health will critically
      deteriorate, is contrary to background material that such medication
      as is required by the appellant, is free in Albania. The respondent
      refers to the CPIN of May 2020 which confirms that treatment for
      psychiatric illnesses is completely free of charge and covered by the
      government.  The respondent claims Judge Landes does not adequately
      explain why the appellant would not be able to obtain the support and
      medication he requires in Albania in light of the background material.
       Finally, the respondent claims the conclusion reached by Judge Landes
      that the appellant would not be able to access the required medication
      is perverse because the background material establishes the reverse.
      The respondent claims Judge Landes has failed to appreciate the high
      threshold still applicable to such an Article 3 claim.


  13. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes on
      4th September 2020.


  14. Before me, Mrs Aboni relied upon the grounds of appeal.  She submits
      Judge Landes failed to give adequate reasons for allowing the appeal
      on Article 3 grounds.  She submits that at paragraph [55] of her
      decision Judge Landes acknowledged that the background material
      establishes that there are clearly relevant facilities and drugs
      available in Albania, even if the facilities and treatment fall far
      below the standard of the rest of Europe.  She submits Judge Landes
      erroneously placed considerable weight on the evidence set out in the
      expert report of Mr Kosumi, and reached her decision without any
      proper consideration of whether the appellant could obtain an ID card
      to enable him to access his entitlement to medical treatment. She
      submits Judge Landes concluded that even if the appellant were able to
      obtain a health card, the appellant would have to pay a significant
      amount each week to access the medication he needs, but failed to
      consider whether the appellant could secure some work, to assist in
      meeting the costs of the medication. She submits the appellant has
      worked in the past, and there is no reason to believe that he would be
      unable to work in the future.


  15. I reject the claim that Judge Landes attached undue weight to the
      opinions set out in the expert report of Mr Kosumi regarding the
      provision of health care and social services in Albania, and failed to
      adequately explain why his opinions, on matters that the respondent
      submits he has no expertise, are preferred to the matters set out in
      the CPIN on mental health treatment in Albania.  The expertise of Veb
      Kosumi as an independent expert on the Western Balkans specialising in
      Albania and Kosovo was not challenged by the respondent either prior
      to or during the hearing of the appeal.  He set out in his report, the
      questions that he had been asked to consider.  The primary focus was
      upon the appellant's ability to access specialist psychiatric
      counselling/therapy and the necessary medication in Albania. In
      setting out his opinions, Mr Kosumi refers to the Albanian health
      system and the source material that he considered and relied upon to
      support his opinions.


  16. At paragraphs [53] and [54] of her decision, Judge Landes refers
      extensively to the matters set out in the CPIN of May 2020 regarding
      mental health in Albania, that was relied upon by the respondent.
      Judge Landes carefully weighed that evidence against the matters set
      out in the report of Mr Kosumi who had expressed the opinion that the
      appellant would be unable to access the mental health services
      required.  He had explained that the appellant would need an ID card
      to access any individual rights and he had explained the procedure for
      obtaining an ID card.


  17. It is in my judgement clear from what is said at paragraphs [53] to
      [59] of her decision that Judge Landes carried out a careful analysis
      of the background material and the evidence before the Tribunal
      regarding mental health provision in Albania, and the treatment
      available.  It was in my judgement open to Judge Landes to conclude
      that the appellant would have real difficulty accessing treatment for
      the reasons set out in her decision.


  18. I also reject the claim made by the respondent that in reaching her
      decision  Judge Landes fails to adequately explain why the appellant
      would not be able to obtain support and medication in Albania, when it
      is said at paragraph 2.6.2 of the CPIN that "...Treatment for
      psychiatric illnesses is completely free of charge and covered by the
      government. Patients do not pay at the hospital. The government
      provides a lot of funds through the MOH and the Ministry of Social
      Welfare.".   It is clear in my judgement that Judge Landes had
      carefully considered the matters set out in the CPIN. At paragraph
      [54] of her decision, she makes express reference to paragraph 2.6.2
      of the CPIN and the extract relied upon by the respondent in the
      grounds of appeal.  At paragraph [62] of her decision, Judge Landes
      again referred to the relevant extracts from the CPIN and she noted
      that it is not clear whether the reference in the CPIN would cover the
      cost of drugs provided on prescription by a family doctor to someone
      who is not receiving treatment at a hospital.  She said:


         "... I appreciate that the CPIN under the heading "cost of drugs"
         (see para 54 above) says as I have quoted above that treatment for
         psychiatric illnesses is completely free. Patients do not pay at
         the hospital. However it is not clear whether the reference in the
         CPIN would cover the cost of drugs provided on prescription by a
         family doctor to someone who is not receiving treatment at a
         hospital. The section in the CPIN is not just about the cost of
         drugs, despite its heading, as the earlier part (2.6.1) refers to
         free access to preventative services (which would not be
         medication). Unfortunately I cannot check the footnote because the
         source for the information is given as the BDA/MedCoI fact-finding
         mission of 2017; this report is not given a URL which I can access.
          When Dr Berman checked for his report the availability of
         olanzapine in Albania he found only the very old 2006 information
         which said that antipsychotic medication, once prescribed, was
         provided to people with mental disorders free of cost or with
         reimbursement equal or more than 80% of the retail price (para 58
         report - which I observe would chime with the reimbursement of 80%
         in the figures found by Mr Kosumi)."


  19. Having carefully considered the evidence before he, Judge Landes
      concluded the appellant would have real difficulty accessing
      treatment.  At paragraphs [69] and [70] she said:


         "69. My finding is that the appellant's reports suggest, credibly,
         that the appellant, on his own, will struggle to access services
         and the appropriate medication and without medication or treatment
         there are substantial grounds for believing his mental health will
         critically deteriorate. Whilst being homeless and destitute would
         not of itself breach Article 3 (See for example Said [2016] EWCA
         Civ 442) there is a real risk that in such circumstances the
         appellant would not be able to access medication or facilities
         himself and would then relapse and act on the voices that ordered
         him to do himself harm/kill himself or indeed harm others. I cannot
         of course rule out the possibility that someone in authority/a good
         Samaritan would come across him and assist him but if the appellant
         were behaving normally there would be no reason for anyone to
         intervene. The appellant's past indicates that he went very quickly
         from behaving normally to killing his flatmate. There is a real
         risk that, similarly, the appellant would, in any relapse, do
         himself serious harm or end his life before anyone took him for
         treatment. Those would be conditions breaching Article 3 ECHR.


         70.  I am satisfied for the reasons I have explained above in
         detail, and reached a conclusion on at [69] that the appellant
         raised such a prima facie case. The respondent has pointed to the
         general treatment available in the CPIN but I have explained above
         why I consider those general points do not answer the concerns on
         behalf of the appellant and despite treatment being available the
         appellant has brought forward substantial grounds for believing
         that he will not be able to access such treatment. Absent the
         respondent's engagement with what precisely would happen to a
         person in the appellant's position without any family support who
         is simply removed to Tirana I am satisfied that there are
         substantial grounds for believing ( a test which of course although
         not an exacting is below the balance of probabilities) that Article
         3 would be breached.  That the healthcare available would be well
         below the standard of the UK is not sufficient; that there are
         substantial grounds for believing the appellant would be unable to
         access the medication he needs or the treatment he needs before he
         became so unwell he seriously harmed himself, is, I find,
         sufficient."


  20. It is now well established that "adequacy of reasons" means no more
      nor less than that. It is not a counsel of perfection. Still less
      should it provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment
      of the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on
      their merits. The purpose of the duty to give reasons, is in part, to
      enable the losing party to know why she has lost and it is also to
      enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the reasons for the
      decision are so that they can be examined in case there has been an
      error of approach.  It is clear my judgement that the findings and
      conclusions reached by Judge Landes at paragraphs [61] to [71] of her
      decision regarding the Article 3 claim follow a careful consideration
      of the evidence that was before the Tribunal and are findings and
      conclusions that are rooted in the evidence.  Judge Landes was
      required to consider the evidence as a whole, giving adequate reasons
      for her decision, and she plainly did so.  The findings and
      conclusions reached by the judge are neither irrational nor
      unreasonable.


  21. It follows that in my judgement it was open to Judge Landes to allow
      the appeal on Article 3 grounds for the reasons set out in her
      decision and I dismiss the appeal before me.


Notice of Decision


  22. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of FtT Judge Landes promulgated
      on 19th August 2020 stands.


Signed   V. Mandalia                Date:  10th November 2020


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
