
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/07992/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th October 2019               |On 31st October 2019               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                  ROHIT [M]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, of Counsel, instructed by Lloyds Clifford
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of India who came to the UK in  June  2001
       and claimed asylum. That application was refused, and his appeal  was
       dismissed. He then  overstayed  in  the  UK.  He  married  a  British
       citizen, Ms [AA], in October 2012, and applied to remain on the basis
       of this marriage in 2013. This application was granted,  and  he  had
       leave to remain on the basis of the marriage from 13th  May  2013  to
       13th November 2015. His leave was then extended until 10th July  2018
       on the basis of his marriage. However, on 15th October  2016  he  was
       ejected from the family home, and he commenced divorce proceedings on
       17th October 2017  with  the  divorce  being  made  absolute  on  1st
       December 2017.

    2. On 10th July 2018 the  appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
       remain on the basis that he had been a victim of  domestic  violence.
       This application was refused, and he applied  again  on  31st  August
       2018. That application was refused too with a right of administrative
       review, which upheld the refusal decision on 21st December 2018.  The
       appellant then submitted  a  pre-action  protocol  letter  which  the
       respondent treated as a human rights' application, and refused in the
       decision of 16th April 2019 with a right of appeal.

    3. The appellant's appeal against the decision refusing the human rights
       application was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Wylie  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 2nd July 2019.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 23rd
       September 2019 on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-tier
       judge had erred  in  law  in  failing  to  consider  the  appellant's
       evidence that he had been a victim of domestic violence and rejecting
       the contention due to a lack of corroborative evidence.

    5. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions -Error of Law

    6. In the grounds of appeal and oral submissions it is argued, in  short
       summary,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  law   at
       paragraphs 23 to 24 of  the  decision  as  there  was  a  failure  to
       consider the credibility of the appellant's own evidence that he  had
       been a victim of domestic violence, particular as it is  argued  that
       he had been subjected to a pattern of coercion  because  his  ex-wife
       and family  had  called  the  police  and  he  had  been  subject  to
       prosecution for assault. It is argued the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
       in law because it simply noted that there was  insufficient  reliable
       evidence to support the claim. It  was  not  considered  that  mental
       abuse, such  as  the  threatening,  abusive  and  coercive  behaviour
       experienced by the appellant,  is  unlikely  to  leave  corroborative
       injuries and less likely to lead to the involvement  of  the  police,
       and that the appellant, as a man, is less likely to have reported the
       abuse.

    7. In a Rule 24 response and in oral submissions the  respondent  argues
       that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  consider  the  quality  of  the
       appellant's evidence as it  is  said  that  there  were  no  specific
       details or a description of what happened. It was not  necessary  for
       the Judge to set out the full  evidence  before  him.  There  was  no
       evidence that the  appellant  had  contended  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal that he had been  subjected  to  threatening  and  punishing
       behaviour through the police prosecution. The fact that it  would  be
       potentially possible to find domestic violence on a  such  a  factual
       matrix did not mean that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  this
       case. The appellant was simply trying to reargue his case before  the
       Upper Tribunal.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. The history of the appellant's troubles with his  ex-spouse  and  her
       two children S and A is set out in the decision at paragraphs  9  and
       10. It was a submission of  his  legal  representative,  recorded  at
       paragraph 18 of the decision, that this evidence should  be  accepted
       as evidence of physical and emotional  abuse.  The  evidence  of  the
       appellant is considered at paragraph 23 of the decision,  but  it  is
       found to be lacking specific details and a full description  of  what
       happened. The totality of the evidence is found at  paragraph  24  of
       the  decision  to  be  insufficient  to  show  on  the   balance   of
       probabilities that the  appellant  has  been  a  victim  of  domestic
       violence.

    9. I do not find that the First-tier Tribunal  has  erred  in  law.  The
       decision  was  rationally  open  to  them  on  the  evidence  and  is
       sufficiently reasoned. The evidence  of  the  appellant  was  clearly
       considered as set out above. There is no contention in  the  oral  or
       written evidence from the appellant before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       that the appellant's wife and her children calling the police  during
       the "altercation" in 2013 or the police prosecution of the  appellant
       were elements of coercive  threatening  domestic  violence,  see  the
       witness statement of the appellant at page  6  of  the  trial  bundle
       before the First-tier Tribunal. It was rationally and  lawfully  open
       to find that  the  history  of  family  conflict  which  led  to  the
       appellant leaving the family home, which is set out by the  appellant
       in his evidence, did not show on the balance  of  probabilities  that
       the appellant had been a victim of domestic violence. I find that the
       First-tier Tribunal did not unlawfully require supporting evidence as
       a condition for a finding of domestic violence, but simply  factually
       noted that there was none in this case.



Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I uphold the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
       appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 29th October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
