
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07025/2018
                                                               HU/07028/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2020                   |On 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                JAMES HAYFORD
                               SAMUEL HAYFORD
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs G Fama, Counsel, instructed by Harding Mitchell
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Thorne (the judge) who, in a decision  promulgated  on  11
         June 2019, dismissed the appellants' human rights  appeals  against
         the respondent's decisions of 1 December 2017 refusing their  entry
         clearance applications under Appendix FM of the immigration  rules.



Background

      2. The appellants are nationals of Ghana. The 1st appellant  was  born
         in 2000. He was 17 years  old  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's
         decisions. The 2nd  appellant,  who  is  the  brother  of  the  1st
         appellant, was born in 2004. He was 13 years old at the date of the
         respondent's decision.

      3. On 7 September  2017  the  appellants  sought  entry  clearance  to
         accompany their father, Isaac Heyford (father), who was seeking  to
         join Naomi Matey (sponsor), his spouse, a British citizen.

      4. The father's application was refused on  the  basis  that  relevant
         documents were not provided.  As  their  father's  application  was
         refused, the appellants' applications were also refused.  This  was
         based on E-ECC.1.6 of the eligibility requirements of Section E-ECC
         of Appendix FM. This reads,

             'E-ECC.1.6. One of the applicant's parents must be in  the  UK
             with limited leave to enter or remain, or be being granted, or
             have been granted, entry clearance, as a partner or  a  parent
             under this Appendix  (referred  to  in  this  section  as  the
             "applicant's parent"), and

             (a) the applicant's parent's partner under Appendix FM is also
             a parent of the applicant; or

             (b) the applicant's parent has had and continues to have  sole
             responsibility for the child's upbringing; or

             (c)  there  are  serious  and  compelling  family   or   other
             considerations which make exclusion of the  child  undesirable
             and suitable arrangements  have  been  made  for  the  child's
             care.'

      5. As the appellants' father was not "being granted" entry  clearance,
         the appellants' applications were refused. Nor was  the  respondent
         satisfied that "the sponsor" the appellants intended to join in the
         UK had sole responsibility for their  upbringing.  I  note  however
         that there is no requirement in Appendix FM that  the  sponsor  has
         sole responsibility for  the  children;  the  requirement  of  sole
         responsibility relates to an applicant's parent - in this case, the
         appellants' father. The respondent considered  whether  there  were
         "serious and compelling family or other considerations" making  the
         appellants exclusion from the UK  undesirable  but  concluded  that
         there were none.

      6. The appellants and their father appealed the respondent's decisions
         pursuant to s.82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002.

      7. On 7 March 2018 the respondent wrote to the  father  informing  him
         that the decision refusing his entry clearance application had been
         reviewed and that, as a result, the  decision  refusing  his  entry
         clearance application had been withdrawn. The letter indicated that
         his case would be reconsidered by the Decision Making Centre.  This
         was because of additional evidence submitted with  the  grounds  of
         appeal. The father was informed that  the  Decision  Making  Centre
         where his original application was decided would  contact  him  "in
         due course with further information about any next steps" he needed
         to take. On 23 March 2018 the First-tier  Tribunal  issued  to  the
         father a Notice of Home Office Decision  Withdrawal.  The  father's
         appeal was withdrawn.

      8. The appellants' appeal was listed for hearing on 25  January  2019.
         On 3 December 2018 an Entry Clearance Manager  (ECM)  reviewed  the
         refusals of entry clearance. The ECM noted that the father's appeal
         had been withdrawn. The ECM stated,

             "That notwithstanding in the evidence before me  I  have  been
             unable to establish whether the father has sole responsibility
             for the appellant[s] or not."

      9. It is  apparent  from  the  ECM  review  that  the  issue  of  sole
         responsibility was in contention.

     10. The appeal hearing listed for 25 January  2019  was  adjourned  and
         relisted for 19 February 2019. The February 2019 hearing  was  also
         adjourned. It appears that  the  Tribunal  may  have  directed  the
         respondent to "send an email" to the  appellants  "regarding  their
         visa". This is based on a letter, dated 14 March 2019, sent by  the
         appellant's legal representatives to the Presenting Officer's Unit.
         I can however find no formal directions issued  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal on this date. The purpose of the 'email' and  its  content
         remain unclear. The letter of 14 March 2019 identified the  correct
         email address for the appellants' father for the  purposes  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal's directions. Follow up letters were sent on  4
         April 2019, 25 April 2019, and 1 May 2019. A further hearing listed
         for 8 April 2019 was adjourned and the matter was listed  again  on
         15 May 2019.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     11. At the appeal hearing on 15 May 2019 the  appellants  were  legally
         represented and the respondent was represented  by  a  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer (HOPO). During the hearing the HOPO informed the
         judge of an email in her file purportedly sent to  the  appellants'
         father on 24 April 2018. At [11] the judge stated,

             "During the hearing the HOPO informed me that according to her
             file and email from "UK Visa ECO" had  been  sent  to  F  [the
             father] on 24/04/18 saying, "The decision to refuse your  visa
             application has bee [sic] overturned and  our  office  is  now
             ready to issue you a UK visa." The email required F to  submit
             further information and pay a fee. However the email was  sent
             to the wrong address and was never  followed  up.  F  did  not
             chase the matter. The appellants solicitors apparently did not
             case [sic] the matter either. Therefore there was no record of
             a visa having been issued to F."

     12. The judge then recorded the absence of any witness statements  from
         the appellants, their father, or their sponsor. The judge did refer
         to a declaration from the appellants' biological  mother  in  which
         she indicated that she had no objection to the father bringing  the
         appellants to the UK [13]. The judge heard oral evidence  from  the
         sponsor, noting that the sponsor  had  never  met  the  appellants'
         mother and knew  nothing  about  her.  The  sponsor  last  saw  the
         appellants in Ghana the previous year and was aware  that  the  1st
         appellant was at boarding school and the 2nd appellant  attended  a
         day school. The sponsor indicated that  the  appellants  and  their
         father were all in good health and happy.

     13. At [23] the judge stated,

             "...  the  appellants  have  not  proved  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities that their mother is not alive and is not living
             in Ghana.  They  have  also  not  proved  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities that F is in the UK  with  a  limited  leave  to
             enter or remain, or is being granted,  or  has  been  granted,
             entry clearance, as a partner or a  parent.  There  is  simply
             inadequate evidence about this. The  position  appears  to  be
             that he has not taken up the offer made by R [the  respondent]
             about this but it is unclear. I also conclude that it has  not
             been  established  that  S  [sponsor]  is  a  parent  of   the
             appellants for the purposes of the Rules. There is  inadequate
             evidence  that  she  has  "stepped  into  the  shoes"  of  the
             appellants' biological mother."

     14. At [24] the judge stated,

             "In addition, the appellants have not proved on the balance of
             probabilities that F  has  had  and  continues  to  have  sole
             responsibility for the appellants' upbringing.  There  are  no
             witness statements from F or the appellants about this and  no
             documentary evidence concerning this matter. It is clear  that
             S has only very limited knowledge about the appellants' mother
             and what part she has played and continues to do so  in  their
             lives. In addition (if it is relevant) it is clear that S does
             not have sole responsibility for the appellants."

     15. The judge went on to refer to the best interests  of  the  children
         and to consider the  Article  8  appeals  outside  the  immigration
         rules. The judge set out, in copious detail, legal  principles  and
         legislative provisions relating to Article 8 and extracts from case
         law. The judge concluded that the refusal to grant  the  appellants
         entry   clearance   would   not   constitute   a   disproportionate
         interference with Article 8 ECHR. The appeals were dismissed.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     16. The grounds contend that it was unclear how the judge concluded, at
         [11], that neither the father nor the appellants' solicitors failed
         to "chase the matter" regarding the father's entry clearance  visa.
         Reference was made to the letter sent by the solicitors on 14 March
         2019 referring to a direction issued  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         requiring the respondent  to  "send  an  email  to  the  Appellants
         regarding their visa", and to the follow-up  letters.  The  grounds
         submit that, given the unclear position relating  to  the  father's
         visa, the fair course of action would have been to adjourn the case
         in order to have these issues clarified. Alternatively,  the  judge
         failed to  consider  that  the  chasing  letters  demonstrated  the
         father's intention to have his UK visa issued.

     17. The grounds contend that, if the respondent had  responded  to  the
         solicitors letters and  sent  the  details  to  the  correct  email
         address for the appellants father, then he would have  been  issued
         with his entry clearance. This would, it was submitted, have had  a
         material bearing on the outcome of the appellants' case. The father
         would have been able to enter  the  UK  prior  to  the  appellants'
         hearing and give evidence of the nature of  his  relationship  with
         his children.

     18. The grounds further contend that the judge  erroneously  considered
         whether the sponsor had sole responsibility for the appellants. The
         grounds additionally contend that the judge's conclusion that there
         was  no  evidence  of  serious  and  compelling  family  or   other
         considerations making the appellants exclusion undesirable  ignored
         evidence that the father was in a position  of  having  a  UK  visa
         issued to him had the respondent since the details to  the  correct
         email address.

     19. At the 'error  of  law'  hearing  Ms  Bassi  provided  'Application
         Details' relating to the father's entry clearance application.  She
         confirmed that the emails inviting the appellants'  father  to  pay
         the Immigration Health Surcharge and to then take his  passport  to
         the visa application centre  had  been  sent  to  the  wrong  email
         address. She confirmed that the correct email address was only used
         for the first time on 15 May 2019, the day of  the  appeal  hearing
         before the First-tier  Tribunal.  She  initially  stated  that  the
         father had not paid the Immigration Health Surcharge, but she later
         accepted that the Immigration Health Surcharge had been paid  after
         being shown  an  email  from  the  appellants'  solicitors  on  the
         sponsor's mobile phone.

     20. Ms Fama submitted that the failure by  the  respondent  to  request
         payment of the Immigration Health Surcharge using the correct email
         address prevented the appellants from being able to show that their
         father was being granted entry clearance. If this mistake  had  not
         occurred, then the father would have been granted entry  clearance.
         Ms Fama accepted that there had been no  chasing  letters  sent  by
         either the father or the appellants' solicitors from the date  that
         the father was informed  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  respondent's
         decision in respect of his entry clearance application and the  1st
         letter sent by the solicitors on 14 March 2019, a period of  almost
         one year. Ms Fama accepted that there was no evidence that, even if
         the Immigration Health Surcharge had  been  paid,  the  father  had
         taken his passport to the visa application centre or  that  he  had
         been was in the process of being issued with his  entry  clearance.
         Ms Farma accepted that there was no documentary evidence  of  proof
         of the father's sole responsibility other than the absence  of  any
         objection by the appellants' biological mother to  them  coming  to
         the UK.

     21. Ms Bassi submitted that no adjournment application  had  been  made
         before the judge, despite the fact that the appellants were legally
         represented. There was no evidence at the date  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing that the father had paid  the  Immigration  Health
         Surcharge or that he  was  being  granted  a  visa.  There  was  no
         evidence before the judge that the father had  sole  responsibility
         for the appellants.

     22. I indicated that I would reserve my decision.

Discussion

     23. It is accepted by both parties that the email sent on 24 April 2018
         requesting the appellants' father to  pay  the  Immigration  Health
         Surcharge and to then take his passport together with a copy of the
         email to the visa application centre where he  initially  made  his
         application was sent to the wrong email address. At the  'error  of
         law' hearing Ms Bassi provided Application Details relating to  the
         father's entry clearance application. The 'Notes' section indicated
         that, on 24 April 2018, an  email  was  sent  to  the  wrong  email
         address relating to the father's entry clearance  application.  The
         email indicated that the decision to refuse  his  visa  application
         had been overturned and that the office was now ready to issue  him
         a UK visa. The email required 2 steps: the father had  to  pay  the
         Immigration Health Surcharge, and he then had to take his  passport
         with a copy of the email to the visa application  centre  where  he
         initially made his application. Further  emails  in  similar  terms
         were also sent to the wrong email address on 6 June  2018,  9  July
         2018 and 16 July 2018. On 19 February 2019 it was  noted  that  the
         wrong email address  had  been  used  to  contact  the  appellants'
         father. Nothing however appears to have been done about this  until
         15 May 2019, the date of the appellants' appeal  hearing.  On  this
         date an email was sent to the correct email address requesting  the
         payment of the Immigration Health Surcharge by  22  May  2019.  The
         Application Details document contained no further  information.  It
         was for this reason that Ms  Bassi  initially  submitted  that  the
         father had not paid the  Immigration  Health  Surcharge.  An  email
         receipt  however  was  provided  by  the   appellants'   solicitors
         suggesting that  the  Immigration  Health  Surcharge  was  paid  on
         Friday, 17 May 2019.

     24. Although the appellants do not couch their challenge to the judge's
         decision in terms of fairness, they are essentially contending that
         the respondent acted in a procedurally unfair manner by sending the
         request for the Immigration Health Surcharge  to  the  wrong  email
         address. Had this been sent to the correct email address, then  the
         appellants' father would have been granted entry clearance and  the
         appellants would have met the requirement of E-ECC.1.6.

     25. Because of the respondent's mistake the father was not informed  of
         the need to pay the Immigration Health Surcharge, or  the  need  to
         then take his passport  and  a  copy  of  the  email  to  the  visa
         application centre. He was however informed in March 2018 that  the
         decision  to  refuse  his  entry  clearance  application  had  been
         withdrawn. Despite the pending appeals of his  children,  initially
         listed for January 2019, it was  not  until  March  2019  that  the
         solicitors  sent  their  letter  requesting  "an  email"   (without
         detailing the required content or purpose of the email) be sent  to
         the correct email address. No explanation  has  been  provided  for
         this delay. I accept that the judge failed to refer to the  letters
         of 14 March, 1 May, 4 April and 25 April  2019,  and  that  it  was
         wrong to say that there was no chasing up of the matter. The father
         and the appellants' solicitors  could  however  have  raised  their
         concerns at a much earlier time. This is  relevant  when  assessing
         whether there has been any unlawful unfairness.

     26. If the email sent by the respondent to the father on 24 April  2018
         had been sent to the correct email address then the father may have
         been granted entry clearance. This was certainly the expectation as
         detailed in the email.  The  fact  that  the  father  did  pay  the
         Immigration Health Surcharge after receiving the email sent  on  15
         May 2019 suggests that he is likely to have been able  to  pay  the
         Immigration Health Surcharge on the earlier date. There is  however
         no  evidence  that  the  father  has  taken  the  subsequent  steps
         necessary to be given his entry clearance. Given the length of time
         between the promulgation of the judge's decision and the 'error  of
         law' hearing I am surprised at the absence of any evidence that the
         father has taken further steps to obtain his entry clearance.

     27. The grounds of appeal content that the judge should have granted an
         adjournment in order to ascertain the status of the father's  entry
         clearance  application.   The   appellant   was   however   legally
         represented at the hearing and no application to adjourn was  made.
         Whilst a judge is entitled of his or her own volition to  grant  an
         adjournment, in circumstances where the parties  are  both  legally
         represented a judge will  reasonably  expect  the  competent  legal
         representatives to determine the best course of  action  for  their
         clients. The fact remains that,  at  the  date  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing, the  father  was  not  somebody  who  was  "being
         granted" entry clearance, and although he  may  have  been  granted
         entry clearance had he known of the need  to  pay  the  Immigration
         Health Surcharge, the fact that, by the date of the 'error of  law'
         hearing he still had not been granted  entry  clearance,  indicates
         that the grant was by no means certain.

     28. However, even if the judge had erred in law in his consideration of
         whether the father was a person being granted entry clearance,  and
         in his failure, of his own volition, to adjourn the hearing on  the
         basis of procedural fairness, I can find no error  of  law  in  his
         consideration of the issue of  sole  responsibility.  Although  the
         Reasons for Refusal Letters  themselves  wrongly  referred  to  the
         sponsor having to have sole responsibility, it is apparent from the
         ECM  reviews  that  the  question  whether  the  father  had   sole
         responsibility was very much in  issue.  It  is  a  requirement  of
         Appendix FM that the appellant's father has sole responsibility for
         them. In TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  'sole  responsibility")  Yemen
         [2006] UKAIT 00049 the Tribunal indicated that questions  of  "sole
         responsibility" under the immigration rules should be approached as
         follows:

               i. Who has "responsibility"  for  a  child's  upbringing  and
                  whether that responsibility is "sole" is a factual  matter
                  to be decided upon all the evidence.

              ii. The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules  should
                  not to be understood as a theoretical or legal  obligation
                  but rather as a practical one which, in each  case,  looks
                  to who in fact is exercising responsibility for the child.
                  That responsibility may have been for a short duration  in
                  that  the  present  arrangements  may  have  begun   quite
                  recently.

             iii.  "Responsibility"  for  a  child's   upbringing   may   be
                  undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents and
                  may be shared between  different  individuals:  which  may
                  particularly arise where the  child  remains  in  its  own
                  country whilst  the  only  parent  involved  in  its  life
                  travels to and lives in the UK.

              iv. Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved  in
                  the upbringing of the child, it will be  exceptional  that
                  one of them will have sole responsibility.

               v. If it is said that both are not involved  in  the  child's
                  upbringing, one of the indicators for that  will  be  that
                  the other has abandoned or abdicated  his  responsibility.
                  In such cases, it may well be justified to find that  that
                  parent no longer has responsibility for the child.

              vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility is  not  just  a
                  matter between the parents. So even if there is  only  one
                  parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may
                  not have sole responsibility.

             vii.  In  the  circumstances  likely   to   arise,   day-to-day
                  responsibility  (or  decision-making)  for   the   child's
                  welfare may necessarily be shared  with  others  (such  as
                  relatives  or  friends)  because   of   the   geographical
                  separation between the parent and child.

            viii. That, however, does not prevent  the  parent  having  sole
                  responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

              ix. The test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else  has  day-to-day
                  responsibility, but  whether  the  parent  has  continuing
                  control and direction of the child's upbringing  including
                  making all the important decisions in the child's life. If
                  not, responsibility is shared and so not "sole".

     29. There was limited evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that  the
         appellants' father had sole responsibility  for  them.  The  letter
         dated 13  September  2017  accompanying  the  initial  applications
         stated that the appellants' biological mother divorced  the  father
         in 2011 and that the appellants were living with their  father.  It
         referred to the biological mother, Ms M Agyeiwah, giving  her  full
         consent for the children to settle in the UK with their father  and
         stepmother.  It  did  not  state   that   the   father   had   sole
         responsibility for the children or that the biological  mother  was
         not involved in their upbringing. A  statutory  declaration  by  Ms
         Agyeiwah, dated 27 June 2017, indicated that she had  no  objection
         to the appellants "staying together at the United Kingdom" and that
         she had given her full consent to the father  to  travel  with  the
         children. This statutory declaration made no reference  to  whether
         the father had sole responsibility for the appellants. Neither  the
         solicitor's  letter  of  13  September  2017  nor   the   statutory
         declaration of the appellants' biological mother indicated  whether
         Ms Agyeiwah was involved or not in the upbringing of her  children.
         The fact that she was divorced from their father and that they were
         living with him is not sufficient to infer  an  abdication  of  her
         parental responsibilities. There were no  witness  statements  from
         the father or the appellants clarifying the situation. As the judge
         pointed put, the sponsor had only  limited  information  about  the
         appellants' mother and what part she played in their  lives.  There
         was little other evidence before the judge relating to the issue of
         sole responsibility.

     30. The grounds focus on a reference at [24] of  the  judge's  decision
         where he noted that the sponsor did not  have  sole  responsibility
         for the appellants. the judge however  prefaces  this  by  stating,
         "(if it is relevant)". It is not relevant that the sponsor has sole
         responsibility, but it is manifestly clear from the  rest  of  [24]
         that the judge has focused his attention on  the  position  of  the
         father. The grounds further contend that the father,  had  he  been
         granted entry clearance, would have been able to attend the hearing
         and give evidence as to his relationship with the  appellants.  The
         appellants were however aware of  the  need  to  meet  all  of  the
         requirements of the immigration rules, including the need  to  show
         that their father had sole responsibility for their upbringing.  It
         was open to the appellants and their solicitors to provide evidence
         of sole responsibility for the First-tier Tribunal hearing. It  was
         open  to  the  father  to  provide  a  witness  statement  and,  if
         necessary, to provide independent supporting evidence. This was not
         done.

     31. I can deal briefly with the contention that the judge erred in  law
         in concluding that there was no evidence of serious and  compelling
         family or other  considerations  making  the  appellants  exclusion
         undesirable. The appellant's father  had  not  been  granted  entry
         clearance, and was not being granted entry clearance at the date of
         the First-tier Tribunal decision.  the  only  evidence  before  the
         judge relating to the appellant's circumstances was that they  were
         in good health and happy and lived in a "very  nice"  seven-bedroom
         house [17]. In the absence of any other evidence of the appellants'
         circumstances, or the intentions of the father if  he  was  granted
         entry clearance but not his  children,  the  judge  was  unarguably
         entitled to his conclusions.

     32. I can detect no error on a point of law in the  judge's  assessment
         of the issue of sole  responsibility.  This  being  the  case,  the
         appeals could not have been successful. I find there  has  been  no
         error on a point of your requiring the decision of the judge to  be
         set aside.



Notice of Decision

The appeals are dismissed


D.Blum   23 January 2020

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
