
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07181/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13th September 2017                |On 02 October  2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                            Mr NOUREDDINE ZABOUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Hussain, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Algeria  born  on  16th  May  1984.   The
    Appellant had applied for entry clearance as a partner  under  Appendix
    FM.  His application was refused by the Entry Clearance Manager,  Paris
    on 27th August 2015.  The Appellant appealed.  The appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Astle sitting  at  Birmingham  on  7th
    December 2016.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 14th  December
    2016 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on human rights grounds.

 2. On 11th January 2016  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On  28th  June  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Gillespie found all  the  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge challenged in  the  proposed  grounds,
    save one, were properly available to  her  on  the  evidence  and  that
    adequate reasons were given for these findings and that no error of law
    was arguably identifiable on these findings.

 3. The one finding, however, upon which Judge Gillespie considered  to  be
    an exception is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  held  that  the
    Appellant had not proven that he is a partner of the  British  national
    Sponsor for the purposes of leave to remain as a parent: in particular,
    that he had not proven that he had contracted a lawful marriage in  the
    United Kingdom with the Sponsor.  Judge Gillespie noted that the ground
    advanced in paragraph 6 of the grounds averred  that  the  parties  had
    been lawfully married to each other in the United Kingdom in  2014  and
    that no issue had been taken by the Respondent as to the  existence  of
    such a valid marriage and genuine  relationship.   He  considered  that
    that raised an arguable point that the findings of the  learned  judge,
    first, as to whether any past deception by the Appellant  rendered  his
    presence, in all the circumstances, not conducive to the  public  good;
    and second, as regards proportionality of exclusion - might  have  been
    materially infected by a mistake and finding of fact.

 4. On 13th July 2017 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24, submitting that the issue in  regard  to  whether
    the Appellant is in a genuine marriage with a British citizen  has  not
    infected the overall outcome of the judge's findings and  that  it  was
    submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  made  significant
    findings in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  credibility  and  previous
    deception, and that a finding that he  is  now  married  to  a  British
    citizen would  not  have  changed  the  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's suitability.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Hussain.  Mr Hussain is familiar with  this  matter,  having
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and by being the author of  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Bates.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Hussain submits the finding by the judge that the Appellant was  not
    married is critical and goes to the position  of  fairness  and  it  is
    necessary for the judge to deal with the  evidence.   He  submits  that
    there had never been any intention or suggestion that the parties  were
    not married and that that constitutes a material error of law.

 7. In response Mr Bates points out that he accepts that there is an  error
    but submits that it is not material.  He submits that such  submissions
    would only be relevant under the Immigration Rules and  that  deception
    having been found, it followed that the criteria  for  the  Appellant's
    suitability for  admission  to  the  UK  had  not  been  satisfied  and
    consequently, albeit there was an error as to whether the Appellant was
    married, it was immaterial.   He  further  submits  that  for  a  claim
    outside the Rules it is also immaterial as the judge had accepted  that
    the Appellant was in a genuine  relationship  and  had  regard  to  the
    deception findings.  He points out that the Appellant had  been  guilty
    of considerable deception and was an overstayer, and that his wife  had
    been aware of that deception.  He submits that the judge had given  due
    consideration to the proportionality aspect within Article 8  and  that
    consequently the Appellant could not meet the Rules and that his status
    was at best precarious.  He takes me to paragraph 26 of  the  decision,
    pointing out that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  applied  Section
    117B and that the evidence against the Appellant was compelling on  the
    facts of the case, and reminds me that the judge  was,  it  is  clearly
    shown, aware of the religious ceremony.  He asked me to find  there  is
    no material error of law.

 8. In brief response, Mr Hussain points out the judge does not submit what
    form of relationship she is  assessing  and  that  she  has  failed  to
    address the issue properly, thus causing a procedural  unfairness.   He
    asked me to find that there is a material error of law and to remit the
    matter for rehearing.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. It is clear that the judge has  made  an  error.   That  error  is  the
    failure to recognise the civil marriage of the Appellant to  a  British
    citizen.  However, the judge was aware of the  religious  ceremony  and
    has set out her reasons for rejecting the Appellant's appeal  on  human
    rights grounds in a consistent and well reasoned manner.  She has noted
    that the Appellant has overstayed and that the Appellant's Sponsor knew
    that he was here illegally very shortly after she  met  him.   She  has
    then given clear reasons as to why the decision of the Entry  Clearance
    Officer is in accordance with the Rules  and  she  has  done  so  in  a
    detailed and thorough manner.

12. Thereafter, the judge has addressed issues pursuant to Article 8.   The
    judge has quite properly at paragraph  26  recited  the  relevant  sub-
    Sections of Section 117B with regard to the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control being within the  public  interest.   Therein,  the
    judge has noted the couple met and married in 2013 and that  they  rely
    on that marriage.  The fact that there is  no  reliance  on  the  civil
    ceremony is, I conclude, not an  issue;  it  is  not  material  to  the
    judge's findings.  The judge has looked at  all  the  issues  and  made
    findings and interpreted Section 117B  in  a  proper,  appropriate  and
    reasoned manner.

13. However, that is not the  end  of  the  issue.   The  judge  has  quite
    properly at paragraph 27 gone on to consider  other  factors  including
    the fact that the Sponsor is British born  and  educated  and  employed
    here, that she has family in the UK, and her mother is in poor  health.
    The judge  has  gone  on  effectively  to  consider  all  the  relevant
    circumstances including issues of language, and as to the  ability  for
    the Appellant and Sponsor to move to Algeria.  She has noted there  are
    no qualifying children, and having considered all the  submissions  has
    made a finding that she was perfectly entitled to  that  the  arguments
    put forward on the  Appellant's  behalf  do  not  outweigh  the  public
    interest.

14. Consequently whilst there is an error with regard to the finding on the
    civil marriage, there is no material error of  law.   This  is  a  very
    thorough decision in which the judge has given full reasons as  to  why
    the Appellant cannot succeed on human rights grounds.   Ultimately  the
    submissions of the Appellant's representatives add little to the issues
    before the judge and her decision is  one  that  contains  no  material
    error of law and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains no material error  of
law.  The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.






No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

