
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07730/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 September 2017                     |On 14 November 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SERGE GOUMA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Gilbert, Counsel instructed by Hammond Lloyd
Legal
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Although this case touches on the welfare of a child I  do  not  see
       any risk to the child's welfare arising from reporting this decision
       and I do not make any order restricting reporting.

    2. The Secretary of State appeals a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       allowing the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter  "the  claimant",
       against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  him  leave
       to remain on human rights grounds.  Permission was  given  by  Upper
       Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  because  she  was  satisfied  that  it  was
       reasonably arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  given
       adequate reasons in law for  concluding  that  the  consequences  of
       deportation would be unduly harsh.

    3. It is  helpful  to  consider  carefully  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
       decision. It sets out the claimant's immigration history.  He  is  a
       citizen of the Ivory Coast.  He was born in 1989 and arrived in  the
       United Kingdom in September  2004  at  the  age  of  14  years.   He
       unsuccessfully claimed asylum but was given discretionary  leave  to
       remain until November 2007.  He applied  for  an  extension  of  his
       leave but before a  decision  was  made  he  was  caught  committing
       criminal offences.

    4. In April 2009 he was arrested and  cautioned  for  possessing  crack
       cocaine.  In  August  2009  he  was  charged  with  supplying  crack
       cocaine. He was convicted of this offence and in  February  2010  he
       was sentenced to two years in a young  offenders'  institution.   In
       January  2010,  presumably  while  he  was  awaiting  sentence   for
       possessing crack cocaine, he was fined for possessing cannabis.

    5. He was told of the intention to deport him  in  March  2010  and  he
       responded by setting out claims for asylum and leave  to  remain  on
       human  rights  grounds  based  on  his  private  and   family   life
       particularly his  relationship  with  his  daughter  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  He was served with a deportation order  in  November  2010
       and refused asylum and leave to remain on human rights grounds.   He
       appealed and his appeal was allowed on human rights grounds  in  May
       2011.  He was then given discretionary leave to  remain  until  2011
       extended until 24 December 2012.  He applied  for  leave  to  remain
       before that leave expired but he made his application in  the  wrong
       form and it was not processed.  A further application  was  made  in
       April 2013 but that was not accompanied by the necessary fee and  so
       was not processed.

    6. On 13 August 2013 he was sentenced to a community order  for  twelve
       months for making false representations.

    7. He applied for further leave to remain in April 2014 but in a letter
       dated 24 November 2015 he was told that he had to be  deported.   He
       then made the application on  12  December  2015  seeking  leave  to
       remain on human rights grounds the refusal  of  which  led  to  this
       appeal.

    8. It was the claimant's case before the First-tier Tribunal  that  the
       effect of removal would be unduly harsh for the  claimant's  partner
       and child.  The First-tier Tribunal  directed  itself  on  the  law.
       Paragraph  66  of  the  decision  is  particularly  significant  and
       includes the following:

  "In deciding whether the decision is unduly harsh I  have  considered  MM
  (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (2016)  and  KMO
  (Section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543  (IAC)  where  the
  Upper Tribunal set out'... matters to which the Tribunal must have regard
  as a consequence of  the  provisions  of  s117C.   In  particular,  those
  include that the more serious the offence committed, the greater  is  the
  public interest in deportation of a  foreign  criminal.   Therefore,  the
  word "unduly" in the phrase  "unduly  harsh"  requires  consideration  of
  whether, in the light of the seriousness of the offences committed by the
  foreign criminal and the public interest considerations  that  come  into
  play, the impact on  the  child,  children  or  partner  of  the  foreign
  criminal being deported is inordinately or excessively harsh.'"

    9. The judge went on to  find,  unremarkably,  that  the  claimant  was
       socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom and  that
       he had no  meaningful  links  with  Ivory  Coast.   The  judge  also
       accepted that there were "solid supportive relationships"  with  the
       claimant's partner and extended family.

   10. At paragraph 71 of her decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge  noted
       that the claimant had developed a relationship with a Ms  A---  N---
       and that they had a child O-- G--- who was born in August 2012.  The
       child's mother was concerned that he suffered from Asperger syndrome
       but there was no medical evidence to support that  claim.  When  she
       was ten years old Ms N was  found  to  have  persistent  behavioural
       difficulties and was later found to have Autistic Spectrum Disorder.
       Nevertheless she is now capable of training to be a nurse.

   11. At paragraph 72 the Judge noted that there was "no evidence" of  any
       behavioural difficulties exhibited by the child  OG  and  the  Judge
       found there were no mental health concerns to  be  considered.   The
       judge noted that OG was managing at nursery  and  that  the  nursery
       recognised that the claimant was involved in the care of his son.

   12. Paragraph 73 of the Tribunal's decision is particularly significant.
        The Judge said:

  "The conclusion of the Tribunal in 2011 was that the public  interest  in
  deportation  was  outweighed,  inter  alia,  by  the  potential  for  the
  appellant to develop a relationship with a child who may be his daughter.
   It has now been  established  that  the  girl  is  not  his  child.   My
  decision, more than five years after that conclusion, is reached  against
  a background of further years in the UK, a relationship  which  developed
  shortly after that decision, one which has resulted in a child  where  it
  is accepted by [Secretary of State] that the relationship with Ms  N  and
  the child are genuine and subsisting.  I accept the evidence that  he  is
  the primary caregiver for their son while she is training to be a nurse."

   13. At paragraph 78 the Judge said:

  "The [claimant] is a foreign criminal,  however,  his  significant  crime
  occurred more than six years ago and I accept that the weight attached to
  the public interest arising from his  deportation  diminishes  with  time
  during which he continues to be a proper member of UK society,  following
  UK laws.  I find that he was convicted in 2013 after trying to use forged
  Argos vouchers, he was sentenced to, and completed, 100  hours  community
  service.  I find that this weighs against him but  I  accept  the  proper
  concession  by  [the  Presenting  Officer]  that,  on  its  own,  such  a
  conviction would not raise any prospect of deportation."

   14. The Judge went on to accept that the claimant and  his  partner  had
       "developed deeper ties as a family over time" and that he has "built
       his family in support of his partner in building her career".

   15. At paragraph 80 of the decision the Judge said:

  "it would not be in the best interests of, and would be unduly harsh for,
  his child to remain in the UK and be separated from him".

   16. At paragraph 81 the Judge noted that the claimant is a member  of  a
       "close and supportive family" and said how  "membership  does  bring
       value and benefit to the wider family as well as to his partner  and
       son".

   17. The Judge repeated the finding given earlier that the claimant

  "is supporting his partner, and caring for their son, while she trains to
  be a nurse and that her course will finish in July 2018".

   18. At paragraph 83 the Judge said:

  "Whilst the  public  interest  in  his  deportation  remains,  it  is  my
  conclusion that his situation is within the exception on the basis of his
  relationship with his child and the impact on his  continued  development
  of the [claimant's] absence at this crucial stage in his life."

   19. At paragraph 84 the Judge said:

  "If I am wrong on that point I must consider his  relationship  with  his
  wife.  I find that he has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
  partner within the scope of paragraph 399(b).  I rely on the  finding  in
  the 2011 decision that she would remain in the UK.   In  considering  her
  position, if he  is  deported  they  can  communicate  using  social  and
  electronic media.  I find that she could travel to Ivory Coast  to  visit
  the [claimant] and whilst I accept that his absence would involve her  in
  additional childcare responsibilities and may  impact  on  her  financial
  situation, I would not find  those  to  be  unduly  harsh,  absent  other
  factors.  The other factors in this case which I take  into  account  are
  the length of  time  since  the  offence  and  the  [claimant's]  social,
  cultural and family ties in the UK."

   20. At paragraph 91 the Judge said:

  "I rely on the previous findings and the reasons set out  above  to  find
  that the effect of the deportation will be unduly harsh on the child  and
  his partner."

   21. At paragraph 92 the Judge said:

  "This [claimant] committed his offences as a young  adult.   He  spent  a
  number of years supporting his family, initially with his  own  work  and
  thereafter in the work carried out by his partner.  Whilst the scales are
  weighted in favour of deportation and while further weight must be  added
  to the new factor of recent criminality, I rely on the  findings  of  the
  previous Tribunal, and the nature of his family life which has  continued
  to develop, on the fact that the recent criminality would not, in  itself
  require  deportation  and  I  find  that  the  public  interest  in   his
  deportation does not, in  this  instance,  outweigh  the  rights  of  the
  [claimant] and his family to enjoy family life in the UK."

   22. Mr Armstrong made his case very simply.  He relied on the  Secretary
       of State's grounds and particularly 1b which  is  in  the  following
       terms:

  "In KMO (Section 117 - unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT 00543 (IAC)  the
  Upper Tribunal reaffirmed the  definition  of  'unduly  harsh'  from  the
  earlier decision of MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") USA [2015] UKUT  00453
  (IAC).  Paragraph 26 of KMO states the following,

  'Although, for these reasons, I respectfully  depart  from  the  approach
  advocated by the Tribunal in MAB I do adopt the other guidance offered by
  that decision:

  "Whether the consequences of deportation will be 'unduly  harsh'  for  an
  individual involves more than 'uncomfortable, inconvenient,  undesirable,
  unwelcome or merely difficult and challenging' consequences and imposes a
  considerably more elevated or higher threshold.

  The consequences for an individual will be 'harsh' if they  are  'severe'
  or 'bleak' and they will be 'unduly' so if  they  are  'inordinately'  or
  'excessively' harsh taking into account all of the circumstances  of  the
  individual."

  Although I would add, of course, that "all of the circumstances" includes
  the criminal history of the person facing deportation.""

   23. I have no hesitation in saying that if the  decision  to  allow  the
       appeal concerned only the claimant's partner  it  would  be  clearly
       wrong.  The public interest requires deportation,  because  that  is
       what statute says, unless the  effects  will  be  unduly  harsh  and
       although the judge has directed herself impeccably I  see  no  basis
       whatsoever for finding the effect on the partner to be unduly  harsh
       and it is not clear that the Judge reached any such conclusion.  Her
       concerns about the partner have to be read with her  concerns  about
       the child.

   24. It is equally clear that the Judge has directed herself correctly in
       respect of the  child  and  has  unequivocally  concluded  that  the
       effects of removal on the child would be "unduly harsh".  That  said
       it is not at all clear what  the  judge  found  those  unduly  harsh
       consequences would be.

   25. I confirm that I have considered Mr Gilbert's submissions but to the
       extent that he says the decision is explained  adequately  I  cannot
       agree.  As indicated in my own analysis of the Decision and  Reasons
       there are  many  correct  examples  of  appropriate  self-direction.
       There are also reasons to suspect the judge has misdirected herself.
        The time spent since the most serious offence was committed is  not
       particularly relevant in determining  whether  the  effects  on  the
       child or partner would be "unduly harsh" and the judge has, I  find,
       rather glossed over the significance of a more recent conviction for
       an  act  of  dishonesty.   Clearly  a  matter  dealt  with  in   the
       magistrates' court and punished by a community order is likely to be
       a great deal less serious than a matter that resulted in a  two-year
       custodial sentence on a young offender but it is not  acceptable  to
       steal from Argos or anyone else.

   26. Further the Judge has not  acknowledged  that  the  requirements  of
       section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       were introduced by amendment in July 2014 and so were not  in  force
       when the claimant  previously  appealed  successfully.  The  present
       regime in tougher and has statutory force. The fact that the earlier
       appeal was successful does not illuminate significantly, if at  all,
       consideration of whether the consequence of removal of unduly  harsh
       now.

   27. I am not particularly concerned  that  the  more  additional  recent
       offence would not have the effect of  attracting  deportation.   The
       fact is the claimant is somebody  who  is  at  risk  of  deportation
       because of his own bad behaviour.  His status was precarious. He did
       not even have leave to be in the United Kingdom. His previous appeal
       was successful largely because of the effect removal would  have  on
       other people and his response to that was to offend again.

   28. However this does not of  itself  undermine  the  finding  that  the
       effect of removal on the child would be unduly harsh.   The  nearest
       the judge gets to justifying the decision is the  finding  that  the
       claimant is the primary  carer  of  his  son  when  his  partner  is
       studying.  That is a significant finding  but  of  itself  does  not
       impress me particularly.  He is available to care for the child  and
       has enough about him to honour some of  his  responsibilities  as  a
       father.  Interfering with that relationship would be harsh but I  do
       not see how of itself it can be  described  as  unduly  harsh.   The
       harshness that follows is the  consequence  likely  to  follow  from
       deportation.  Family relationships  are  destroyed.   That  is  what
       deportation does.

   29. I have considered the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in  an
       effort to see if the unexplained conclusion made more sense  in  the
       light of the evidence.

   30. The claimant in his witness statement confirmed that he has a  close
       relationship with his partner and child and asserts that the  effect
       of  deportation  would  be   "unduly   harsh"   but   gives   little
       consideration, if any, to  what  that  effect  would  be.   He  does
       indicate that  because  his  partner  is  studying  and  working  he
       collects his son from school and takes him  to  school  usually  and
       plays with him.

   31. I have considered the statement  of  the  claimant's  partner.   She
       emphasises her own immaturity when the relationship began.  She  was
       born in February 1994.  She describes the claimant  as  "an  amazing
       dad" as well as being a good uncle and  acknowledges  his  affection
       for his child.

   32. Other family members comment in letters on the desirability  of  the
       nuclear family being allowed to remain together.  I note by  way  of
       example the observations in a letter from  one  Jasmine  Waller  who
       identifies herself as a friend of the family.  She says:

  "If you genuinely took time to meet  the  family  and  Serge,  you  would
  understand the mistake [you are] making and the negative impact [you are]
  about to make on a young boy's whole life.  I beg  you  to  rethink  your
  decision."

   33. Similar points are made by family friends and supporters.

   34. I have considered too the skeleton argument prepared for the hearing
       before the First-tier Tribunal but that has little to say about  why
       it would be unduly harsh to remove the claimant.  The  only  element
       in this case which  is  at  all  out  of  the  ordinary  in  a  case
       concerning a man living in  a  nuclear  family  with  his  child  or
       children is that the wife depends on  him  for  childcare.   She  is
       engaged in a course which is of limited  duration.   There  will  be
       difficulties in managing without the claimant  although  I  find  it
       significant that they have not been explained in  the  evidence.   I
       can see  nothing  in  these  papers  that  would  support  a  lawful
       conclusion that the effects of removal on the child would be  unduly
       harsh.  Rather they are the natural consequences of deportation when
       the person to be removed is a family man.  I hope that no-one making
       these decisions falls into the trap of overlooking how  horrible  it
       is to break up a nuclear family.  For  many  centuries  the  nuclear
       family has been regarded as one of the essential building blocks for
       stability in society but Parliament  has  made  it  clear  that  the
       public interest requires that foreign criminals are deported  unless
       certain exceptions arise which do not exist here unless  it  is  the
       law that fathers who live with their children cannot be deported.

   35. I acknowledge the positive or neutral factors recorded by the First-
       tier Tribunal in its analysis of Section 117 including the amount of
       time the claimant has spent in the United Kingdom and his ability to
       speak English and his lack of ties with his country of  nationality.



   36. I have no hesitation in concluding that the best  interests  of  the
       claimant's son lie in his father remaining with him  in  the  United
       Kingdom. There is no prospect of his removing to the Ivory Coast and
       it is best that he keeps  a  close  relationship  with  his  father.
       However other consideration can prevent the best  interests  of  the
       child being achieved and this is such a case.

   37. Even allowing for all this I cannot find on the evidence  before  me
       that the effects of removal would be "unduly harsh".

   38. I also ask myself if this is one  of  those  rare  cases  where  the
       application of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
       outside the Rules but this is not a case that can  succeed  on  that
       basis.  There are  no  exceptional  or  compelling  or  out  of  the
       ordinary factors here.  This is a case fully  within  the  statutory
       regime and I find the statutory regime permits only one conclusion.

   39. It follows therefore that although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       correctly identified that the appeal had to be dismissed unless  she
       was satisfied that the effects of removal would unduly harsh  within
       the meaning of section 117C(5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 she did not explain adequately her  conclusion  that
       removal would be unduly harsh in this case.

   40. Further, having considered the evidence before me.  I  have  assumed
       that it is substantially truthful in its description of the  present
       arrangements and I am reminded myself that for  the  purpose  of  an
       article 8 balancing exercise facts have to be proved to the ordinary
       civil standard of the balance of probabilities.

   41. I am satisfied that the evidence does not support a conclusion  that
       removal would be unduly harsh.

   42. It follows therefore that I allow the Secretary of  State's  appeal.
       I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I order that
       the appeal against the decision to  refuse  the  claimant  leave  to
       remain on human rights grounds is dismissed.

     Decision

     The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

     I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

     I substitute a decision dismissing the claimant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision.







|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 2 November 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |



