
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07581/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 December 2018                  |On 04 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ZAHARA [I]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Barri, Chapeltowns Citizen Advice


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall  refer  to  the  appellant  as  the  'respondent'  and  to  the
    respondent as the 'appellant' as they respectively appeared before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The appellant is a female citizen of Sudan and was
    born on 1 January 1995. She appealed against the decision of the  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 23 April  2017  refusing  her  application  for
    entry clearance for settlement under  the  family  reunion  rules.  The
    First-tier Tribunal, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  19  March  2018,
    purported  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    Secretary of State, with permission, now appeals to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The relevant rule in HC 395 (as amended) is Paragraph 352A:

         'Family Reunion Requirements for leave to enter or  remain  as  the
         partner of a refugee

         352A. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom as the partner of a person  granted
         refugee status are that:

             (i)  the applicant is the partner of a  person  who  currently
             has refugee status granted under the Immigration Rules in  the
             United Kingdom; and

             (ii) the marriage or civil  partnership  did  not  take  place
             after the person granted refugee status left  the  country  of
             their former habitual residence in order to seek asylum or the
             parties have been living together in a  relationship  akin  to
             marriage or a civil partnership which has  subsisted  for  two
             years or more before the person granted  refugee  status  left
             the country of their former habitual  residence  in  order  to
             seek asylum; and

             (iii)    the relationship existed before  the  person  granted
             refugee status left  the  country  of  their  former  habitual
             residence in order to seek asylum; and

             (iv) the applicant would not be excluded  from  protection  by
             virtue of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of these Rules or Article
             1F of the Refugee Convention if they were to  seek  asylum  in
             their own right; and

             (v)  each of the parties intends to live permanently with  the
             other as their partner and the  relationship  is  genuine  and
             subsisting

             (vi) the applicant and their partner must not  be  within  the
             prohibited degree of relationship; and

             (vii)    if seeking leave to  enter,  the  applicant  holds  a
             valid  United  Kingdom  entry  clearance  for  entry  in  this
             capacity.'

 3. The appeal was brought on human rights grounds (Article 8  ECHR)  only.
    The Respondent challenged the authenticity of  a  marriage  certificate
    upon which the appellant relies.  The  Respondent  was  also  concerned
    that, although the marriage appeared to have taken place  on  2  August
    2013, it had not been registered until 20 March 2014, some seven months
    later. Respondent also considered that there was no evidence  that  the
    appellant and sponsor had lived together  as  a  pre-flight  family  in
    Sudan.

 4. I find that the decision of the judge to  be  problematic.  First,  the
    refusal notice made it clear that the respondent was not satisfied that
    the appellant and sponsor were married as claimed.  Despite  this,  the
    judge [19] refused to consider challenge to the marriage  made  by  the
    presenting officer at the hearing, apparently  because  the  respondent
    had not challenged a stamp on the marriage  certificate.  Consequently,
    the judge did not properly address the concerns of  the  respondent  as
    articulated in the refusal  notice.  Secondly,  though  he  appears  to
    acknowledge the relevance of paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM of HC 395
    (as amended) [8], the judge purports to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    immigration rules; the appeal was brought on human rights grounds  only
    and there was no appeal possible on the grounds  that the decision  was
    not in accordance with the Immigration Rules .  Thirdly,  at  [30]  the
    judge refers to various items of evidence which he finds prove, on  the
    balance of probabilities, that the appellant and sponsor have a genuine
    and subsisting marriage. As grounds of appeal point out, the issue  was
    not whether the couple are currently in a subsisting  relationship  but
    whether they had contracted a pre-flight marriage, an issue  which  the
    judge has failed to address adequately. Fourthly, the judge appears  to
    find that compliance with paragraph 352A was entirely  synonymous  with
    proving that the decision of the entry clearance officer amounted to  a
    disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR. Not only  should  the  judge
    have considered each of  the  sub-  paragraphs  of  paragraph  352  and
    considered whether these were met by the appellant on the evidence, but
    he should also have carried out a proper analysis of the Article 8 ECHR
    appeal and  stated  clearly  why  the  decision  was  disproportionate.
    Compliance with the rule was a relevant consideration but was  not  the
    beginning and  end  of  the  necessary  analysis.  Fifthly,  the  judge
    declares that he was satisfied that the  sponsor  was  a  truthful  and
    credible witness [29] but it is not clear what the  sponsor's  evidence
    was capable of proving given the very limited assistance he provided to
    the tribunal as recorded by the judge at [21].

 5. In the light of what I say above, I am satisfied that the  decision  of
    the judge is flawed in law and should  be  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that  tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision following a hearing.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  19
    March 2018 is set-aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The
    appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not  Judge  Head-Rapson)
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision.


Signed                              Date 2 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


