

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07155/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th August 2017                   |On 30th August 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                       GERALDIE GRACE DIVINE DIAFOUKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     no appearance by sponsor or legal representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the grounds that the
      First-tier Tribunal had failed  to  take  into  account  the  evidence
      produced that there was no testing centre available  in  Cameroun;  it
      had not opened  until  after  the  appellant  had  applied  for  entry
      clearance as a spouse.


   2. The Notice of Hearing for today was sent to the last notified  address
      of the appellant's husband who is on the record  as  her  sponsor  and
      representative.  The  Notice  of  Hearing  has   not   been   returned
      undelivered. There is no explanation  why  he  has  not  attended  the
      hearing today. I do not consider that an adjournment is necessary  and
      proceeded with the hearing. I heard submissions from Ms Aboni.
,
   3. The appellant from Congo-Brazzaville, had applied for entry  clearance
      as the spouse of a person present, settled and a  British  citizen  in
      the UK. She met the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  save  that
      she had  not  obtained  a  recognised  language  certificate.  In  her
      application for entry clearance she said there was no  testing  centre
      in her country and that was why she did not have the test.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal judge referred to there being testing  centres
      in Cameroun, Nigeria, Ghana and South Africa.  In  fact,  the  testing
      centre in Cameroun was  not  opened  until  after  she  had  made  her
      application and it was on this basis that  permission  to  appeal  was
      granted. Ghana, Nigeria and South Africa are thousands of  miles  from
      where the appellant lives but  the  appellant  has  not  and  did  not
      provide any evidence why she  could  not  travel  to  another  testing
      centre - not necessarily one as far away as South Africa.  The  burden
      is on the appellant; simply to state  that  there  is  not  a  testing
      centre in her home country is not sufficient to discharge the  burden.
      Had she provided evidence of particular difficulties at the  time  she
      applied for entry clearance, including evidence of  the  research  she
      had undertaken, the costs of travelling to take  the  test  and  other
      similar evidence it may be that the Entry Clearance Officer would have
      considered exercising his/her discretion. But on the  evidence  before
      the ECO his/her decision was lawful. There is no identifiable error of
      law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.


   5. I would comment that the testing centre in Cameroun -  a  neighbouring
      country - is now open. Even if there had been an error of law  in  the
      First-tier Tribunal decision, the  circumstances  of  the  application
      would have been reconsidered by the ECO in the circumstances  as  they
      stood at the time of reconsideration -  namely  that  t  there  was  a
      testing centre open and accessible.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision

     The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  stands,  namely  the  appeal
    against the decision of the ECO is dismissed.

[pic]

                                    Date 29th August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
