
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07215/2018 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 20 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     A T
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.




    This decision has been made without a hearing, pursuant to rule  34  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. For reasons that will become apparent, my  decision  in  this  case  is
    relatively brief.  At the outset I wish to express my gratitude to Mr S
    Vnuk of Duncan Lewis Solicitors and  Mr  I  Jarvis,  Senior  Presenting
    Officer, for their  assistance  provided  in  the  resolution  of  this
    appeal.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cameron ("the judge"), promulgated on 14  January  2020,
    in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's
    refusal of his human rights claim.  That claim was made in response  to
    a deportation order signed on 22 February 2011, which was followed some
    years later by a refusal to revoke that order.  The deportation  action
    was  predicated  upon  a  conviction  and  sentence   of   two   years'
    imprisonment, both occurring on 8 July 2010, for possession of Class  A
    drugs with intent to supply.

 3. The lengthy  procedural  history  which  followed  the  instigation  of
    deportation action need not be set out here.

 4. In essence, the appellant's case on  appeal  involved  three  principal
    strands.  First, that his absence from the Turkish Republic of Northern
    Cyprus ("TRNC") since the age  of  3,  together  with  his  significant
    mental health problems and other relevant circumstances, meant that  he
    would face  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  integration  into  that
    society (with reference to  exception  1  under  section  117C(4)  NIAA
    2002).  Second, that  having  regard  to  his  marriage  to  a  British
    citizen, their two British children, and the appellant's mental  health
    conditions and those of  his  wife  (who  also  suffers  from  physical
    disabilities), it would be "unduly harsh" for the family unit  to  live
    in TRNC and for the appellant to be deported whilst  the  rest  of  his
    family remained in United Kingdom (with reference to exception 2  under
    section 117C(5) NIAA 2002).  Third,  the  appellant  was  an  important
    witness  in  a  serious  criminal  case  and  had  placed  himself   at
    significant risk by giving evidence.  This,  combined  with  all  other
    factors, went to show "very compelling circumstances"  over  and  above
    those described in  the  two  exceptions  (with  reference  to  section
    117C(6) NIAA 2002).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal and the grounds of appeal

 5. From what appears on the face of his decision, the judge did not appear
    to specifically reject any the  evidence  before  him.   This  evidence
    included  numerous  expert  reports,  relating  both  to   the   health
    conditions of the appellant and his wife, and to the situation in TRNC.



 6. In summary, the judge reached the following conclusions.  He found that
    the appellant had been in the United Kingdom for "more  than  half  his
    life" and was socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom
    ([41] and [43]). He found that  the  appellant  could  obtain  relevant
    medical treatment in TRNC and would not face very significant obstacles
    to integration on return (.45]-[46])  The appellant had a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his wife  and  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his two children.  It would be unduly  harsh
    for the wife and children to relocate to the TRNC ([52]).   Whilst  the
    appellant's deportation would  have  caused  "great  distress"  to  the
    appellant's wife and children, splitting the family would not have been
    unduly harsh ([53]-[57]).  Finally, the appellant had  failed  to  show
    that  there  were  "compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the  public
    interest in his deportation" ([58]-[64]).

 7.  The  appellant  challenged  all  three  of   the   judge's   principal
    conclusions.

Subsequent events

 8. Following directions issued by the Upper Tribunal on 21 February  2020,
    the respondent provided a brief skeleton argument, the relevant passage
    of which states:

         "Having seen the grounds, and the FTT decision of 14  January,  but
         lacking any access to the HO file, or  the  actual  evidence  dealt
         with at the hearing,  it  would  be  most  appropriate  for  me  to
         indicate the [respondent] does not oppose the application."

 9. The appeal was then listed for an error of  law  hearing  on  28  April
    2020.  The Covid-19 pandemic intervened and that hearing was adjourned.
     By directions dated 26 May 2020, the President expressed his view that
    a remote hearing was appropriate.  At  the  same  time  he  granted  an
    extension  of  time  for  the  appellant  to  file  and  serve  written
    submissions and an application under rule 15(2A) of the Procedure Rules
    to rely on new evidence.  All relevant documents were in fact  received
    by the Upper Tribunal 2 June 2020.

10. A remote hearing was then listed for 6 July 2020.

11. On the respondent's side, the case was allocated to  Senior  Presenting
    Officer Mr Jarvis at  a  late  stage.   Having  reviewed  the  relevant
    materials, a decision was made to withdraw  the  decision  refusing  to
    revoke the deportation order.  Mr Jarvis communicated this decision  by
    email to the Upper Tribunal and the appellant's solicitors  on  5  July
    2020 in the following terms:

         "As a result of a review of that evidence the SSHD takes  the  view
         that, on the current state of  the  evidence,  deportation  of  the
         [appellant] would have an unduly harsh effect on  his  wife.   This
         decision has been taken  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  of  her
         significant physical and mental health difficulties, as well as the
         role the [appellant] currently plays  in  providing  care  for  the
         children (as well as their young ages).

         The SSHD has therefore  withdrawn  her  deportation  decision  (the
         refusal to revoke) in this case and will, as  a  result  grant  the
         [appellant] up to 30 months Leave to Remain under the Rules.

         The SSHD therefore asks that the UT allow the  SSHD's  case  to  be
         withdrawn from the Tribunal's jurisdiction under rule 17(2) of  the
         [Procedure Rules] for the reasons given above."

12. As the "deportation decision" referred to in Mr Jarvis' email  was  not
    that under appeal, I take the view that he intended to confirm that the
    refusal of the human rights claim had also been withdrawn.

13. I attach no criticism to Mr Jarvis in respect  of  the  timing  of  his
    communication.   It  is  clear  that  he  only  received  all  relevant
    documents late in the day.  It is equally clear  that  he  conducted  a
    thorough and productive review of those materials in the  very  limited
    time available.  He is to be commended for this.

14. On receiving Mr Jarvis'  email  on  the  morning  of  6  July  2020,  I
    contacted both parties in order to ascertain  their  views  as  to  the
    proper method of disposal of this appeal in light of  the  respondent's
    new position.  In particular,  I  queried  whether  the  appellant  now
    wished to withdraw his appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  or  whether  the
    respondent's withdrawal of  the  underlying  decision  meant  that  the
    appeal was now unopposed  and  that  I  should  produce  a  substantive
    decision.

15. In reply, Mr Jarvis stated as follows:

         "The SSHD is content for [the Upper Tribunal]  to  proceed  on  the
         basis of producing a brief  decision  which  notes  that  the  SSHD
         conceded on error of law (this  was  an  extremely  brief  document
         which simply conceded with no detailed reasoning) and then allowing
         the substantive appeal on the basis of the SSHD's concession on the
         unduly harsh test, the withdrawal of  the  decision  to  refuse  to
         revoke and the [deportation order] as well as the undertaking  that
         Leave will be granted."

16. For the appellant, Mr Vnuk confirmed that his  client  agreed  to  this
    course of action.

17. Both parties also agreed that the remote hearing should be vacated  and
    that my decision could be made 'on the papers'.

Decision without hearing: rule 34 of the Procedure Rules

18. Having regard to  the  core  issue  of  fairness  and  the  significant
    developments  which  have  arisen  at  the  latter  stages   of   these
    proceedings (as set out above), it is clear that I should  exercise  my
    discretion under rule 34 of the Procedure Rules and make my decision in
    this appeal without a hearing.

The jurisdictional issue

19. In light of SM  (withdrawal  of  appealed  decision:  effect)  Pakistan
    [2014] UKUT 00064 (IAC),  the  withdrawal  by  the  respondent  of  the
    underlying decision does not deprive the Upper Tribunal of jurisdiction
    to determine the question of whether the First-tier Tribunal should  be
    set aside for ever law and, if so,  to  re-make  the  decision  in  the
    appeal.

20. Therefore, I am able to proceed to reach a substantive decision in this
    appeal.

Decision on error of law

21. Taking the  respondent's  brief  skeleton  argument  together  with  Mr
    Jarvis' correspondence, it is clear that the  respondent  has  formally
    conceded that the judge materially erred in law.  That  concession  was
    quite properly made.

22. In respect of exception 1 under section 117C(4), it is plain  that  the
    judge failed to have regard to the evidence of Dr Thomas in so  far  as
    she  had  given  an  opinion  that  the  appellant  would   face   real
    difficulties in accessing any treatment in TRNC  even  if  it  existed.
    Further, the judge failed to assess the country report from Dr Bahceci,
    which provided relevant evidence as to  significant  obstacles  in  the
    path of integration into TRNC society.

23. For the avoidance of any doubt, although the judge did not specifically
    address the "lawfully resident" criterion  within  section  117C(4)(a),
    the appellant's temporary admission prior to the granting of Indefinite
    Leave to Enter in 2000 was to be treated as lawful  residence  (see  SC
    (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 2112 and CI (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ  2027).
    When this period is combined with that during which the  appellant  had
    leave, most of his life was  spent  in  this  country  whilst  lawfully
    resident.

24. I turn to exception 2 under section 117C(5) NIAA  2002.   Having  found
    that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife and children  to
    go and live in TRNC, the judge failed to have  any  (or  at  least  any
    adequate)  regard  to,  or  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting, the significant expert evidence before him relating  to  the
    wife's  mental  and  physical  conditions,  and  the  impact  that  the
    appellant's deportation would  have  on  her  and,  by  extension,  the
    children.  On the particular facts of this case, I would go further and
    accept (on an exceptional basis) that it was irrational for  the  judge
    to conclude that the appellant's deportation would not have been unduly
    harsh on his wife and/or the children.

25. In respect of the "very compelling circumstances" issue  under  section
    117C(6) NIAA 2002, the judge failed to have any regard to,  or  at  the
    very least provide any reasons for  rejecting,  the  evidence  from  DC
    Williams.  What can only be described as compelling evidence from  this
    highly experienced  officer  as  regards  the  appellant's  significant
    participation in the  criminal  proceedings  was  simply  left  out  of
    account.  Given the fact that the criminal  trial  had  not  yet  taken
    place at the date of the hearing and that the appellant's evidence  was
    considered so important,  this  particular  element  of  his  case  was
    certainly capable of constituting a very compelling circumstance,  when
    taken together with all other factors.

26. In light of the above,  the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  his
    decision must be set aside.

Re-making the decision

27. The respondent has formally conceded that it would be unduly  harsh  on
    the appellant's  wife  if  he  were  to  be  deported  to  TRNC.   That
    concession is fully justified  in  light  of  the  evidence  and  legal
    framework.  It is sufficient to dispose of this appeal, as it  has  the
    effect that the appellant satisfies exception 2 under  section  117C(5)
    NIAA 2002.

 1. Whilst strictly speaking it is unnecessary for me to  say  anything  in
    respect of the other core issues, I nonetheless deem it appropriate  to
    set out my conclusions in brief terms.

 2. In respect of section 117C(4)(c ), I conclude that there  would  indeed
    be very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration  into  the
    society of TRNC, notwithstanding the high threshold set  by  the  test.
    He has been away from that territory since the age of 3 and clearly has
    no meaningful memories of life there.  He has no family there, nor  any
    potential social network of any sort.  The country expert sets out  the
    significant obstacles  in  the  path  of  integration  (her  report  is
    contained in the appellant's second supplementary  bundle).   There  is
    then his mental health conditions, which are  undoubtedly  significant.
    Even if relevant  treatment  is  potentially  available  in  TRNC,  the
    powerful evidence from Dr Thomas indicates  that  the  appellant  would
    experience very real difficulties in actually accessing  this.   Having
    regard to paragraph 14 of Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and other relevant
    authorities, the appellant satisfies the high threshold and succeeds in
    his appeal on this basis.

 3. In my view, it logically follows from the respondent's concession as to
    the position of the appellant's wife that it would also be unduly harsh
    on his children were he to be deported.  It is not simply a question of
    them being highly distressed by his  departure.   The  manifestly  very
    great difficulties that their mother would experience as result of  the
    appellant's deportation (as recognised by the respondent) would plainly
    have a direct impact on the wellbeing of the  children.   The  evidence
    before me indicates that the involvement of Social  Services  would  be
    likely.  In addition, the eldest child has been assessed  as  requiring
    additional  educational  support  at  nursery  (he  will  be   entering
    Reception Class in September).  This added factor  goes  to  exacerbate
    the  detriment  faced  by  that  child  were  his  primary  carer  (the
    appellant) to be removed from his  life.   Put  bluntly,  the  children
    would suffer undue harshness as a  result  of  their  mother  suffering
    undue harshness.  Thus, the appellant is  able  to  succeed  under  the
    second limb of exception 2 under section 117C(5) NIAA 2002.

 4. Finally, if it were necessary  to  reach  a  conclusion  under  section
    117C(6) NIAA 2002, the following matters are to be taken  into  account
    (based on the unchallenged evidence of  DC  Williams  set  out  in  his
    letters dated 4 February 2020 and 22 April 2020):

      a) the appellant was a victim of a serious crime;

      b) despite his experiences and mental health conditions, the appellant
         did in fact give evidence at the criminal trial in January 2020;

      c) this evidence  was  provided  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
         appellant's name had been disclosed and his anonymity negated;

      d) his evidence at the trial was accepted as both honest and true;

      e) the evidence assisted in the conviction of an  individual  for  the
         offences of robbery, possession of a firearm, and attempted  murder
         of a police officer, for which the perpetrator  was  given  a  life
         sentence;

      f) the appellant's participation is described as "highly commendable".

 5. In my view, the appellant's actions were  exceptional  in  nature.   It
    does not take any real leap of faith to conclude that any  right-minded
    member of society would regard what the appellant did as constituting a
    very significant public service.  When this factor is combined with the
    appellant's overall circumstances (both in respect of his life  in  the
    United Kingdom and his position  if  he  were  removed  to  TRNC),  the
    undoubtedly very strong public interest in deporting him by  virtue  of
    his drugs conviction in 2010 is reduced.  This is a rare example of  an
    Article 8 claim being sufficiently strong for the individual to succeed
    under section 117C(6).

Anonymity

28. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction.  Given that  minor
    children are involved and the issue relating to the  criminal  case  in
    which the appellant was a witness, I maintain that direction.



Notice of Decision

29. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

30. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

31. I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor    Date: 7 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor    Date: 7 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
