
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/07959/2015
      HU/07961/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 21 December 2017                        |On 28 December 2017            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                  Anna [r]
                                    [b b]
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                  On behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Mahmud, Counsel instructed by Irvine Thanvi
                    Nata Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is a challenge by the respondent, however  for  convenience  I
         shall continue to refer to the parties  as  they  were  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal.
      2. The appellants are mother and son and nationals  of  Honduras  born
         respectively on [ ] 1979 and [ ] 2005.  The  respondent  challenges
         the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Samimi  promulgated
         on 13 April 2017 allowing their  appeal  against  the  respondent's
         decision of 10 September  2015  to  refuse  their  application  for
         family reunion under paragraphs 319O, 352AA and 352D.  The ECO  was
         not satisfied that the first appellant had been in  a  relationship
         akin to marriage before the sponsor's departure or that the  second
         appellant was the son of the sponsor.


      3. Judge Samimi found the sponsor  to  be  truthful  and  allowed  the
         appeals.



      4. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the  basis  that  the
         judge had failed to consider the deliberate deception practised  by
         the sponsor and first appellant when  assessing  their  credibility
         and also that she failed to appreciate that  the  second  appellant
         could not meet the requirements of the rules  as  he  was  not  the
         child of the sponsor.



      5. Permission was granted by Judge Pickup on 19 October 2017. Although
         he refers only to the arguable merits of the grounds in respect  of
         the second appellant, there is no attempt to restrict  the  grounds
         that may be argued.



      6. The Hearing



      7. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds, argued that the judge  had  failed
         to deal with the issues raised by the respondent and erred when she
         considered the circumstances  of  the  child.  He  asked  that  the
         decision be re-made by the Upper Tribunal as  no  further  evidence
         was required.



      8. Ms Mahmud submitted that the rules did not specify that the sponsor
         must be a biological parent and that the child was  not  considered
         separately when the ECM reviewed the decision. The outcome  of  the
         first appellant's appeal would be determinative of the  outcome  of
         the second appellant's appeal. She submitted  however  that  if  an
         error of law were to be found, another hearing  was  sought  before
         the First-tier Tribunal as evidence about the relationship  between
         the sponsor and the child would be required.



      9. Mr Tarlow was content  to  rely  on  the  grounds  and  submissions
         already made and had nothing further to add.



     10. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now
         give.



     11. Conclusions



     12. The respondent identified two arguable errors in the  determination
         but  both  parties  focused  on  the  second  issue  and  made   no
         submissions on the first. It is nevertheless part  of  the  grounds
         relied on by Mr Tarlow and is a matter I must consider.



     13. There are difficulties with the conduct of both the  appellant  and
         the sponsor which the judge failed to grapple with. The  ECO  notes
         that the sponsor was illegally in the UK for a number of years  and
         that when she sought to enter the UK in 2008,  the  appellant  said
         she knew no one in the UK.



     14. The judge found the sponsor to be  truthful.  She  noted  that  the
         appellant had deliberately concealed the sponsor's presence in  the
         UK so as to protect his position but found this to be a  reasonable
         and plausible explanation. As pointed out by the  respondent,  this
         was deliberate dishonesty which should have been taken into account
         when credibility was assessed. Alternatively, it is  possible  that
         the appellant was truthful when she said she knew no one in the  UK
         which impacts upon the issue of  whether  there  was  a  pre-flight
         relationship. These are matters which  needed  to  be  tackled  but
         which the judge did not consider.  The  documentary  evidence  also
         needed to be considered in this context.



     15. On the second issue, the  judge  failed  entirely  to  address  and
         resolve the issue of the parentage of  the  second  appellant.  The
         rules make it plain that a child must be the child of the  refugee.
         If the judge considered that this included a  stepchild,  then  she
         should have given reasons for so finding. This was a matter plainly
         raised by the ECO and the judge was required to  consider  it.  For
         these reasons, I find that the decision is flawed  and  it  is  set
         aside other than as a record of proceedings.



     16. I have considered the  submissions  made  by  both  parties  as  to
         disposal. Ms Mahmud indicated that further evidence would be called
         and in those circumstances this appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing and for a fresh  decision  to  be
         made by a judge other than Judge Samimi.



     17. Decision


     18. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law such that  the  decision
         is set aside. The matter shall be re-heard and  decided  afresh  by
         another judge of the First-tier Tribunal at a date to be arranged.






     19. Anonymity



     20. No request for an anonymity order was made and I see no  reason  to
         make one.

    Signed


       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 21 December 2017


