
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07127/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 03 October 2017                           |On 27 October 2017            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                               Shajedah Koussa
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Megha, of Campbell and Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of Mauritius, born in 1981. She 1st entered
    the United Kingdom on 22 April 2005 with entry clearance as a  student.
    Her leave has been extended subsequently  on  many  occasions,  finally
    expiring on 12 April 2013.

 2. On 01 June 2015, the appellant made an application for indefinite leave
    to remain on the basis that she had accumulated  10  years'  continuous
    lawful residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.  She  relied  on  residence
    accumulated since the expiry of her leave to remain on 12  April  2013,
    on the basis that prior to the expiry of leave, on 05 April  2013,  she
    had completed and posted a valid application to extend her leave, using
    the specified form valid at the time, and submitting the right fee. The
    form and  the  fee  had  changed  on  6  April  2013.  By  posting  her
    application on 5 April she was entitled to use the form and pay the fee
    that she  did.  Before  me  her  counsel  explained  that  it  was  her
    contention that the operation of section 3 (C) of the 1971  Immigration
    Act, the respondent having never served a proper notice, because of the
    omission of any notification of a right of appeal, her extended  lawful
    leave had not been stopped in  2013,  and  as  a  result  lawful  leave
    continued to accrue. Accordingly, calculating from 22 April  2005  when
    the appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom, the requisite 10 years
    had been exceeded by the time of the application on 1 June 2015.

 3. On 16 September 2015,  the  application  was  refused.  The  respondent
    reasoned that no valid application had been made prior to the expiry of
    leave. The forms had changed on 6th April and the application  had  not
    been received until 9th April. The form and the fee were out  of  date.
    Leave expired on 12 April 2013. On 17 April 2013, the  application  was
    treated as invalid and returned to the appellant. On 20 April 2013, the
    appellant resubmitted her application  by  which  time  her  leave  had
    expired. In short, she had made no valid in-time  application  so  that
    leave was not automatically extended by the application of  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

 4. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed her appeal, but  she  was  successful  in  obtaining
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the  basis  that  it  had
    been established in court proceedings elsewhere that she  had  in  fact
    submitted her application on 5 April 2013 so that the form and fee were
    correct. In those circumstances, the Home  Office's  rejection  of  the
    application as invalid on 17 April 2013 was in error.  The  application
    should have been processed and, if refused (and it had been  determined
    in the higher courts that the application was entirely without merit so
    that it would have been bound to be refused), the appellant would  have
    had an in country right of appeal, and section 3C/D of the  Immigration
    Act 1971 would have operated to extend lawful leave. At a hearing on 26
    May 2017 the respondent conceded an in-time valid application had  been
    submitted, and in those circumstances, that the judgement of the First-
    tier Tribunal was materially flawed by legal error.

 5. Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor, in light  of  the  concession,  set  the
    decision aside, the matter was retained in the Upper Tribunal, and  the
    appeal was listed for a  continuation  hearing  so  as  to  remake  the
    decision. The case came before me on 27 July when the respondent sought
    to reopen the error of law hearing and  withdraw  the  concession  upon
    which the error of law had been found. Mr Melvin explained that a  full
    examination of the earlier Home Office file had revealed a letter  from
    the appellant in which she expressly  stated  that  she  had  made  her
    application on 8 April, using an old form and with the  incorrect  fee.
    The parties were in agreement that the appellant should  have  time  to
    consider the implications of that evidence and to respond  to  it,  and
    the case was adjourned.

 6. When the matter came before me again on 3 October 2017 I indicated from
    the start that I did not propose to reopen the error of law decision. I
    took the view that the issue had been  concluded  by  the  decision  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor setting the decision aside.  However,  in
    remaking the decision I found it was incumbent upon me to reach my  new
    decision on a correct  factual  basis.  In  that  context,  I  proposed
    admitting the evidence now brought forward by the respondent,  and  the
    witness statements filed in response, provide an opportunity  for  oral
    evidence and submissions, and then to make findings of fact as to  when
    the 2013 application had been submitted, and apply the law to questions
    of the application's validity and the operation of  section  3  of  the
    1971 Immigration Act. I invited representations as to my adopting  that
    process and, neither side objecting, proceeded on that course.

The remaking of the decision

 7. Mr Megha called the appellant, and in turn her  husband,  both  adopted
    their witness statements. No supplemental questions followed.

 8. The appellant  and  her  husband  were  cross-examined.  The  appellant
    confirmed that she had  come  as  a  student  intending  to  return  to
    Mauritius  but,  sometime  after,  she   felt   she   had   contributed
    sufficiently enough to society here, through being a student  and  part
    time work so as to settle, and that was why she made the application in
    2013. As she had not had help  from  the  government  she  thought  she
    should be allowed to stay.

 9. The appellant conceded that on 20 April 2013 she had written a covering
    letter enclosing her resubmitted application in which she stated that:

      a) she had completed the earlier submitted application form  prior  to
         the form changes on 6  April  2013,  which  was  why  it  had  been
         completed on the form, and submitted it  with  the  fee  applicable
         before 6 April 2013. She said that because of the weekend the  post
         office was closed and therefore it was posted on the 1st  available
         date which was on 8 April 2013. She asked the respondent  to  treat
         the application is being submitted in time on  8th  of  April.  She
         explains that although the fee was incorrect that  was  through  no
         fault of hers or her husband, and  she  points  out  that  the  old
         version of the form from before 6  April  remains  valid  until  27
         April 2013.

10. The appellant told me that when she wrote that letter she  was  telling
    the truth as she knew it at the time. However, subsequently  she  spoke
    to her husband who told her that her recollection was  entirely  wrong.
    He had reminded her that she had met with him  when  he  had  left  the
    mosque after Friday prayers on 06 April 2013 and they had gone  to  the
    post office together and posted the application form.

11. The appellant said that she did not discuss the letter that she sent to
    the respondent with her husband before she sent it, and so he  did  not
    have the opportunity to correct her memory at that time. She was  upset
    and depressed about the rejection of the application and in a panic  to
    resubmit. She thought it was the Home Office's fault because  they  had
    put her under too much  pressure.  The  appellant's  husband  had  also
    prepared a witness statement on  the  same  lines,  and  he  gave  oral
    evidence in the same terms, as that of his wife. He told me  he  was  a
    bit ill when the refusal came and so he thought that added to  why  his
    wife did not discuss it with him before she replied, and he agreed that
    that the reference to the post office being closed was a  fiction,  but
    he thought it was adequately explained by the fact that  his  wife  was
    in a panic caused by the Home Office letter.

12. Mr Melvin put it to each of them that  their  evidence  was  expedient,
    being given for the 1st time in the face of  the  letter  of  20  April
    2013, and in response to their recognising the importance  of  changing
    the evidence in that letter. The appellant and her husband denied  that
    and reiterated their recollection of the application being posted on  5
    April.

13. There was no re-examination.

14. Mr Melvin submitted that whilst the appellant was right to point out in
    her  letter  that  following  the  change  to  the  form  on  6   April
    applications made on the old form continued to be treated as valid  for
    a period of 21 days, the fees were a separate  issue.  To  be  a  valid
    application the application had to be accompanied by  the  correct  fee
    and the appellant had paid the old fee. The failure to  pay  the  right
    fee was sufficient to invalidate the application and  the  respondent's
    decision was  correct.  So  far  as  the  date  of  submission  of  the
    application was  concerned  the  letter  accompanying  the  resubmitted
    application was where the truth lay. The disruption caused by the  Post
    Office  being  closed  was  significant.  The  witnesses   were   being
    untruthful, distancing themselves from the letter in order to succeed.

15. In terms of Article 8 the appellant and her husband did  not  meet  the
    rules, no compelling  circumstances  had  been  put  forward  requiring
    consideration beyond the considerations provided for in the rules,  and
    the decision was proportionate.

16. In submissions Mr Megha confirmed that  he  resiled  from  the  earlier
    statements, in the grounds of the  application,  that  both  the  Upper
    Tribunal and Court of Appeal had found as fact that the  appellant  had
    sent her application in on 05 April 2013, recognising that on the  face
    of the judgements produced following Judge O'Connor's directions, it is
    apparent that they did not.

17. Mr Megha asked me to place weight on the oral evidence and to find  the
    appellant and her husband credible in their claim that the  application
    had been sent in on 05 April 2013. The evidence  of  the  latter  stood
    alone and was adequately explained by the appellant and her husband. He
    pointed out that ever since the refusal of the resubmitted  application
    in May 2013, the appellant  and  her  husband  had  asserted  that  the
    application had been made on 05 April 2013.  They  had  taken  judicial
    review proceedings on the basis of that assertion and  renewed  to  the
    Court of Appeal on that basis. The  respondent  had  not  produced  the
    letter now relied on, and had not contested the position. The court had
    found that the application had been  unlawfully  rejected  as  invalid.
    Even if the application had in fact been sent  on  the  08  April  2013
    under rule 34G(I) the respondent was wrong to reject the application on
    the basis that the form was invalid  because  there  is  provision  for
    applications made on the old version of the  form  to  continue  to  be
    treated as valid for 21 days i.e. until 27 April 2013.  In terms of the
    fee he said it was incoherent that an earlier applicable form should be
    acceptable but the earlier fee was not.  Even  taking  the  appellant's
    position at is lowest, the only irregularity  was  the  fee.   Now  the
    rules at 34B allowed that where a single mistake had been made  it  was
    open to the respondent to give  an  opportunity  to  the  appellant  to
    correct it. That was in accordance with principles of fairness, and  it
    would simply be unfair for  the  appellant  if  she  had  to  bear  the
    consequences of the respondent unfairly rejecting  the  application  of
    April 2013 as invalid or what was a single technical error.

18. This was a case where I should use Article 8 ECHR to right a wrong. The
    appellant had been here for 8 years when she made the 2013 application,
    it was rejected as  invalid  because  of  home  office  error  and  the
    subsequent application refused and wrongly she was deprived of a  right
    of appeal. Although technically overstaying she had to  stay  to  apply
    for a remedy, and although it was refused on  the  basis  that  it  was
    academic, it was clearly proper that she should stay because she had  a
    properly arguable complaint.

Discussion

19. I had the benefit of hearing and seeing the appellant and  her  husband
    give their oral evidence.  The respondent apparently failed to  produce
    the evidence in the JR proceedings which the appellant brought in order
    to obtain a right of appeal. It appears that  the  discrepancy  between
    what was written  in  the  letter  on  20  April  and  the  appellant's
    subsequent account have never been put to the appellant before, so that
    this is the first time that the letter and the explanation for it  have
    been considered.

20. I am satisfied that the evidence of the 20th April is the best evidence
    of what happened. It was written close to the date of the  events.  The
    appellant shows in the letter that she is well informed, being aware of
    the detailed provision of the rule including that at Rule 34G(I) to the
    point of the extended validity of the old form.  She  is  also  clearly
    aware that the rule does not extend to the  fees  specified  under  the
    regulations. I do not accept that at that  early  point  following  the
    submission of the application she would have forgotten what happened. I
    am fortified in my conclusion by her explanation that the  post  office
    was closed. If the account she and her husband now  offer  was  correct
    that would  simply  be  untrue.   I  found  the  explanation  that  the
    appellant had not spoken to her husband about her  recollection  before
    responding to the Home Office most improbable given the  importance  of
    their immigration status. I find on balance that the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and her husband is expedient.

21. The letter rejecting the application, dated the 17/04/2017, is provided
    in the appellant's bundle, at Judge O'Connor's  direction.  The  letter
    makes it quite clear that the application was only returned because the
    fee was wrong. The appellant is cautioned that when  resubmitting  with
    the right fee she should use the  right  form,  which  she  does.   The
    appellant's letter accompanying the resubmitted application on the 20th
    April letter also makes it quite clear that she  understands  that  the
    reason for rejection is that the fee was wrong. It is quite clear  that
    the application form was never returned or treated as  invalid  because
    of  the   use   of   the   earlier   applicable   form.   That   is   a
    mischaracterisation which has pervaded these proceedings.

22. The issue was always whether the payment of the wrong  fee  invalidated
    the application. The only argument to the contrary is predicated on the
    elision of the position in respect of forms to that of fees.  There  is
    no basis to extend the rule concerning forms to the position in respect
    of fees. The fees are set  out  in  the  relevant  orders.  Mr  Megha's
    reference to the current rules permitting the  respondent  to  exercise
    discretion in respect of a single error takes the  matter  no  further.
    Not only is the power a discretion, his  submission  omits  to  mention
    that the error in respect of form would now have  to  come  under  that
    rule, because 34(I) permitting the continued use of an old form for  21
    days has been deleted, so that the fee error would not  be  the  single
    error, but in any event the current position is  not  relevant  to  the
    2013 position.

23. I accept the submission of Mr Melvin.  The application was made on  the
    08 April and it was invalid for the failure to pay the right fee.

24. Turning to the appeal against the September 2016 refusal the respondent
    was right to find that the appellant had not obtained the  relevant  10
    years lawful residence.

25. In his submission, the point that Mr  Megha  relied  on  was  that  the
    appellant had been wronged by the Home Office. For the reasons, I  have
    already set out I do not agree.  The reality is that even in  2013  she
    had no proper expectation of being able to  remain,  her  position  was
    without  merit.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jordan  found,  even  if   her
    application had been valid at that time it would be bound to have  been
    refused,  and  any  appeal  would  have  failed.  No  remedy  had  been
    forthcoming on the basis that the application had been hopeless to  the
    point that any right of appeal would have been academic. The  Court  of
    Appeal agreed. Mr Mehga's efforts to pray that position in  aid  of  an
    Article 8 case now is misconceived. It considered an insufficient basis
    then, when it seems her case was considered at its  highest.  Currently
    when it is clear that in fact the decision of invalidity  was  correct,
    and s3 of the 1971 Act has no actual or hypothetical  application,  her
    position is not improved.

26. Mr Megha's skeleton  argument  resurrects  Article  8  ECHR  points  in
    respect of  obstacles  to  integration,  highlighting  the  appellant's
    witness statement evidence that neither she nor her husband have assets
    or property in Mauritius, have severed all ties to the country  and  so
    have no one to whom they could turn for help, and that  in  the  global
    economic crisis jobs would be virtually impossible. He  adds  that  the
    husband has medical conditions and the appellant is his carer, and that
    the husband is challenging his own refusal of leave  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal. References are made to documents in the bundle before the First-
    tier  tribunal.  He  did  not  address  me  on  those  issues  in   his
    submissions.  In  the  circumstances,  I  can  deal  with  the  matters
    succinctly. I have looked at the documents in  the  bundles,  including
    the references, examination results, medical notes and correspondences,
    including that from the MP that  take  the  matters  any  further  with
    regard  to  their  position  here.  So  far  as  the  birth  and  death
    certificates go they do not of  themselves  establish  any  significant
    difficulties for the appellant in terms  of  return  to  Mauritius.  In
    light  of  my  adverse  credibility  findings  I  find  that  the  bare
    assertions of the witness statements fall far short of establishing, on
    balance, a factual matrix in the UK or as anticipated on return, of any
    significant obstacles on return or of  relevant  factors  amounting  to
    compelling circumstances sufficient to displace  the  public  interest,
    described in s117 of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act,
    in the removal of the appellant.

Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has previously been  set  aside
    by the Upper Tribunal. The decision is remade dismissing the appellants
    appeal on all grounds.





Signed            E. Davidge            Date 24 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


