
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:   HU/07900/2015
                                                               IA/20255/2015
                                                               IA/20270/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2016                   |On 18 October 2016                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                               A M and Others
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare  issues.  I  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr B. Chimpango of Crown & Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.     The  appellant  (a  minor)  and  her  parents  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision dated 29 September 2015 to refuse a human  rights
    claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 6 January 2016.

3.    In a decision dated 13  September  2016  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted
    permission to appeal in the following terms:

         "It is at least arguable that the judge may not have approached the
         Article  8  assessment  with  reference  to  the   relevant   legal
         framework. It is perhaps unsurprising that the judge did  not  make
         findings in relation to paragraph 276ADE of the  immigration  rules
         when the appellants' representative apparently conceded  that  they
         did not meet those requirements [17].  It  is  arguable  that  some
         analysis of whether this concession was correctly made  might  have
         been required. Given the similarity of  the  'reasonableness'  test
         outlined in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  and  section  117B(6)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002")  the
         judge's failure to consider the appeal under the rules may not have
         been material save for the  fact  that  there  is  no  evidence  to
         suggest that  he  gave  any  meaningful  consideration  to  section
         117B(6) as part of his overall assessment of Article 8 outside  the
         rules."

4.    At the hearing Ms Fujiwala  accepted  that  the  grant  of  permission
    identified an error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision.  Both
    parties agreed that it would be appropriate to remit  the  case  for  a
    fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

5.    Although the judge gave some consideration to the  best  interests  of
    the child and made findings regarding  the  proportionality  of  return
    under Article 8 it is apparent, for the reasons given in the  grant  of
    permission,  that  he  did  not  conduct  a  sufficiently  well-rounded
    assessment of the relevant circumstances and did not engage  adequately
    with the legal test of whether it would be "reasonable" for  the  child
    to leave the UK: see MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

6.    I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law that was material to the outcome of the appeal.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
a fresh hearing

Signed   [pic]   Date 17 October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
