








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07818/2018

                                                               HU/07822/2018

                                                               hu/07825/2018

                                                               hu/07827/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8th January 2019                |On 23rd January 2019               |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                             OOA, OPA, RAA & RIA

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Daykin of counsel instruct by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A Greasley promulgated on the 25th October 2018  whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellants' appeals against the decision of the
    respondent to refuse the appellants leave to remain in the UK based  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. As the proceedings concern and impact upon  the  rights  and
    status of a child I  consider  it  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Povey on 15th November  2018.  Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

Grounds of appeal

 4. The grounds cite the case of KO (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2018]  UKSC  53  and
    allege that the judge has erred by weighing the conduct of the  parents
    in the balance in considering the question of whether  given  that  the
    parents of the child  had  no  right  to  remain  in  the  UK,   it  is
    reasonable for a qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom with  the
    parents. It is suggested that that approach is  inconsistent  with  the
    guidance given in KO.

 5.  The case of KO 2018 UKSC 53 is specifically  relevant  in  considering
    how one deals with children and their best interests.

 6. In the judgement I draw attention to paragraphs 18-19 of the  decision.
    Having acknowledged that there was  nothing  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  which  referred  to  the
    conduct of the parents in the context of what was in the best  interest
    of the child whether or not it was in the best interests of  the  child
    to remain in the UK, the judgment continues:-

         18.      On the other hand, as the IDI  guidance  acknowledges,  it
         seems to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider  where
         the parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave. It is only if, even on that  hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to  remain.  The  point  was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:


             "22.      In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."


         19.      He noted (para 21) that Lewison  LJ  had  made  a  similar
         point in considering  the  "best  interests"  of  children  in  the
         context of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
         Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:


             "58.      In my judgment, therefore,  the  assessment  of  the
             best interests of the children must be made on the basis  that
             the facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has
             no right to remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"


         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves.


 7. I also draw attention to paragraphs 46-51 in which the factual basis of
    NS and AR, two  of  the  appellants  before  the  Supreme  Court,  were
    considered. [NS and AR were the 3rd and 4th appellants in the  case  of
    MA v SSHD 2016 EWCA Civ 705 see paragraphs 76-89]. NS & AR had  entered
    as students in 2004 and 2003. The appellants had children who had  been
    in the UK over 10 years, including a child or children born in the  UK.
    The appellants had been involved in applications to extend their leave,
    which involved scams, claiming to have studied at Cambridge College  of
    Learning for postgraduate qualifications.

 8.  In paragraph 51 having found that the  judge  had  correctly  directed
    himself as to the wording of section 117 Lord Carnwarth continues:-

         51.      ... The parents' conduct was relevant  in  that  it  meant
         that they had to leave the country. As I have  explained  (para  18
         above), it was in that context that it had to be considered whether
         it was reasonable for the children to leave with them.  Their  best
         interests would have been for the whole family to remain here.  But
         in  a  context  where  the  parents  had  to  leave,  the   natural
         expectation would be that the children  would  go  with  them,  and
         there was nothing in the evidence reviewed by the judge to  suggest
         that that would be other than reasonable.

 9. The case of NS & AR was not a deportation  case  but  a  removal  case.
    Whilst the children had been in the UK a significant period of time, in
    excess of ten years, the fact that the parents were to leave the UK was
    material in assessing whether it was reasonable  for  the  children  to
    accompany them. Whilst the best interests of the child or children were
    for the family to remain, in the final analysis assessment  had  to  be
    made in the context of the parents  having  to  leave  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the child or  children  to  accompany  them.   That  was
    separate from determining what the best interests of the children were.



10. With respect to the grounds of appeal it appears that  the  very  thing
    that the Supreme Court dealt with in the paragraph cited  is  suggested
    to be an error on  the  part  of  the  judge.  The  Supreme  Court  has
    indicated that having assess the best interests  of  the  children  the
    judge thereafter has to go on and consider where  exactly  the  parents
    would be and having  assessed  that  consider  whether  or  not  it  is
    reasonable for the children to accompany the parents to  their  country
    of nationality. That appears to be the very test that is applied by the
    judge in the present decision in paragraph 30.

11. In assessing the  position  of  the  appellants  the  judge  has  given
    individual  consideration  to  the  circumstances  of  the   respective
    parents. The 1st appellant had entered the United Kingdom in  May  2000
    on a  visit  visa  and  thereafter  had  had  no  leave.  He  had  made
    applications on EEA grounds which were  refused,  applications  outside
    the rules which had been refused  and  otherwise  applications  on  the
    basis of family life which were refused. None of those applications had
    been successful he had therefore been unlawfully in the United  Kingdom
    since late 2000.

12. In paragraph 6 the judge had gone on to consider the 2nd appellant. She
    had entered as a student in September 2002. When his student  visa  had
    expired she remained unlawfully. She sought to make an  application  in
    August 2009 but that was refused. The appeal was ultimately  withdrawn.
    It appears that she has sought to rely on qualifications from Cambridge
    college, which were not genuine qualifications.   Further  applications
    had been made but all were refused.

13. At the time of the original application the subject of appeal  the  4th
    appellant was not a qualifying child. The only qualifying child was the
    3rd appellant. He had been born in the United Kingdom on 9  June  2010.
    The judge was well aware that the 3rd appellant was a qualifying child.
    He assessed the circumstances in which the family were  living  in  the
    United Kingdom. The fist appellant had to live  separately  from  other
    family members. The judge also assessed the access  that  the  children
    had to education, to medical  facilities  and  to  external  activities
    outside of school.

14. In the judgement the judge had acknowledged that the 3rd appellant  was
    a qualifying child and he had referred  to  the  same  for  example  in
    paragraph 30. In paragraph 30 the judge identifies that  the  principal
    issue is whether or not it would be reasonable for the qualifying child
    to be expected to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  with  the  parents.  In
    assessing that factor it was an issue of looking at where  the  parents
    and 4th appellant would be in accordance with the guidance given in KO.

15. There were some similarities between the present case the  case  of  NS
    and AR as highlighted in the case of KO. In KO the appellants NS and AR
    had purportedly taken courses at Cambridge College  of  learning  which
    were clearly bogus and false. In  the  present  circumstances  the  2nd
    appellant had likewise sought  for  a  period  of  time  to  rely  upon
    qualifications and courses at Cambridge College of  learning.  Whatever
    else could be said the 1st, 2nd and 4th appellant did not  qualify  for
    leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.  The  expectation  was  taking
    account of the fact that they were unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom
    that they would be returned to Nigeria and the issue for the judge  was
    whether in the light of that it was reasonable for the 3rd appellant to
    return to Nigeria.

16. The judge accordingly was asking himself the very questions  that  were
    posed in the case of KO. The judge concluded having looked at  all  the
    evidence that in order to maintain the family unit and  taking  account
    of all the circumstances it was reasonable for the 3rd appellant to  go
    to Nigeria with the other members of the family. That was a finding  of
    fact the judge was entitled to make on the evidence before. There is no
    error in the approach adopted by the  judge.  Indeed  the  approach  is
    consistent with the guidance given in the case of KO.

17. In the circumstances I do not find that there is any error  of  law  in
    the approach taken by the judge.

    Notice of Decision

18. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 11th January 2019






Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed                                                   Date 11th January
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

