
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07387/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2018                              |On 5 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                             mr manjinder singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Mawaha, Counsel instructed by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India and his date of birth is  17  April
    1992.  He made an application for entry clearance to  join  his  spouse
    here.  The application was refused by the ECO on 1 February 2016.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Monaghan following a  hearing  on  18  May
    2017.  The judge found that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM, but dismissed the appeal under Article 8.  Permission  was
    granted to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nightingale on  2
    December 2017.

2.   At the hearing before me Ms Willocks-Briscoe conceded  that  the  judge
    materially erred and indicated that the application  was  not  opposed.
    She conceded that following the judge's findings under Appendix FM, the
    appeal should have been allowed under Article  8.   I  agreed  with  Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe.

3.       The only issue as far  as  the  ECO  was  concerned  was  that  the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting and the judge concluded that it
    was, having found the sponsor to be  a  credible  witness.   The  judge
    found that the appellant met the requirements of the  Rules  for  entry
    clearance as a  spouse  under  Appendix  FM,  but  concluded  that  the
    interference was proportionate.

4.      The Rules under Appendix  FM  represent  the  respondent's  view  of
    proportionality.  It cannot sensibly be argued in this case  that  when
    the Rules under Appendix FM  are  met  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance is proportionate.  The decision to dismiss the  appeal  under
    Article 8 is set aside.  I remake the appeal and allow it under Article
    8.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 3 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
