
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07942/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7th September 2017                    |On 28th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                         Mr Adebambo Sheriff Adesoga
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel, instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated  2nd  March
    2016 to refuse his application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the partner of  a  British  national.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Wyman dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 22nd  May
    2017.  The Appellant now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal  with  permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 5th July 2017.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant says that he  first
    met his now wife in 2008 when he visited the United Kingdom on holiday.
     He returned to Nigeria to complete his education and came back to  the
    United Kingdom in January 2011, having been granted entry clearance  as
    a visitor.  His leave to remain expired on 10th June 2011  and  he  has
    not had further leave since then.  He  says  that  he  decided  not  to
    return to Nigeria at that stage because his relationship had reached  a
    critical stage.  He made an application for leave  to  remain  in  June
    2012 which was refused on 12th February 2013 with no  in-country  right
    of appeal. He requested  reconsideration  of  that  decision  and  that
    request was rejected on 29th April 2013. He sought  to  challenge  that
    decision by way of Judicial Review but permission was refused  on  10th
    March 2014.  The Appellant and his wife, Ms Stern, married on 7th  June
    2014.  The appellant applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of  his
    marriage on 9th September 2014. That application was refused with no in-
    country right of appeal. He made a further application on 10th February
    2016 and the decision to refuse that application is the subject of this
    appeal. The Secretary of State refused the  application  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of EX.1 of Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules  and  had  not  established  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  his  partner  continuing
    outside of the UK.  The Secretary of  State  considered  whether  there
    were exceptional circumstances in the case and decided that there  were
    not.

 3. In approaching the appeal the judge  set  out  the  relevant  case  law
    including a summary of the findings of the Supreme Court in the case of
    Agyarko and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]
    UKSC 11. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and  his  wife  in
    English.  The Appellant's case was that his wife is employed on a full-
    time basis as a nurse.  She is  an  only  child  and  her  family  live
    nearby.  The Appellant is a Muslim and his wife is a Christian  and  he
    asserts that it would be difficult for them to live in Nigeria  because
    of their different religions. The judge made her findings at paragraphs
    63 to 85 of the decision. In so  doing  the  judge  considered  whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles  to  the  Appellant  and  his  wife
    continuing their family  life  outside  of  the  UK.   The  judge  also
    considered whether the Appellant and his wife could return  to  Nigeria
    on a temporary basis to apply for entry clearance  and  concluded  that
    they could.

    Grounds of appeal

 4. The main issue raised in the Appellant's Grounds of Appeal  is  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge properly applied the principles  set  out
    by the Supreme Court in Agyarko in relation to the weight to  be  given
    to the public interest if the Appellant  were  certain  to  be  granted
    entry clearance if he returned  to  Nigeria.  It  is  accepted  in  the
    Grounds that the judge properly directed herself to consider  paragraph
    51 of Agyarko. However, it is submitted that, reading the decision as a
    whole, the judge turned her back on the  correct  principles  regarding
    the application of Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, failed  to  consider  what
    the outcome of immigration control would  actually  be  and  failed  to
    properly identify how much weight to attach to the Respondent's  public
    interest and how much weight to  attach  to  the  family  life  of  the
    Appellant and his wife.

 5. It is contended that it was argued that an entry clearance  application
    would be certain to succeed because the Respondent  had  accepted  that
    the parties were in a genuine and  subsisting  marriage  and  that  the
    Appellant met the eligibility and suitability requirements for leave to
    remain as  a  partner.  It  is  contended  that  the  earnings  of  the
    Appellant's wife were more than sufficient to meet the maintenance  and
    accommodation requirements of Appendix FM,  that  the  Appellant  could
    speak  English  fluently   and   that   there   were   no   aggravating
    circumstances.

 6. The Grounds argue that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  properly
    ask herself whether an entry clearance  application  would  succeed  in
    light of the evidence.   Instead,  it  is  submitted,  the  judge  only
    focused on the fact that an entry clearance application could  be  made
    rather than asking herself whether it would succeed  and  if  it  would
    whether there was any sensible reason to enforce a policy of  requiring
    the application to be made from Nigeria.

 7. Reliance is placed on the case of Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 and  on  the
    case of MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 953  where  the  Court  of
    Appeal held that the principle  of  Chikwamba  applied  notwithstanding
    that there were no children adversely affected by the decision  in  the
    case.  It is contended that the real question is not whether there were
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Appellant  returning  to  make   an
    application for entry clearance from Nigeria, but whether there was any
    sensible reason why he should be required to do so (paragraph 9  of  MA
    (Pakistan)).

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it is arguable  that
    the judge has not correctly applied  the  principles  set  out  in  the
    decision in Agyarko.

    Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me Mr Coleman submitted that it is clear from the
    factual findings that an  application  for  entry  clearance  would  be
    likely to succeed in this case.  The Appellant's wife is working  as  a
    nurse, there is no adverse immigration history apart  from  overstaying
    and there are no aggravating factors.  He therefore submitted that this
    was the type of case envisaged by paragraph 51 of Agyarko.   He  argued
    that the judge erred in failing to consider the case under paragraph 51
    and that this is a material error because it is very  likely  that  the
    entry clearance application would succeed and the judge may  well  have
    concluded that there  may  therefore  be  no  public  interest  in  the
    Appellant's removal. He submitted that in  focusing  on  whether  there
    were exceptional circumstances in the case the judge  failed  to  apply
    the test set out in paragraph 51.

10. He submitted that it was never a realistic submission that family  life
    could not take place outside the UK.  He accepted that it was a  choice
    made by this couple but the real issue was whether it was necessary and
    proportionate in law.  He accepted that the judge noted the findings in
    Agyarko and Chikwamba but submitted that the judge failed to  apply  or
    consider the guidance from those cases.  In Mr Coleman's submission  it
    is hard to  imagine  a  more  eligible  case  to  be  considered  under
    paragraph 51 of Agyarko.

11. He submitted that the observations made at paragraph 71 of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  were  from  the  perspective  of  the
    Respondent but the judge undertook no balancing exercise as to  whether
    it was necessary for the Appellant to return  to  Nigeria  to  make  an
    application from abroad and the decision is therefore flawed because of
    the absence of that analysis.

12. In his submissions Mr Duffy argued that the facts  in  this  case  were
    different from those in the case of Chikwamba.  Here, he submitted, the
    appeal turned on the argument as to whether there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles  to  family   life   continuing   in   Nigeria.    In   these
    circumstances, given that there were no such insurmountable  obstacles,
    the case of Chikwamba does not apply.  He submitted that the judge  did
    what  was  required  of  her  in   considering   whether   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles and exceptional circumstances as  set  out  in
    paragraph 51 of Agyarko.  He submitted that  paragraph  51  of  Agyarko
    would apply in a situation where the Secretary of State  accepted  that
    an application  for  entry  clearance  would  be  successful.   In  his
    submission an interpretation of paragraph 51  which  would  cover  many
    people in the Appellant's situation would render  Ex  1  pointless.  He
    submitted that there had to be very strong or compelling  circumstances
    and that there were not in this case.

13. In response Mr Coleman submitted that the  ratio  of  Agyarko  is  very
    clear and that this case falls  to  succeed  under  paragraph  51.   He
    submitted that there was no requirement for the Secretary of  State  to
    agree that an Appellant met the Rules.  He submitted that paragraph  57
    of Agyarko, which refers to exceptional circumstances,  makes  specific
    reference to a consideration of all factors relevant  to  the  specific
    case in question including where  relevant  the  matters  discussed  in
    paragraph 51.

14. I reserved the decision.

    Discussion and Conclusions

15.  The  guidance  given  by  Lord  Reed  in  Agyarko   in   relation   to
    precariousness and exceptionality is as follows;


         "Precariousness
         49.   In Jeunesse, the Grand  Chamber  said,  consistently  with
         earlier judgments of the court,  that  an  important  consideration
         when assessing the proportionality under article 8 of  the  removal
         of non-settled migrants from a contracting state in which they have
         family members, is whether family life was created at a  time  when
         the persons involved were aware that the immigration status of  one
         of them was such that the persistence of that  family  life  within
         the host state would from the outset be "precarious". Where this is
         the case, the court said, "it is likely only to be  in  exceptional
         circumstances that the removal of the  non-national  family  member
         will constitute a violation of article 8" (para 108).


         50.    Domestically, officials who are determining  whether  there
         are exceptional circumstances as defined in the  Instructions,  and
         whether leave to remain should therefore  be  granted  outside  the
         Rules, are directed by the Instructions to  consider  all  relevant
         factors,  including   whether   the   applicant   "[formed]   their
         relationship with  their  partner  at  a  time  when  they  had  no
         immigration status or this was precarious". They are instructed:


                    "Family life which involves the applicant putting  down
                    roots in the UK in the full knowledge that  their  stay
                    here is unlawful or precarious, should  be  given  less
                    weight, when balanced against the factors  weighing  in
                    favour of removal, than family life formed by a  person
                    lawfully present in the UK."


         That instruction is consistent with the case law  of  the  European
         court, such as its judgment in Jeunesse. As the instruction makes
         clear, "precariousness" is not a preliminary hurdle to be overcome.
         Rather, the fact that  family  life  has  been  established  by  an
         applicant in the full  knowledge  that  his  stay  in  the  UK  was
         unlawful or precarious affects the weight to be attached to  it  in
         the balancing exercise.


         51.   Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is entitled
         to remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance  of
         this consideration depends  on  what  the  outcome  of  immigration
         control might otherwise be. For  example,  if  an  applicant  would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal will  generally
         be very considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if
         residing in the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted
         leave to enter, at least if an application were made  from  outside
         the UK, then there might be  no  public  interest  in  his  or  her
         removal. The point is illustrated by the decision  in Chikwamba  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department.


         52.   It is also necessary to bear in mind that the cogency of the
         public interest in the  removal  of  a  person  living  in  the  UK
         unlawfully is liable to diminish - or, looking at the  matter  from
         the opposite perspective, the weight  to  be  given  to  precarious
         family life is liable to increase - if there is a protracted  delay
         in the enforcement of immigration control. This point was  made  by
         Lord Bingham and Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood in EB (Kosovo) v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41; [2009]
         AC 1159, paras 15 and 37. It is also illustrated by the judgment of
         the European court in Jeunesse.


         53.     Finally, in relation to this matter, the reference in  the
         instruction to "full knowledge that their stay here is unlawful  or
         precarious" is also consistent with the case law  of  the  European
         court, which refers to the persons concerned being aware  that  the
         persistence of family life in the host state  would  be  precarious
         from the outset (as in Jeunesse, para 108). One can, for example,
         envisage circumstances in which people might be under a  reasonable
         misapprehension as to their ability to maintain a  family  life  in
         the UK, and in which a less stringent approach might  therefore  be
         appropriate.


         Exceptional circumstances
         54.   As explained in para 49 above, the European court  has  said
         that, in  cases  concerned  with  precarious  family  life,  it  is
         "likely" only to be in exceptional circumstances that  the  removal
         of the non-national family member will constitute  a  violation  of
         article 8. That reflects the weight  attached  to  the  contracting
         states' right to control their borders, as an  attribute  of  their
         sovereignty, and the limited weight which is generally attached  to
         family life established in the full knowledge that its continuation
         in the contracting state is unlawful or precarious. The  court  has
         repeatedly acknowledged that "a state is entitled, as a  matter  of
         well-established international  law,  and  subject  to  its  treaty
         obligations,  to  control  the  entry  of  non-nationals  into  its
         territory and their residence there" (Jeunesse, para 100). As  the
         court has made clear, the Convention is not intended  to  undermine
         that right by enabling non-nationals to evade  immigration  control
         by establishing a family life  while  present  in  the  host  state
         unlawfully or temporarily, and  then  presenting  it  with  a  fait
         accompli. On the contrary, "where confronted with a  fait  accompli
         the removal of the non-national family member  by  the  authorities
         would  be  incompatible  with  article  8   only   in   exceptional
         circumstances" (Jeunesse, para 114).


         55. That statement reflects the strength of the claim  which  will
         normally be  required,  if  the  contracting  state's  interest  in
         immigration control is to be outweighed. In the Jeunesse case, for
         example,  the  Dutch  authorities'  tolerance  of  the  applicant's
         unlawful presence in that country  for  a  very  prolonged  period,
         during which she developed strong family and social ties there, led
         the court to conclude that the circumstances were  exceptional  and
         that a fair balance had not been struck  (paras  121-122).  As  the
         court put it, in view of the particular circumstances of the  case,
         it was  questionable  whether  general  immigration  considerations
         could be regarded as  sufficient  justification  for  refusing  the
         applicant residence in the host state (para 121).


         56. The  European  court's  use  of   the   phrase   "exceptional
         circumstances" in this context  was  considered  by  the  Court  of
         Appeal  in MF  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department[2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1 WLR 544. Lord  Dyson  MR,
         giving the judgment of the court, said:


                    "In our view, that  is  not  to  say  that  a  test  of
                    exceptionality is being applied. Rather it is that,  in
                    approaching  the  question  of  whether  removal  is  a
                    proportionate interference with an individual's article
                    8 rights, the scales are heavily weighted in favour  of
                    deportation and something very compelling  (which  will
                    be 'exceptional') is required to  outweigh  the  public
                    interest in removal." (para 42)


         Cases are not, therefore, to  be  approached  by  searching  for  a
         unique or  unusual  feature,  and  in  its  absence  rejecting  the
         application without further examination. Rather, as the  Master  of
         the Rolls made clear, the  test  is  one  of  proportionality.  The
         reference to exceptional circumstances in  the  European  case  law
         means that, in cases involving precarious family  life,  "something
         very compelling ... is required to outweigh the  public  interest",
         applying a proportionality test. The Court of  Appeal  went  on  to
         apply that approach to the interpretation of the  Rules  concerning
         the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  where  the  same  phrase
         appears; and their approach was approved by  this  court,  in  that
         context, in Hesham Ali.


         57.    That approach is also appropriate when a court or  tribunal
         is considering whether a refusal of leave to remain  is  compatible
         with  article  8  in  the  context  of  precarious   family   life.
         Ultimately, it has to decide whether the refusal  is  proportionate
         in the particular case before it, balancing  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the removal of the person  in  question  against
         the impact on private and family life. In doing so, it should  give
         appropriate weight to the Secretary of State's policy, expressed in
         the Rules  and  the  Instructions,  that  the  public  interest  in
         immigration  control  can  be  outweighed,  when   considering   an
         application for leave to remain brought by a person in  the  UK  in
         breach of immigration laws, only where  there  are  "insurmountable
         obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as defined. It must  also
         consider all factors relevant to the  specific  case  in  question,
         including, where relevant, the matters  discussed  in  paras  51-52
         above. The critical issue will generally  be  whether,  giving  due
         weight to the strength of the public interest in the removal of the
         person in the case before it, the article 8 claim  is  sufficiently
         strong  to  outweigh  it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with
         precarious family life,  a  very  strong  or  compelling  claim  is
         required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control.


         58.    The expression "exceptional  circumstances"  appears  in  a
         number of places in the Rules and the Instructions. Its use in  the
         part of  the  Rules  concerned  with  the  deportation  of  foreign
         offenders was considered in Hesham Ali. In the present context, as
         has been explained, it appears in the Instructions dealing with the
         grant of leave to remain in the UK outside the Rules.  Its  use  is
         challenged on the basis that the Secretary of State cannot lawfully
         impose  a   requirement   that   there   should   be   "exceptional
         circumstances", having regard  to  the  opinion  of  the  Appellate
         Committee of the House of Lords in Huang.


         59.   As was explained in para 8 above,  the  case  of Huang was
         decided at a time when the Rules had not been  revised  to  reflect
         the requirements of article 8.  Instead,  the  Secretary  of  State
         operated arrangements under which effect was  given  to  article  8
         outside  the  Rules.  Lord  Bingham,  giving  the  opinion  of  the
         Committee, observed that the ultimate question  for  the  appellate
         immigration authority was whether the refusal of leave to enter  or
         remain, in circumstances where the life of  the  family  could  not
         reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking full account
         of all considerations weighing in favour of the refusal, prejudiced
         the family life of the applicant in a manner  sufficiently  serious
         to amount to a breach of article 8. If the answer to that  question
         was affirmative, then the refusal was unlawful. He added:


                    "It is not necessary  that  the  appellate  immigration
                    authority, directing itself along the  lines  indicated
                    in this opinion, need ask in addition whether the  case
                    meets a test of exceptionality. The suggestion that  it
                    should is based  on  an  observation  of  Lord  Bingham
                    in Razgar [ R (Razgar) v Secretary of State for  the
                    Home Department [2004] UKHL 27; [2004] 2 AC 368] , para
                    20. He was there expressing an expectation, shared with
                    the Immigration Appeal Tribunal,  that  the  number  of
                    claimants not covered by the  rules  and  supplementary
                    directions but entitled  to  succeed  under  article  8
                    would be a very  small  minority.  That  is  still  his
                    expectation. But he was not purporting to  lay  down  a
                    legal test." (para 20)


         60.  It remains the position that the ultimate question  is  how  a
         fair balance should be struck  between  the  competing  public  and
         individual interests involved, applying a proportionality test. The
         Rules and Instructions in issue in the present case do  not  depart
         from that position. The Secretary of State has not imposed  a  test
         of exceptionality, in the sense which Lord  Bingham  had  in  mind:
         that is to say, a requirement that the  case  should  exhibit  some
         highly unusual feature, over and above the application of the  test
         of proportionality. On the  contrary,  she  has  defined  the  word
         "exceptional", as already explained, as meaning  "circumstances  in
         which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
         the individual such that the refusal of the application  would  not
         be proportionate". So understood, the provision in the Instructions
         that leave can be  granted  outside  the  Rules  where  exceptional
         circumstances  apply  involves  the  application  of  the  test  of
         proportionality to the circumstances of the  individual  case,  and
         cannot be regarded as incompatible with article 8. That  conclusion
         is fortified by the express  statement  in  the  Instructions  that
         "exceptional" does not mean "unusual"  or  "unique":  see  para  19
         above."

16. I set Lord Reed's consideration of these issues  in  full  because  the
    comments at paragraphs 51 and 57 relied upon by the Appellant  in  this
    case must be read in the context of the entire decision.

17. In this case First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman was  fully  aware  of  the
    Appellant's immigration history and the basis of his claim as  set  out
    at paragraphs 3-15 of the decision. The oral evidence  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 39-61. The judge was clearly aware of the background  to  the
    appeal. The Appellant has not had leave to remain in the  UK  since  10
    June  2011  when  his  entry  clearance  as  a  visitor  expired.   The
    relationship was formed whilst the Appellant's  status  was  precarious
    and they were married when he was without leave to remain in the UK.

18. The judge considered whether there were 'insurmountable  obstacles'  to
    the Appellant and his wife continuing their family life outside of  the
    UK in accordance with Ex.1. She concluded that  there  were  not  [81].
    Therefore the Appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM.
    This finding has not been challenged.

19. The challenge here is to the judge's consideration of the appeal  under
    Article  8  and  the  weight  given  to  the  public  interest  in  the
    proportionality assessment. Although the judge  did  not  set  out  the
    consideration within and outwith the Immigration Rules separately in my
    view it is clear that she considered both.

20. In considering the appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules  the  judge
    followed  the  guidance  in  Agyarko  looking  at  whether  there   are
    exceptional circumstances as set out in particular at paragraph  57  of
    Agyarko. The judge found that there are  no  exceptional  circumstances
    such as to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  this  case  [69,  83].
    According to the guidance in Agyarko this is what is  required  in  the
    context of precarious family life.

21. Mr Coleman submitted that the judge failed  to  "consider  all  factors
    relevant to the specific case in question, including,  where  relevant,
    the matters discussed in paras 51-52..."(paragraph 57 of  the  decision
    in Agyarko). However it is clear from reading the decision as  a  whole
    that the judge did  in  fact  consider  all  factors  relevant  to  the
    Appellant's case. The judge considered  the  circumstances  in  Nigeria
    should the couple choose to return there together or the  Appellant  on
    his own. The judge considered the Appellant's immigration  history  and
    his decision to 'deliberately flout UK immigration laws and  remain  in
    the United Kingdom illegally' [79].

22. There was no concession by the Secretary of State  that  the  Appellant
    was 'certain' to be able to meet the entry clearance requirements if he
    made an application from Nigeria. Although Mr Coleman argued  that  the
    basis of the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal was  that  he  would  be
    able to meet the entry clearance requirements, it is not clear from the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision that this was the  thrust  of  the
    Appellant's case before her. It is not clear that the documents  before
    the First-tier Tribunal establish that the Appellant was  'certain'  to
    meet the entry clearance requirements. It is clear  from  paragraph  67
    that the judge had the possibility of the success of an entry clearance
    application in mind. In my view it is clear  from  the  decision  as  a
    whole that the judge did not find it established that the Appellant was
    'certain' to be granted entry clearance. In any event, as  acknowledged
    by Mr Coleman, this is a  factor  which  'might'  outweigh  the  public
    interest in removal. It is one factor to be considered along  with  all
    of the other factors in the case. In my  view  it  is  clear  from  the
    decision that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  all  of  the
    evidence before her.

23. At paragraph 57 of Agyarko Lord Reed said that when a court or Tribunal
    is considering this issue  it  must  give  appropriate  weight  to  the
    Secretary of State's policy, expressed in the Rules  and  instructions,
    that the public interest in immigration control can be outweighed  only
    where there are insurmountable obstacles or exceptional  circumstances.
    It is clear that the judge undertook an  assessment  of  insurmountable
    obstacles and exceptional circumstances  in  this  case.   The  Supreme
    Court said that the  critical  issue  will  generally  be  whether  the
    Article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh the strength of  the
    public interest in removal of a person in a particular case.  In  cases
    concerned with a precarious family life the  court  said  that  a  very
    strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the public interest.
     It is clear that the  judge  found  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances in this case, taking into account all of the facts.

24. Accordingly the judge made a decision which was  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence before her properly applying the relevant case  law  including
    the guidance in Agyarko.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 27 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes








TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 27 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

