
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07357/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th September 2018                         |On 18 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                            mr Indra Kumar Gurung
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C E Moll (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against  refusal  of  his  human  rights  claim,
    following refusal of entry clearance for settlement  as  the  dependent
    son of his sponsor in the United Kingdom, was dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pedro ("the judge") in a decision  promulgated  on  25th
    April 2018.   The  appellant  accepted  that  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules  ("the  rules")  and  relied  on
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  He is the son  of  a  former
    Gurkha  soldier.   His  parents  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    settlement on 6th July  2010,  leaving  the  appellant  in  Nepal.   In
    dismissing the  appeal,  the  judge  took  into  account  two  earlier,
    unsuccessful, appeals against refusal of entry  clearance,  found  that
    Article 8 was not engaged and concluded that refusal of entry clearance
    did not breach the appellant's human rights (or those of anyone  else).



2.   Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  who
    found that it was arguable that the judge may have erred in not  taking
    into account Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320 and any impact that judgment might
    have on findings regarding the appellant's circumstances and the extent
    to which he was or remains dependent on his sponsor.  There was no Rule
    24 response from the respondent.

Submissions on Error of Law

3.   Mr Moll said that the judge made no mention of Rai and any impact  that
    case might have.  The Court of Appeal held that it was not  an  adverse
    factor that a claimant had lived apart from his or her sponsor  parents
    following their settlement in the United Kingdom.  He  adopted  grounds
    settled by Counsel instructed at an earlier stage.  In  those  grounds,
    it  was  contended  that  insofar  as  the  judge  concluded  that  any
    dependency was limited to the sponsor providing  financial  assistance,
    as  opposed  to  the  appellant  being  wholly  or  mainly  financially
    dependent, this was a legally erroneous approach.  The judge  expressly
    relied upon a finding made in a decision in 2014,  that  finding  being
    contradicted by a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge in 2015, who  found  that
    the appellant's father was paying everything for his upkeep.  Moreover,
    the proper test was not applied, in the light of guidance given in Rai.
     The judge in the present appeal relied  upon  conclusions  reached  in
    earlier decisions, in 2010 and 2014, made before the  Court  of  Appeal
    gave  judgment  in  Rai.   The  extent  of  the  appellant's  financial
    dependence on his father, as accepted  by  the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge, was sufficient to engage  Article  8,  applying  the  "effective
    support" test confirmed in Rai.

4.   In addition,  the  judge  put  emphasis  on  the  appellant's  parents'
    decision to leave Nepal and settle in the United Kingdom,  as  had  the
    judge in the Upper Tribunal in Rai.  The Court of Appeal concluded that
    this did not engage with the real issue which was whether, as a  matter
    of fact, the appellant had demonstrated a family life with his parents,
    which existed at the time of their departure to settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom and endured beyond  it,  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  the
    parents from  Nepal.   The  appellant's  case  was  that  his  parents'
    decision to settle in 2010 should not be held against him.

5.   It was clear in the decision under challenge, for example in  paragraph
    8, that the judge put emphasis on a finding made in the  first  appeal,
    in 2010, that the parents chose to come to the United Kingdom.   Again,
    Rai showed that this was not the correct approach.

6.   In the present appeal, the appellant asserted  that  he  had  a  family
    life at the time his parents left.  He remained single and supported by
    them and his parents continued to visit Nepal each  year.   He  applied
    for entry clearance in 2010, when he was  27  years  old,  and  if  the
    current rules were in place, he might well have  qualified.   In  2014,
    when another application was made, he was over  the  age  of  30.   The
    Tribunal in the appeal heard in that year concluded  that  he  had  not
    shown family life.  The appellant's sponsor had served in  the  British
    Army for 26 years, reaching the rank of  captain.   The  appellant  was
    born in 1983 and the sponsor was discharged from  military  service  in
    1986.

7.   Mr Jarvis said that although the judge  made  no  mention  of  Rai,  he
    referred in paragraph 9 of the decision to Gurung, a judgment from  the
    Court of Appeal that was still good  law.  In  the  light  of  Rai,  an
    appellant is not to be condemned merely by separation from his parents.
     The written grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to
    appeal highlighted this point at paragraph 11(c).  The key question was
    this: had the judge considered by  his  own  means,  on  the  evidence,
    whether family life was shown.  He took into account  the  two  earlier
    decisions.  The 2010 decision was made when the case law was not  fully
    developed but the specific findings with regard to the evidence  before
    the Tribunal were open to the judge on that occasion and they  fell  to
    be taken into account in the present appeal.  They went to the heart of
    the case concerning Article 8 family life.

8.   In terms of assessing the materiality of any error, there was a  thread
    which could be followed through all three decisions.   Paragraph  8  of
    the 2010 decision showed that the  judge  doubted  the  reliability  of
    evidence regarding the appellant's  personal  circumstances,  including
    accommodation.  In  the  2014  decision,  mentioned  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph  9,  there  was  plainly  still  doubt  regarding  where  the
    appellant lived.  The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge's  decision  in  2015
    was not a remaking of the decision.

9.   The judge in  the  present  appeal  properly  began  with  the  earlier
    findings, including those made in  2014,  and  took  into  account  the
    concerns shown regarding accommodation, dependency and the  appellant's
    personal circumstances.  At paragraph 11 of the decision in the present
    appeal, the judge pointed to particular difficulties  in  the  evidence
    before him.  He accepted some of what he was told but  disbelieved  the
    claim that the appellant was "sofa surfing".  The  appellant  gave  the
    same address as the permanent residence identified in the 2010 decision
    but evidence from his mother was rather different.   This  was  to  the
    effect that the property was sold three or four years ago.   The  judge
    came to a conclusion that the  appellant  has,  in  fact,  a  permanent
    address, given much earlier.  All of this was  important  in  assessing
    the materiality of any failure to  refer  to  Rai.   If  the  appellant
    failed to show what his personal circumstances were, then  no  material
    error would be shown and the judge would then be entitled to find  that
    Article 8 was not engaged.

10.  In a brief response, Mr Moll said that it was clear from  the  decision
    that the judge put weight on the earlier decisions.  At  paragraph  13,
    his analysis was clearly based on the passage of time, giving  rise  to
    his finding that the appellant's independence in  life  away  from  his
    parents had grown.  Moreover, the  relevance  of  any  claim  that  the
    appellant was "sofa surfing" was unclear.  Family life might  still  be
    shown, even if he were still living in the family home, or a  temporary
    premises elsewhere.

11.  The  judge  found  that  it  was  material  that  in  the  two  earlier
    decisions, the judges had not found family life and he built on that to
    include the passage of time, suggesting that the appellant might not be
    as close to his parents as he was.  All of that  was  contrary  to  the
    approach found to be correct in Rai.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12.  Notwithstanding the precision  of  Mr  Jarvis's  submissions  that  any
    error is not material, I conclude that the decision must be  set  aside
    on the basis that it does, on close reading, contain a  material  error
    of law.  There is no mention of  the  judgment  in  Rai  but  that,  of
    itself, is not an error of law, let alone a material one.  However,  it
    is clear from the judgment of the Court of Appeal in that case  that  a
    critical  question  is  whether  family  life  exists  at  the  time  a
    claimant's parents leave Nepal to settle  in  the  United  Kingdom,  in
    addition to the question whether family life endures after that.  It is
    also clear that family life may be shown  between  adult  children  and
    their  parents,  without  evidence  of  "exceptional  dependence"  (see
    paragraph 18 of the judgment in Rai).

13.  The judge reminded himself more than  once  that  he  was  required  to
    consider the position "at the present time".  Although that is  so,  in
    that the date of assessment  was  the  date  of  the  hearing,  he  was
    required to look back to the position in  2010  and  to  make  a  clear
    finding that family life was either shown or not shown  at  that  time.
    The decision shows  that  he  approached  this  task  by  relying  upon
    findings made in the 2010 and 2014 decisions.  However, it is not clear
    from the parts of the earlier decisions that he set out in paragraphs 8
    to 10 of the decision that he isolated findings of fact made on earlier
    occasions that answer the question precisely and it is not  clear  that
    the parts of those decisions that he drew on themselves  indicate  that
    the correct approach, as described in Rai, has been followed.

14.  For example, the judge took from the 2010 determination a finding  that
    the appellant had not shown that he was "wholly dependent  financially"
    on his father.  This is a rather different test from  deciding  whether
    real, committed  or  effective  support  is  shown,  as  identified  in
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and noted at paragraph 17 of  the  judgment
    in Rai.  The judge also drew on a conclusion made in the 2010  decision
    that  the  appellant's  circumstances  fell  well  short  of   "evoking
    compassion to an exceptional or most exceptional degree".  Again,  that
    particular threshold is difficult to  reconcile  with  the  law  as  it
    developed in Ghising [2012] UKUT 160 and  Gurung  [2013]  1  WLR  2546.
    Where the judge in 2010 went on to find that the  relationship  between
    the appellant and his parents amounted to nothing  other  than  "normal
    emotional ties", that  finding  appears  in  the  present  decision  in
    paragraphs based upon a flawed approach.

15.  So far as the 2014 decision is concerned, the  judge  took  from  it  a
    similar finding that the appellant had not shown that  he  was  "wholly
    dependent financially upon his parents" and although there are findings
    that the appellant has established an independent life, it is difficult
    to see an  answer  to  the  question  whether  family  life  was  shown
    notwithstanding the absence of evidence of exceptional dependence.   In
    addition, as submitted by Mr Moll, although the decision from the Upper
    Tribunal in 2015 was not a remaking of the decision under  appeal,  the
    judge on that occasion made a finding the appellant's father was paying
    everything for his upkeep.  Although the judge  noted  this  and  other
    findings made in the Upper Tribunal in paragraph 10  of  his  decision,
    there is no resolution of the apparent conflict with findings  made  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

16.  Having drawn on the earlier decisions, it is at  paragraphs  11  to  14
    that the judge makes his own assessment.  He properly took into account
    evidence of events since the 2014 decision but  directed  himself  that
    the correct question is this:

         "If such facts lead me to the conclusion that at the  present  time
         and on the material before me the appellant has shown that there is
         family life for the purposes of Article 8 then so be it.   However,
         I find that I am not led to such a conclusion by  any  developments
         since (the) previous determination."

    What is missing is any engagement with family  life  in  2010,  in  the
    light of Rai.  The judge went on to find that the relationship  between
    the appellant and his parents continued in substantially the same  form
    as it did at the time of the 2014 decision, that the appellant's father
    continued to provide financial assistance to him and that  his  parents
    continued to visit Nepal to see him, usually on an annual basis.  There
    was, as Mr Jarvis said, evidence from the appellant's mother which  was
    inconsistent with the provision by the appellant  of  an  address  but,
    nonetheless, as Mr Moll submitted,  that  inconsistency  does  not,  of
    itself, show that family life is not present.

17.  At paragraph 13, the judge reminded himself that  he  had  to  consider
    the position "at the present time" and that family life was  not  found
    in the 2010 and 2014 decisions.  He did not at that point  engage  with
    guidance given in Rai, to assess  the  evidence  before  him  (properly
    taking into account the earlier decisions, of course) to assess whether
    family life existed at the time the appellant's parents left Nepal  and
    whether it endured, taking into account that an absence of "exceptional
    dependence" was not fatal to the appellant's case.

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and must be set aside and remade.  In a brief discussion about  the
    appropriate venue, Mr Moll said that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should
    remake the decision.  Mr Jarvis  thought  that  remaking  the  decision
    might only require submissions and so the Upper Tribunal could keep it.
     That is an attractive suggestion but, on careful  reflection,  in  the
    light of my conclusion that  there  has  been  an  absence  of  precise
    findings in the present appeal, the decision should be  remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, at Hatton Cross, before a judge other than  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Pedro.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  It will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal,  at  Hatton
Cross, not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro.   The  findings  of  fact
made in the First-tier Tribunal in this appeal are  not  preserved  and  the
appeal will be de novo.


Signed                                  Date 18 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity order.   I  make  an  order  under
Rule  14(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper   Tribunal)   Rules   2008
prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any  matter  likely  to  lead
members of the public to  identify  the  appellant  or  any  member  of  his
family.  This direction will continue in force until  varied  or  discharged
by another Tribunal or court and it applies to  both  parties.   Failure  to
comply with it may amount to a contempt of court.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

