
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07045/2018 +2


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 July 2019                      |On 09 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                   M M i M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                             First Appellant
                                     and

                                   m m b m
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and

                                  m k i t m
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                             Third Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Rogers, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria  who  made  an  application  for
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the children of their sponsor.
    Those applications were refused by the Respondent on  22  January  2018
    because he was not satisfied that their mother had sole  responsibility
    for them, or that there were any serious and compelling family or other
    considerations which made their exclusion undesirable.  The  Appellants
    appealed that decision and following a hearing at North Shields, and in
    a decision promulgated on  27  March  2019,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Fisher dismissed their appeals.

 2. The Appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Landes on 9 May 2019.  Her  reasons  for  so
    granting were: -

         "1.  These are in-time applications by the appellants, citizens  of
         Nigeria (dates of birth 14 January 2001, 24 January 2003 and 16 May
         2004 respectively) seeking permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
         Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Fisher  promulgated  on  27  March
         2019 who  dismissed  their  appeals  against  the  entry  clearance
         officer's refusal of their human rights claims as the  children  of
         the sponsor their mother.

         2.   It is arguable that the judge erred as set out  at  grounds  3
         and 4. The judge does not appear to have considered the evidence of
         the children which was generally relevant, but specifically so when
         considering whether there were serious  and  compelling  family  or
         other considerations following the  case  of  Mundeba.  Whilst  the
         judge found that he was not satisfied that  he  had  been  given  a
         truthful account of the appellants' circumstances in Nigeria he did
         not explain why he rejected the evidence of the  appellants  and/or
         the evidence of the sponsor's husband as to their circumstances.

         3.   The first part of ground 1 is concerned with the argument that
         the tribunal should have disregarded  the  respondent's  contention
         about the appellants' relationship with  their  father.  I  do  not
         consider this to be arguable. This was  an  appeal  against  a  new
         decision  and  in  that  decision  the  respondent  had   put   the
         appellants' relationship with their father dearly in issue. So  far
         as the second part of ground 1 is concerned,  whilst  it  is  right
         that where the children were living/who they had  contact  with  in
         the past is not  directly  relevant,  that  the  sponsor  has  been
         inconsistent about where her children lived in  the  past  and  who
         they had contact with in the past seriously damages  the  sponsor's
         credibility as to her contention that she is solely responsible for
         the appellants now.

         4.   However I consider ground 2 is also arguable. The  photographs
         of course cannot prove sole responsibility but not  only  are  they
         consistent with the circumstances claimed by the sponsor  they  are
         consistent with the evidence  of  the  sponsor's  husband  and  the
         appellants. The judge did not explain why he rejected the  evidence
         of the sponsor's husband and the appellants themselves.

         5.   Despite my comments, I do not restrict the grounds  which  may
         be argued."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Ms  Rogers  relied  upon  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal
    emphasising that the Judge  did  not  appear  to  have  considered  the
    evidence of the children and in  particular  when  considering  whether
    there  was  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations
    following the authority of Mundeba (s.55  and  para  297(i)(f))  [2013]
    UKUT 00088(IAC). Further the  failure  of  the  Judge  to  explain  the
    rejection of the evidence of the Sponsor's husband and  the  Appellants
    themselves. The former having provided photographs which albeit  unable
    to  prove  sole  responsibility  were  at  least  consistent  with  the
    circumstances claimed by the Sponsor  and  the  evidence  of  both  the
    Sponsor's husband and the Appellants. The Sponsor's husband's  evidence
    had not been subject to cross examination therefore it was asserted had
    not been challenged.

 5. Mr Mills accepted that there had been no specific reference within  the
    Judge's decision, or indeed consideration of, the Appellant's  evidence
    (which was in letter form) but even  if  this  were  an  error  on  the
    Judge's behalf it was not a material  one.  Further  he  accepted  that
    there was no cross-examination of the evidence provided orally  by  the
    Appellant's Sponsor's husband and that the way in which the Judge  went
    on to deal with his evidence did not take account of the absence of any
    challenge to it. However, he submitted that set within the  context  of
    the totality of the evidence any error of the Judge was not a  material
    one.

 6. I do not accept Mr Mills' submission. I find that the Judge  failed  to
    consider  the  evidence  of  the  children  which  was   relevant   and
    particularly  so  when  considering  whether  there  were  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations following the above-mentioned
    case of Mundeba. The Judge  failed  to  explain  why  he  rejected  the
    evidence of the Appellants and indeed the  evidence  of  the  Sponsor's
    husband as to their  circumstances.  The  latter  provided  photographs
    which albeit are unable to prove sole responsibility they  do  indicate
    consistent evidence with the circumstances claimed by the Sponsor,  her
    husband and the Appellants themselves. The Judge has failed to  explain
    why this evidence, unchallenged in cross-examination, was rejected.

 7. These errors are material  and  infect  the  totality  of  the  Judge's
    decision.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh
pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
Act 2007 and Practice Direction 7(b)  before  any  Judge  aside  from  Judge
Fisher and Judge M Davies.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                     Date:  1   August
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



