
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07620/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 6 August 2019                     |On 20 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Saleem Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. W. Khan, Fountain Solicitors (Walsall)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith, promulgated on 26 March 2019, in which
    he allowed Mr. Ahmed's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision
    to refuse to grant leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. For the purposes of the decision I refer to the Secretary of State as
    the Respondent, and to Mr. Ahmed as the Appellant, reflecting their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows

         "It is arguable that in going ahead to hear this appeal the judge
         failed to notice that the decision dated 11 March 2018 was not an
         appealable decision under section 82 of the Nationality and
         Immigration Act 2002.  The only remedy available to the appellant
         was by way of Judicial Review.  In proceeding to decide the appeal
         the judge has made an arguable error of law."

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard submissions from both
    representatives following which I announced that the decision involved
    the making of a material error of law.  There was no jurisdiction to
    hear the appeal, and the appeal was struck out.

Error of Law

 5. The Respondent sets out the basis of the Appellant's application on
    page 2 of the decision.  On page 3 the Respondent considers whether
    this is a repeat application.  She quotes paragraph 353 of the
    immigration rules.  She then considers the elements of the claim which
    had not been previously considered.  On page 5 the Respondent states as
    follows:

         "Careful consideration has been given to whether your submissions
         amount to a fresh claim.  Although your submissions have been
         subjected to anxious scrutiny, it is not accepted that they would
         have a realistic prospect of success before an Immigration Judge in
         light of the reasons set out above, in particular.

         All of your submissions have therefore been considered previously
         in the decision of 6 July 2015 and reconsideration on 5 August
         2015, which was upheld by an Immigration Judge on 19 April 2016.
         Your submissions are not significantly different from the evidence
         that has previously been considered.  Therefore they do not amount
         to a fresh claim.  It was previously determined that the
         exceptional grounds you raised in connection to your previous claim
         were insufficiently compelling to indicate that leave to remain
         outside of the Immigration Rules was appropriate.  In the absence
         of any additional evidence or claim it is not accepted that the
         exceptional grounds raised in your previous claim are sufficient to
         indicate that refusing you leave to remain would lead to
         unjustifiably harsh consequences as outlined in paragraph GEN.3.2
         of Appendix FM.

         As your submissions do not create a realistic prospect of success
         before an Immigration Judge, they do not amount to a fresh claim."



 6. I find that the Respondent gave proper consideration to whether or not
    this was a fresh claim.  With reference to paragraph 353 the Respondent
    considered that it was not a fresh claim and therefore there was no
    right of appeal.

 7. I was referred to the case of Robinson [2019] UKSC 11.  At [64] it
    states:

         "For these reasons I consider that the Court of Appeal was correct
         to conclude that "a human rights claim" in section 82(1)(b) of the
         2002 Act as amended means an original human rights claim or a fresh
         human rights claim within rule 353.  More generally, where a person
         has already had a protection claim or a human rights claim refused
         and there is no pending appeal, further submissions which rely on
         protection or human rights grounds must first be accepted by the
         Secretary of State as a fresh claim in accordance with rule 353 of
         the Immigration Rules if a decision in response to those
         representations is to attract a right of appeal under section 82 of
         the 2002 Act."

 8. I find that this case makes it clear that, where the Respondent has not
    accepted further submissions as a fresh claim in accordance with
    paragraph 353, the decision does not attract a right of appeal.  The
    Respondent did not accept the Appellant's further submissions a fresh
    claim.

 9. Mr. Khan submitted that the Respondent had failed to take into account
    all of the evidence which was before her, and that the decision was
    unclear as to whether it was treating the submissions as a fresh claim
    or not.  I do not find that this is made out.  The Respondent was clear
    that this was not being treated as a fresh claim.  The Respondent
    quoted paragraph 353.  The Respondent then correctly went on to
    consider the elements of the Appellant's claim in order to make her
    decision as to whether or not there would be a realistic prospect of
    success before an Immigration Judge.  That is what the Respondent was
    bound to do.  The fact that the Respondent has considered the elements
    of the claim does not mean that the Respondent was treating it as a
    fresh claim.  Without doing this, the Respondent cannot properly make a
    decision under paragraph 353.

10. The file shows that the issue of jurisdiction was one which fell to be
    considered as a preliminary issue.  However, it was not dealt with.  It
    was accepted by Mr. Mills that it did not appear that Mr. Hussain,
    representing the Respondent in the First-tier Tribunal, had raised this
    issue on the day of the hearing.  However, he submitted that this was
    not a bar to it being considered now with reference to [37] of the case
    of Kousar [2018] EWCA Civ 2462, paragraph 37.  I accept that this is
    the case, and Mr. Khan did not challenge this.

11. The file shows that a decision was made by a Duty Judge that
    jurisdiction was a preliminary issue which fell to be considered.
    While I accept, as submitted by Mr. Mills, that the Duty Judge was
    wrong in not deciding himself that there was no jurisdiction to hear
    the appeal, nevertheless it was clear from the Duty Judge's decision
    that whether or not the Tribunal had jurisdiction was a preliminary
    issue to be considered.

12. I find that the Judge did not appreciate that there was a jurisdiction
    issue to be considered as a preliminary issue.  The Respondent's
    decision was clear that her decision did not attract a right of appeal.
     Any submissions made by Mr. Khan before me in relation to the
    Respondent's alleged failure to take into account all of the evidence
    which was put before her should have been raised as a matter for
    judicial review.  The complaint by the Appellant that new evidence was
    not considered properly by the Respondent does not lead to a statutory
    right of appeal.

13. It is very clear from the Respondent's decision that the Respondent did
    not consider this to be a fresh claim.  I find that the Respondent
    treated the decision exactly in the way that she should have done.  She
    did not consider it to be a fresh claim and so there was no statutory
    right of appeal.



Decision

14. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and I set
    it aside.

15. There was no jurisdiction to hear the appeal and the appeal is struck
    out.

16. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 12 August 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
