
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07414/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2019                       |On 19th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. B.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Alex Bell
                    Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Stainthorpe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, entered the UK legally but became an
overstayer on 7 June 2006. He sought to regularise his status with an
application for leave to remain on human rights grounds outside the
Immigration Rules, relying upon his marriage to Ms A. That application was
refused on 13 March 2018. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was
heard, and dismissed, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope, in a decision
promulgated on 22 October 2018, following a hearing on 10 September 2018.

The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by First-
tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 19 November 2018 on all the grounds
advanced. There were four (wrongly numbered as five). The Respondent did
not reply to that grant with a Rule 24 response. Neither party applied
pursuant to Rule 15(2A) for permission to introduce further evidence. Thus
the matter came before me.

    The challenges in the grounds

It is conceded before me that there is no merit in the first ground.

The focus of the hearing was upon Ground 2 and 3. The latter, which is made
out, is a complaint that the Judge failed to make any reference in his
decision to the authorities of Tikka [2018] EWCA Civ 642 or Chikwamba
[2008] UKHL 40, which were relied upon in the course of the hearing before
him. There were also the more recent authorities on the Chikwamba principle
to consider; Kaur [2018] EWCA Civ 1423, and TZ [2018] EWCA Civ 1109. Nor am
I satisfied that his decision can be read as demonstrating that he had the
relevant principles set out in those decisions in mind when reaching his
own decision. On his own findings this was an interfaith marriage, and this
should have led him to consider whether it was reasonable to expect Ms A to
travel to Pakistan and to live with the Appellant in Pakistan for any
period of time. Nor is there any consideration by the Judge of whether the
Appellant had demonstrated with the evidence supplied in support of his
appeal, that if an entry clearance application were made at the date of the
hearing from Pakistan it would meet the requirements of the Immigration
Rules.

Ground 2 is a complaint about procedural unfairness on the part of the
Judge. Ms A had produced in evidence a divorce certificate to show that her
first marriage had been dissolved, and that she was free to marry the
Appellant. It is common ground before me that she was not questioned about
the content of that document during the hearing, and that the Respondent
did not suggest that this document was a forgery, or that it was indicative
of any unreliability in the evidence of either the Appellant or Ms A. It
would appear that during the course of writing his decision the Judge
concluded in the light of the content of the certificate that Ms A's
evidence was unreliable, which then formed the basis for a chain of
reasoning about the credibility of the Appellant and Ms A. It is common
ground that this was a credibility point first taken by the Judge in the
course of writing his decision. There was no attempt to relist the appeal
for further evidence on the point; if there had been the Appellant would
have been able to direct the Judge to the content of a 2010 report from the
Refugee Board of Canada which he might then have accepted dealt with the
points he had identified.

In the circumstances I am satisfied that the approach taken to the appeal
was procedurally unfair. It was common ground that if that was my
conclusion the proper outcome would be for remittal of the appeal to the
First-tier Tribunal for rehearing. In circumstances such as this, when it
would appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered by
the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has been to
deprive the parties of the opportunity for their case to be properly
considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
Statement of 13 November 2014. Moreover the extent of the judicial fact
finding exercise required is such that having regard to the over-riding
objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to the
First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 13
November 2014.

    To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope, at the North Shields Hearing
    Centre. The following directions were given at the hearing.

    No interpreter is required.

    The Appellant must file and serve any further evidence upon which he
    intends to rely in support of his appeal by 5pm 28 June 2019. If the
    Appellant is unable to meet this timetable he must inform the Tribunal,
    explaining the circumstances, and offering a new timetable that he is
    able to meet.

    The remitted appeal is suitable for the short warned list. Absent any
    well founded objection the Tribunal is likely to call the appeal on for
    hearing at short notice after 1 July 2019.

Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing, with the directions set out above.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 14 June 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
