
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/07578/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 10 January 2019                            |On 25 January 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    N K A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Clyde,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The  respondent's  decision  dated  12  March  2018,  refusing  the
         appellant's application for leave to  remain,  based  on  10  years
         residence.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Buchanan, promulgated on 9 August 2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 22 August 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 4 September 2018.

     vi) The skeleton argument for the appellant, dated 8 January 2019.

 2. The first point in the grounds (prepared by  previous  representatives)
    is that failure to declare income for tax (even  deliberately)  is  not
    conduct which falls within the respondent's policy guidance for refusal
    of  leave.   Mr  Caskie  supported  this  point,  but  rather  faintly,
    acknowledging that it is not supported by the bulk  of  the  case  law,
    although he said it might ultimately be supported by the Supreme Court.



 3. The second point in the grounds is that the judge  failed  properly  to
    consider evidence from accountants [who said the incorrect declarations
    were due to their errors] and gave inadequate reasons for not accepting
    the evidence for the appellant on this issue.

 4. The third point in the grounds is that the  judge  overlooked  evidence
    which  accounted  for  the  appellant's  absences  from  the  UK,   and
    inadequately explained why those  reasons  were  not  compelling.   (Mr
    Caskie did not support the expression in the grounds of "a disingenuous
    assessment").

 5. The skeleton argument appears to have  been  prepared  by  Mr  Caskie's
    instructing agents.  Its first heading is "failure to determine whether
    the decision is in accordance with the law pursuant to the  third  limb
    of Razgar."  This is based on a misunderstanding of  what  that  "third
    limb" means, and Mr Caskie did not add  to  this  ground.   The  second
    heading, "failure to lawfully apply  the  burden  of  proof",  and  the
    third, "failure to recognise the discretionary nature  of  the  general
    ground of refusal", lead nowhere.  The fourth, "failure to consider the
    lack of a penalty", is subsumed into the resolution of the  submissions
    by Mr Caskie.  The fifth heading, "perverse credibility assessment", is
    only disagreement taken to an extreme.

 6. Mr Caskie submitted that the decision of the FtT should be  set  aside,
    and the case should be remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing, on  two
    grounds, either one of which would suffice: inadequacy of reasoning  on
    the length of residence issue, and error of approach, or the giving  of
    "too many reasons", on the income  discrepancy  issue.   He  said  that
    success even on length of residence justified a remit, because that had
    an important impact on the final question of proportionality.

 7. The argument on length of  residence  ran  as  follows.   There  is  no
    discretion within the rule, which lays down a bright line, but there is
    discretion in the guidance, which is relevant  to  the  proportionality
    assessment.   The  judge  at  8.5  misinterpreted  the  guidance.   The
    permitted period  of  18  months  of  absences  is  not  to  allow  for
    circumstances arising unexpectedly late in the 10-year span.  Where  an
    appellant times regular visits to his family  to  fit  within  what  is
    permitted, and uses up more than the average amount in one year due  to
    a matter such as a parent's funeral, that "excess" is excusable even if
    it happened in an intervening year.  There is no requirement to  reduce
    future visits to adjust the  period  to  the  permitted  maximum.   The
    question is only whether there was a good reason for the  "extra"  time
    out of the UK when it occurred.  Maintaining contact with children  was
    a good reason for not shortening  later  visits.   At  8.6,  the  judge
    failed to appreciate that the evidence about the security  difficulties
    in the Khyber Agency (or North  West  Frontier),  where  his  wife  and
    children live, also explained why he had to stay for  longer  than  the
    period in the rules.

 8. On income discrepancy, the argument was on these lines.  The judge  had
    evidence from two firms of accountants that their errors were to blame.
     Those were statements by responsible professionals.   The  judge  said
    there was no explanation of how those errors came about, but it was not
    for the appellant to provide that.  It was sufficient to show that  the
    error was by the accountants, not by him.  The judge  should  not  have
    required anything more to support those explanations.  He was  not  the
    accountants' disciplinary authority.  The judge thought  the  appellant
    should have seen that something  was  wrong,  but  that  was  with  the
    benefit of hindsight, and it was reasonable for the appellant to  trust
    professionals he employed to delay with such  matters  on  his  behalf.
    The appellant is well educated, but accountancy and  tax  are  not  his
    area of expertise.  The  judge  should  not  have  taken  it  that  his
    qualifications were relevant to  whether  he  knew  there  were  under-
    declarations  (5.21  -  5.25).  The  judge  gave   extensive   reasons,
    summarised at 5.25, but effectively imposed a counsel of perfection  on
    the appellant.  He should have attached significance to the absence  of
    a penalty from HMRC.  Although not in evidence, 10% of all tax returns,
    some 500,00 a year, were retrospectively  amended  (Mr  Govan  did  not
    object to this point being raised).  The judge should  not  have  found
    that the appellant used deceit in his tax affairs, because  he  "should
    not  have  gone  behind  the  plausible  explanation  tendered  in  the
    accountants' letters".

 9. I asked Mr Caskie if he was submitting that the judge was bound to take
    the accountants' letters at face value and as a complete answer on  the
    matter.  He said that he did not go that far.

10. Having considered also the submissions for the  respondent,  I  do  not
    find that the making of the decision of the FtT involved the making  of
    any error on a point of law, such that it should be set aside.

11. The argument that it is irrelevant whether an  "excess"  is  identified
    earlier or  later  in  the  10-year  period  reads  a  scope  into  the
    discretionary policy which is not there.  It is up to an  appellant  to
    arrange his affairs in accordance with rules from  which  he  hopes  to
    benefit.  The judge  was  right  at  8.5  to  consider  that  allowance
    obviously went  to  circumstances  arising  unexpectedly  late  in  the
    period.

12. It is conceivable that security difficulties on the North West Frontier
    might play a part in an extended absence, but the general existence  of
    such difficulties, by itself, explains nothing.  Mr Govan  was  correct
    in pointing out  that  there  was  no  evidence  on  this  point  which
    accounted for any particular absence.

13. The appellant had to account for being absent from the UK not  for  the
    540 days permitted but for 725, an excess of 185 days over the  10-year
    period.  The judge at 8.7 was not persuaded that there were "compelling
    or  compassionate  circumstances"  to  justify   the   application   of
    discretion.  That involves the making of  no  error.   Further,  it  is
    difficult to see that, given the long period  to  be  excused  and  the
    weakness of the explanations offered, any  judge  might  sensibly  have
    found such circumstances had been shown.

14. I take it to be presently settled that  someone  who  has  deliberately
    made false declarations of income to HMRC or to UKVI, or to  both,  may
    fail to qualify for leave through the application of  paragraph  322(5)
    of the immigration rules; see e.g. Dadzie and Parker-Wilson [2018] CSOH
    128 at [15] and [16].

15. Statements by qualified professionals carry a certain  status,  but  Mr
    Caskie referred to no authority which required the judge to  give  them
    any higher value than he did.   Their  letters  were  not  certificates
    which the judge was bound to take as conclusive.  He  was  entitled  to
    evaluate their terms, and to place them in context  of  all  the  other
    evidence, including the evidence of the appellant.  While he was not an
    accountant, his level of relevant knowledge  and  likely  insight  into
    what was involved in declaring income and paying tax was relevant.   He
    was, as observed at 5.24, "a  highly  qualified  academic".   While  Mr
    Caskie stopped short of the submission that the judge was bound to take
    the letters as a complete answer  for  the  appellant  on  the  use  of
    deceit, that was in effect his argument.

16. It is conceivable that there might be a case where accountants  explain
    how  mistakes  occurred,  to  such  effect  that  a  judge  could  only
    rationally find that an appellant must have been blissfully unaware  of
    the tax advantage which came as a windfall.  The present case  is  very
    different.  The decision thoroughly explains why the explanations  from
    the accountants and, more importantly, from  the  appellant,  were  not
    accepted.

17. The conclusion at 5.25 that the appellant  "deliberately  asserted  one
    set of figures for tax purposes and ...  another  ...  for  immigration
    purposes" is not shown to have involved the making of any error.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. The FtT made an anonymity direction.   There  does  not  appear  to  be
    justification for one, but as neither party addressed the matter in the
    UT, anonymity has been maintained herein.

      [pic]

      14 January 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
