
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07981/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 October 2019                            |On 13 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                               mr Arnold Saad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Record, Counsel (direct access)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Lebanon born on 6 June 1974.  He is
    appealing against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Mathews ("the judge") promulgated on 12 July 2019.

 2. The appellant entered the UK in 2009 and was granted British
    citizenship in 2015. He was subsequently deprived of his citizenship.

 3. The appellant's claim, in summary, is that his removal from the UK
    would be disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR because of his close
    relationship with his mother, a British citizen who suffers from a
    number of serious medical conditions and relies on him for support,
    both physically and mentally. He submits that the impact on his mother
    of his removal from the UK would be devastating.

 4. The respondent refused the appellant's application.  It was not
    accepted that he had a family or private life in the UK that could
    satisfy any of the routes to leave to remain under the Immigration
    Rules and it was not accepted that there were exceptional circumstances
    that would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences if he were
    removed from the UK.  In respect of the appellant's mother, the
    respondent stated that the appellant had failed to provide supporting
    documentation or evidence of her medical conditions or that he was her
    sole carer.

 5. The appeal was listed to be heard in Newport on 20 June 2019 before
    First-tier Tribunal Mathews.

 6. On 12 June 2019 the appellant applied for an adjournment and requested
    that the appeal be transferred to London on the basis that his mother's
    medical condition meant that she would be unable to travel to Newport.
    The application was sent by fax to the correct fax number and an
    acknowledgment of receipt was received.

 7. On 18 June 2019, not having received a response to the adjournment and
    transfer request, the appellant, with the assistance of his
    representative, contacted the Tribunal service. He was told that the
    application had not been received.  He submitted the application again.
    The following day it was refused.  The refusal did not acknowledge that
    the application had initially been made on 12 June 2019 and referred to
    it having been made only the day before.  The application was refused
    because it was not accepted that the medical evidence showed that the
    applicant's mother would be unable to travel to the hearing in Newport.



 8. Neither the appellant nor a representative on his behalf attended the
    hearing in Newport on 20 June 2019.

 9. The judge considered whether to adjourn the hearing.  He referred to
    the application having been made on 19 June 2019, without acknowledging
    that the applicant had submitted the application a week earlier, on 12
    June 2019.  However the main reason given for rejecting the application
    was not its late submission but that the medical evidence did not
    establish that the appellant's mother would be either unfit or unable
    to attend the hearing. At paragraph 6 of the decision the judge stated:



         I observe that though medical evidence before me confirms that the
         appellant's mother is subject to medical investigation for a number
         of problems and has forthcoming appointments, there is no medical
         evidence or report before me saying in terms that she is either
         unfit to attend court or unfit to travel to court.  In the absence
         of such evidence and having had confirmation that the respondent
         objected to any such adjournment I declined to adjourn the matter.

10. In a brief decision, the judge observed that the appellant had not
    submitted a bundle and there was no witness statement from his mother.
    The only evidence submitted by the appellant was that which was
    appended to his adjournment request. This included a statement from
    him, as well medical records and correspondence concerning his mother's
    health.  The judge found that the medical evidence about the
    appellant's mother did not establish that she was as frail as the
    appellant suggested. At paragraph 16 the judge stated:

         I note the poor copies of medical letters suggesting forthcoming
         outpatient appointments for the appellant's mother at hospital.
         But though I am willing to accept that she has some health
         problems, I do not have adequate evidence before me upon which to
         find that she is as frail as the appellant suggests or that she is
         reliant upon him in the way that he suggests.

11. The judge then considered Article 8 ECHR and concluded at paragraphs 19
    and 20:

         I do not find that the proposed decision is a disproportionate
         interference with the appellant's Article 8 interests in this case
         or any other human rights because despite seeking an appeal hearing
         the appellant has not advanced any adequate evidential matrix upon
         which I can make findings upon which to consider his Article 8
         position.

         The applicant did not show that he could meet the applicable Rules
         and has not discharged the burden of proof in this case.  He has
         made out no family or private life as alleged given the lack of
         evidence and similarly has made out no exceptional circumstances
         requiring a grant of leave.  The respondent's decision for the
         reasons given above was proportionate in all the circumstances.

12. The appellant has advanced three grounds of appeal.

      a) Firstly, he submits that the failure to grant an adjournment was
         unfair.

      b) Secondly, he argues that there was a failure to have proper regard
         to the evidence regarding his mother's ill health.

      c) Thirdly, he submits that the failure to find a private and family
         life was an error of law.

13. I heard submissions from Ms Record on behalf of the appellant and Ms
    Bassi on behalf of the respondent.  I now consider each of the grounds
    of appeal.

14. With respect to the adjournment issue, the relevant question is
    fairness and whether the appellant was deprived of a right to a fair
    hearing. See Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)

15. The only reason given for seeking an adjournment was that the ill
    health of the appellant's mother meant that she would be unable to
    attend the hearing in Newport. Whilst there was a substantial amount of
    correspondence and medical documentation regarding her health appended
    to the application for an adjournment, none of the documents stated
    that she was unfit to travel to or attend the hearing. There are
    references in the records and correspondence to a heart condition,
    breathlessness, palpitations and symptoms on exertion but it does not
    follow from this that the appellant's mother would be unable to travel
    to Newport with the appellant. In the absence of medical evidence
    stating, or even indicating, that the appellant's mother was unable to
    travel to Newport (or would face significant difficulties doing so) it
    was not unfair for the judge to proceed.

16. A further factor relevant to the fairness of proceeding is that the
    appellant's mother did not submit a written witness statement. Whilst
    she could have given oral evidence even without a statement, the
    absence of a witness statement is indicative that the appellant did not
    intend to place significant reliance on her evidence. It is also
    relevant that the key issue regarding the appellant's mother was her
    health and care needs, the strongest evidence in respect of which is
    likely to be obtained from medical records and reports rather than oral
    evidence, and the appellant's mother's ill-health does not explain why
    only a limited amount of documents about her condition were submitted.
    Having regard to all of the circumstances, the judge was entitled to
    refuse - and no procedural unfairness arose from refusing - the
    application for an adjournment.

17. The second ground of appeal submits that the judge failed to have
    adequate regard to the medical evidence about the health of the
    appellant's mother. The consideration of the medical evidence in the
    decision is very brief but the brevity does not mean the judge fell
    into error.  The records and documents submitted to the First-Tier
    Tribunal do not show that the appellant's mother requires a high degree
    of support from the appellant.  Nor do they establish, or even
    indicate, that his removal would have a significant detrimental effect
    on her health. The medical evidence that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal could not on any legitimate view support a conclusion that
    differed to the one reached by the judge and therefore a more
    comprehensive assessment of the records would not have changed the
    outcome.

18. The third ground of appeal submits that the judge erred by failing to
    find that the appellant has a private and family life in the UK, given
    that he has lived with his mother, who is in poor health, since coming
    to the UK. The difficulty for the appellant is that the onus is on him
    to establish his case but he has put forward very little evidence to
    support it. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal did not show
    why the medical condition of the appellant's mother meant that she
    required a high degree of support; or, if she did require such support,
    it could not be obtained through the NHS or other services to which she
    is entitled. Nor did the evidence show that the appellant has been
    providing a high level of care and support to his mother, as claimed.

19. It is unclear from paragraphs 19 and 20 of the decision (quoted above
    at paragraph 11) whether the judge found that article 8(1) was not
    engaged, or if he found that it was engaged but that removal would not
    be disproportionate under article 8(2). Even if this lack of clarity
    amounts to an error of law, it is not material because even if the
    appellant's relationship with his mother engages article 8, in light of
    the limited evidence about his mother's health and care needs that was
    before the First-tier Tribunal (taken together with the absence of
    evidence about the appellant's private life in the UK or obstacles he
    might face if removed from the UK) there was no basis upon which any
    judge could have reasonably found that removal would be
    disproportionate article 8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

20. The appeal is dismissed.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material
    error of law and stands.

22. No anonymity direction is made.


|                                      |                               |
|Signed                                |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         |Dated:  11 November 2019       |



