
                                     [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07354/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 January 2019                   |On 04 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M S D
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay     (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Petyna      (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal,
brought with the permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  from  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal")  which  it
made on 4 June 2018 following a hearing of 31 May 2018 and which it sent to
the parties on 25 June 2018.  The tribunal decided to allow the claimant's
appeal from the Secretary of State's decision of 8 March 2018 refusing  to
grant him leave to remain under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
Human Rights (ECHR).

2.    I have not directed anonymity in this case.  The tribunal did  not  do
so, I was not invited to consider doing so  and  I  could  not  think  of  a
persuasive reason to do so.

3.    The background circumstances are set out  in  the  tribunal's  written
reasons for June 2018 and in the various  documents  before  me  which  the
parties have.  So, I do not propose to rehearse all of  that  in  detail  in
this decision.   But  shorn  of  all  but  the  essentials,  the  background
circumstances may be summarised as follows: The claimant is a male  national
of Albania and he was born on 15 June 1984.  Since 2011 he has been  in  a
relationship with a female British  citizen,  one  [VB].  They  had  met  in
Albania and the relationship was continued by way of  visits  which  Ms [B]
and her two infant children (born on 7 September 2003 and 23 September 2006
respectively and whom are both British citizens) had made to  Albania.   The
claimant applied, for his part, for a Visit Visa in order  to  come  to  the
United Kingdom ('UK') to see Ms [B] on three occasions but, each time, the
application was refused.  Then, in March 2016, the claimant entered the  UK
illegally and commenced cohabitation with Ms [B].  He  has  remained  here,
continuing to cohabit with Ms [B] and her two children,  ever  since.   The
father of the two children from whom Ms [B] is separated, continues to have
a parental relationship with those  children.   But  the  claimant  asserted
that he too had a parental relationship with  the  children  and  he  relied
upon that and his relationship with Ms [B] for his contention that it would
be unlawful, having regard to Article 8, to refuse leave and/or to  require
him to return to Albania.

4.    Since as noted above, the Secretary of State refused his  application,
the claimant appealed to the tribunal.  At the hearing before  the  tribunal
both parties were represented.  The claimant and Ms [B] both gave evidence.
 The representatives then, in the usual way, made oral submissions.   It  is
important to note, at this stage, that the representative for the  Secretary
of State made a concession, which the tribunal recorded at paragraph 19  of
its written reasons, to the effect that, having regard  to  the  content  of
section 117(6)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  if
the requirement therein was met then it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
the children to leave the UK.  The practical upshot of  that  was  that  the
claimant would  succeed  if  he  could  successfully  establish  before  the
tribunal that he had a parental  relationship  with  the  two  children  or,
indeed, I suppose, even with only one of them.

5.    The tribunal, as is apparent  from  its  written  reasons,  considered
matters with considerable care.   With  respect  to  what  it  made  of  the
claimant's relationship with the children, it said this:

    "11.   It is worth noting from the outset that the Respondent  has  not
         disputed the  chronology  as  outlined  at  paragraphs 1-2  above.
         Furthermore, the Respondent has not disputed  that  a  relationship
         exists between the Appellant and Ms [B] and her children.

    12.    It is accepted by all parties that the Appellant cannot meet the
         Immigration Rules for leave to  remain  as  a  partner.   This  is
         because he fails to meet the definition of partner in GEN.1.2 as he
         had not been residing with Ms [B] for two years prior to the  date
         of the application.

    13.     With  respect  to  private  life,  the  Appellant  cannot  meet
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)-(v).  Considering 276ADE(1)(vi), there is
         no evidence before me that there are very significant obstacles  to
         the Appellant's integration into Albania were he required to  leave
         the United Kingdom.  The Appellant is from Albania and has  family
         in Albania and I find that he would be  able  to  reintegrate  back
         into Albanian life if required to leave the United Kingdom.

    14.    I turn now to the consideration of  Article 8  outside  of  the
         Rules.  First, with respect  to  the  public  interest  factors  at
         section 117B, I note the following:

         a) That the Appellant can speak little English, although  I  accept
             that he is learning from communicating with Ms [B]'s children;

         b) With respect of the Appellant's financial circumstances, he  has
             indicated he is being supported by his brother and friends.  I
             have no evidence of how much the Appellant  is  receiving  and
             how regularly.  Furthermore I  have  no  evidence  as  to  the
             source of the Appellant's brother's and friends income.  I  am
             not satisfied that he is financially independent;

         c) The Appellant's private life whilst in the  United Kingdom  has
             developed while his stay has been unlawful;

         d) The Appellant's relationship with Ms [B] began 5 years  before
             his arrival in the United Kingdom, however since his  arrival
             in the United Kingdom in 2016 it has further developed  while
             his stay has been unlawful.

    15.    Section 117B(6) provides:

             '(6)      In the case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                  deportation, the public  interest  does  not  require  the
                  person's removal where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child; and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom.'

         With respect to 117B(6)(a), I am invited to find that the Appellant
         has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  Ms [B]'s
         children.

    16.    The case of R (on the application  of  RK) v SSHD  (s.117B(6);
         'parental relationship' IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 held that apart from
         the situation of split families where relationships between parents
         have broken down and an actual or de facto step-parent exists,  it
         will be unusual but not impossible for more than 2 individuals  to
         have a parental relationship with a child.  Thus, the view  of  the
         Upper Tribunal, albeit obiter, was that where there  was  a  split
         family and a de facto step-parent, it would be  less  unusual  for
         more than 2 individuals to have a parental relationship towards  a
         child.

    17.    It seems to me that the  issue  as  to  whether  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship  exists  is  fact  sensitive,  and
         depends on whether the Appellant has assumed the role of a  parent.
         Although the biological father  plays  a  role  in  the  children's
         lives,  I  find  that  the  Appellant  has  assumed  some  parental
         responsibilities with respect of the children,  for  the  following
         reasons:

         a) The Appellant lives with the children and provides  day  to  day
             care, including cooking meals;

         b) Ms [B] is plainly the main decision maker with respect of  the
             children,  but  includes  the  Appellant,  as  well   as   the
             biological father in decisions with respect of the children;

         c) The letter from [EB]  indicates  that  the  Appellant  takes  an
             active role in many if not all aspects of her life,  including
             her schoolwork, her football club and her meals;

         d) The letter from [DB]  indicates  that  the  Appellant  takes  an
             active role in his life, including his  homework,  caring  for
             him whilst he was ill, and giving him advice when he was going
             through problems.

         In my view, when one looks  at  the  substance  and  range  of  the
         support and care the Appellant provides to the children, it amounts
         to a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

    18.    I am obliged to consider the  best  interests  of  the  children
         under section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
         Act 2009, which requires me to view the children's interests as  a
         primary, albeit not paramount consideration.  It is plainly in  the
         children's best interests to remain  in  the  United Kingdom  with
         their mother and father, and to continue  to  receive  the  support
         currently provided by the Appellant.

    19.    Mr Larcombe sensibly conceded that were section 117(6)(a) met,
         then it would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the
         United Kingdom.  The children are British citizens and their mother
         is Kosovan.  Although they have been on  holiday  to  Albania  they
         plainly have no meaningful experience of life in Albania.  Both the
         children are at an advanced level of education.  Darius is  due  to
         take his GCSE's this year and will have developed  social  contacts
         outside of  the  family.   Even  taking  into  account  the  public
         interest factors which point towards removal, in my  view  they  ae
         not sufficiently powerful to displace the children's best interests
         in remaining in the  United Kingdom;  MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 705."

6.    For good measure, the tribunal  then  went  on  to  address  what  the
situation would have been irrespective of section 117(6).  It said this:

    "20.   Even if section 117(6)  did  not  apply  in  this  case,  I  am
         satisfied that removal of the Appellant would  be  disproportionate
         in the circumstances.  First, while the Appellant did not meet  the
         Rules at the date of the application, I  find  that  the  Appellant
         does satisfy the Rules at the date of the appeal  hearing.   It  is
         not  disputed  that  he  has  been  residing  with  Ms [B]  in  a
         relationship akin to marriage for at least two years.  I find  that
         there are insurmountable obstacles  preventing  their  family  life
         continuing outside of the United Kingdom.  Ms [B] is the main care
         giver to her two children, who live with her and it is unreasonable
         to expect them to leave the UK.  That being the case, I  find  that
         the children's dependency on Ms [B] would amount to insurmountable
         obstacles preventing Ms [B] from continuing her family  life  with
         the Appellant outside the United Kingdom.

    21.    Secondly, even if the Appellant did  not  have  a  'genuine  and
         subsisting relationship' under section 117B(6), it is accepted  by
         the Respondent that the  Appellant  has  a  relationship  with  the
         children.  This relationship extends to providing day to  day  care
         and support in a number of crucial areas in the children's lives as
         outlined in paragraph 17.

    22.    I remind myself  that  exceptional  circumstances  do  not  mean
         searching for a unique or unusual feature, and that the test is one
         of proportionality; Agyarko [2017] UKSC 0011.  Taking into account
         the strong relationship the Appellant has with  the  children,  and
         the fact that he is likely to meet the requirements of the  partner
         rules in Appendix FM at  the  current  time,  and  balancing  this
         against the countervailing factors outlined in para 14 above, I am
         satisfied on the balance of probabilities that his removal from the
         United Kingdom would be a disproportionate interference  with  his
         family life and would breach Article 8.   I  therefore  allow  the
         appeal."

7.    So, as noted, the appeal succeeded.  But that was not the end  of  the
matter because the Secretary of State applied for  and  obtained  permission
to appeal.  In the grant of permission this was said:

    "2.    The ground seeking  permission  are  somewhat  lengthy  but,  in
         short, it is argued that  the  judge  failed  to  provide  adequate
         reasons and therefore, the judge erred in allowing the appeal.

    3.     It appears from the judge's decision that the appellant  is  not
         the biological father of the children in this  case.   Indeed,  the
         biological father still plays an active role in the  lives  of  the
         children.  As such, it may be open to argument that the judge erred
         in finding that the appellant has a parental relationship with  the
         children.

    4.     There is an arguable error of law."

8.    Permission having been granted the matter was  listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could  be  considered  and
decided whether the tribunal had erred in law and, if it  had,  what  should
flow from that.  Representation at that hearing was as indicated  above  and
I am grateful to each representative.  In the event it  was  only  necessary
for me to hear from Mr Lindsay.

9.    He made a number of points.  He explained that it had  been  indicated
before the tribunal that the claimant had delayed making the application  to
the Home Office and which has ultimately  led  to  this  appeal  before  the
Upper Tribunal, for tactical reasons.  He said that when that is considered
alongside the claimant's decision to enter the  UK  illegally  it  militates
against the tribunal's finding that his evidence was credible.   As  to  the
case of RK, to which the tribunal referred in  the  passages  from  which  I
have quoted, Mr Lindsay suggested  that  it  might  have  misunderstood  or
misapplied what had been said.  The  evidence  to  support  the  claim  that
there was  a  parental  relationship  had  been  weak.   If  the  tribunal's
approach was the correct one that would probably mean all persons  who  have
a partner with whom they cohabit and who  have  children  could  demonstrate
the existence of such a relationship.  That could not feasibly be  the  true
position.  The tribunal's decision was unsafe.

10.   The tribunal, in my judgment, carried out a careful and  comprehensive
assessment as to the key issue of whether or not the claimant could be  said
to have a "parental relationship" with Ms [B]'s two  children.   Given  the
concession referred to above, if the tribunal's  decision  as  to  that  was
legally sound then the decision itself would be so.

11.   The tribunal noted the factual background in its written  reasons  and
noted  the  oral  evidence  which  was  given  to  it.   It  summarised  the
submissions made to it.  It correctly acknowledged that  it  would  be  rare
for more than two individuals to have a parental relationship with a  child.
 But it also correctly directed itself to the  fact  that  the  question  of
whether there was or was  not  such  a  relationship  between  a  particular
individual and a child or children would be "fact-sensitive".  It then  made
its findings of fact  all  of  which  were  open  to  it  and  found  itself
persuaded in the claimant's favour on the basis  of  those  findings.   That
approach, in general terms, cannot be faulted.

12.   To deal with Mr Lindsay's particular points, it may very well be  the
case that there is good reason to criticise the claimant  for  his  decision
to enter the UK illegally and effectively circumvent the  Immigration Rules
rather than to make an  application  for  entry  clearance  abroad.   Whilst
there was disagreement between the parties as to whether  the  claimant  had
acknowledged tactical delay in the making  of  an  immigration  application,
during the course of the hearing  before  the  tribunal,  the  tribunal  was
aware that his  immigration  history  was  culpable  anyway  and,  since  it
referred to it, did take it into account.  I can find nothing  in  what  the
tribunal said to suggest it misunderstood or misapplied what was  stated  in
RK.  As to the strength  or  otherwise  of  the  evidence  pointing  to  the
existence of a parental relationship, it was  for  the  tribunal  to  assess
that and to decide how persuasive that evidence was.  Perhaps  on  one  view
the conclusion that there was such a relationship might have  been  generous
but that does not mean such a conclusion was  reached  in  reliance  upon  a
legally erroneous  approach.   The  tribunal  made  it  clear  that  it  was
deciding matters on the particular circumstances in front of  it  and  I  do
not find the argument that such an  approach  would  result  in  many  cases
being found in favour of claimants to be particularly persuasive.

13.   In short, the tribunal considered the evidence, made its  findings  of
fact, and correctly applied the law to those findings.   That  is  what  was
required of it and that is what it did.  Once it had resolved  the  parental
issue in the claimant's favour, as indicated, that was  really  the  end  of
the matter.

14.   In the circumstances this appeal to the Upper Tribunal fails.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law and shall stand.

No grant of anonymity is made.


Signed:     Date: 28 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
