
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/07447/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2019                      |On 7 February 2019            |
|                                        |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               RAIMA KERIMOVA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Vanas of Visa Inn immigration Specialist
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies promulgated  on  12  December  2018,  which
dismissed the Appellant's appeal.
Background


3. The Appellant  was  born  on  6  February  1988  and  is  a  national  of
Turkmenistan.  On  2  March  2016  the  Secretary  of  State   refused   the
Appellant's application for leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Roopnarine-Davies ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  28  December
2018 Judge J Grant-Hutchison granted permission  to  appeal  stating,  inter
alia

      The appellant had the date of 16 November 2018 allotted to her as  the
      date of her oral hearing. The appellant made a request  in  good  time
      for the hearing to proceed on the papers but due to an  administrative
      error the appellant had not been informed that  the  case  was  to  be
      listed as a paper case and put before  the  Judge  to  consider  on  6
      November 2018. As such the appellant had not  forwarded  a  bundle  in
      time for the Judge to take it into account. It is  arguable  that  had
      the appellant being given due notification she would have been able to
      lodge evidence which may  have  made  a  material  difference  to  the
      outcome or the  fairness  of  the  proceedings  (Naigwe  (adjournment:
      fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418(IAC)).

The Hearing

5. Ms Cunha, for the respondent, told me that she is now satisfied that  the
appellant's  bundle  was  tendered   before   the   Judge's   decision   was
promulgated.  Because  the  Judge's  decision  takes  no  account   of   the
appellant's bundle the appeal is no longer resisted. She invited me  to  set
the decision aside and remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal so that  a
fact-finding exercise can be carried out.

6. Mr Vanas, for the appellant, asked me to immediately  substitute  my  own
decision. He told me that  the  appellant  is  the  mother  of  two  British
citizens and asked me to allow the appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Analysis

7.  It  is  common  ground  that,  due  to  an  administrative  error,   the
appellant's bundle was not placed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
Because no evidence was placed before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  her
findings of fact are brief.

8. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  it  was  held
that  if a Tribunal refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds,  it  is  important
to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether  the
First-tier Tribunal acted reasonably.  Rather, the test  to  be  applied  is
that of fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
to a fair hearing?

9. It is now accepted that the appellant was  deprived  of  a  fair  hearing
because there was confusion over the date that his appeal  should  be  dealt
with and because (due to administrative  problems)  the  appellant's  bundle
was not placed before the First-tier Judge,  even  though  it  was  received
before the decision was promulgated. Through  no  fault  of  the  Judge  the
appellant has been deprived of a fair hearing. That is a material  error  of
law. I set the decision aside

10. I find I cannot substitute my own decision because  the  respondent  has
not had an opportunity to consider the appellant's bundle. At  the  date  of
today's hearing the  respondent  has  still  not  received  the  appellant's
bundle. Ms Cunha has only  seen  evidence  that  the  bundle  was  tendered.
Fairness must be  applied  to  both  parties.  This  is  a  case  where  the
appellant has not had a fair hearing because the  Judge  did  not  have  the
opportunity to consider evidence with anxious scrutiny. The  respondent  has
not yet had fair notice of the appellant's position.  The  only  appropriate
way to proceed is to remit this case to the First-tier  so  that  the  fact-
finding exercise can be carried out after both parties have fair  notice  of
the evidence to be led.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

11. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

12. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

13. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Taylor  House
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge  Roopnarine-Davies.


Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law.

15. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 12  December  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed
              Date 4 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle





