
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: HU/07650/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On December 5, 2016             |On January 17, 2017             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   MR B H
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Najma (Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Peterson (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and he was born on January 6,
       1978. On October 23, 2003 the appellant entered the  United  Kingdom
       as a spouse with leave valid until October 15, 2005.  On October 30,
       2005 he applied for leave to remain outside of the Rules and he  was
       granted leave to remain  to  enable  him  to  attend  child  contact
       hearings. This leave was extended until December 15, 2006.  He  then
       applied for leave to remain to exercise access rights but  this  was
       refused with a right of appeal on January 11, 2007. His  appeal  was
       dismissed on March 16,  2007  and  his  appeal  rights  were  deemed
       exhausted on April 13 2007. He made  applications  under  article  8
       ECHR on April 20, 2007, June 30, 2012 and February  27,  2014.  Each
       application was refused by the respondent. Only his last application
       attracted a right of appeal and  after  he  lodged  his  appeal  the
       Tribunal dismissed his appeal on November 11, 2014  and  his  appeal
       rights were deemed exhausted on June 3, 2015.

    2. On September 9, 2015 the appellant lodged a further  application  on
       human rights grounds. The respondent refused this on  September  24,
       2015  and  the  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of   the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on October 9, 2015.

    3. The appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Holmes
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on December 14, 2015 and in a
       decision  promulgated  on  December  17,  2015  he   dismissed   the
       appellant's appeal under both the Immigration Rules  and  article  8
       ECHR.

    4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on December 29, 2015  against
       that decision.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Wellesley-Cole on June 30, 2016 and the matter came before me on the
       above date.

    6. No order for anonymity is made.

SUBMISSIONS

    7. Ms Najma relied on her grounds of appeal.  In short,  she  submitted
       the Judge had placed too much weight on the earlier findings made by
       former Judges of the First-tier Tribunal Fountain and  Law  on  2007
       and 2014 respectively. She submitted that their findings clouded the
       Judge's approach and  he  fell  into  error.  He  made  findings  at
       paragraphs [44], [49] and [50] but failed to explain how he  reached
       those  conclusions  in  spite  of  the  fact  there  were  documents
       supporting his relationship with the child.

    8. Ms Peterson adopted her colleague's Rule 24 statement dated July  7,
       2016. She submitted this appeal was about the  Judge's  approach  to
       the relationship the appellant had with the mother of his child  and
       the  child  himself  and  she  submitted  the  Judge  addressed  the
       documents and gave reasons for rejecting the evidence  presented  to
       him. He considered the arguments between paragraphs  [28]  and  [35]
       and made findings open to him.  The  Judge  addressed  the  evidence
       given by the appellant over his relationship with the child's mother
       between paragraphs [36] and [43] and the findings were open to  him.
       The Judge was entitled to take  as  a  starting  point  the  earlier
       findings but  he  went  further  because  he  examined  the  current
       evidence and made the findings he did.



DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

    9. Permission to appeal had been granted in this matter  and  Ms  Najma
       sought to persuade me the Judge had erred in  his  approach  to  the
       appeal.

   10. In giving permission reference was made  to  two  areas  namely  the
       absence of any reference to Appendix FM in the  decision  and  over-
       reliance on the findings made in October 2014 by Judge Law.

   11. I raised with Ms Najma on what basis the  Judge  should  have  dealt
       with her client's appeal under Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules
       if he rejected the relationship between the child and the  appellant
       and she accepted that if the Judge's findings  on  the  relationship
       were open to him then the appellant could not succeed under Appendix
       FM.

   12. The Judge set  out  in  his  decision  at  paragraph  [6]  that  the
       appellant's claim  was  based  on  his  him  having  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with Ismail despite having  no  relationship
       with the child's mother. The Judge noted that any claim  would  have
       to be brought under Section R-LTRPT of Appendix FM.

   13. In order  to  succeed  the  appellant  would  have  to  satisfy  the
       requirement  of  Section  E-LTRPT  2.2.  The  Judge   examined   the
       relationship between the child's  father  and  himself  and  he  had
       regard to the fact the child's mother was not in attendance  at  the
       hearing. His conclusions about the child and the  relationship  were
       set out between paragraph [44] and [50].

   14. He found the appellant to be an unreliable witness and it  is  clear
       from his decision that he had regard  to  earlier  adverse  findings
       about him. He was also wholly unimpressed by the  witness  statement
       said to be signed by the child's mother  or  his  claim  to  be  the
       father. Although Ms Najma asked me to consider further evidence that
       had been submitted under Rule 15(2A) I am  satisfied  that  as  that
       evidence was not submitted to the original Tribunal then it  is  not
       evidence I should attach any weight to when considering  whether  an
       error in law has been made. The Judge gave reasons for rejecting his
       claim that the child was British and in absence of  such  a  finding
       the Judge was not required to make any  substantial  findings  under
       Appendix  FM  because  being  a  British  citizen  or  living   here
       continuously for seven years was a mandatory requirement to bring  a
       claim under Section R-LTRPT.

   15. The Judge did  consider  the  alternative  scenario  namely  if  the
       appellant  was  the  child's  biological  father.  He  did  this  at
       paragraph [50]. He then rejected the appellant's  claim  to  have  a
       genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  the  child  or  that  he
       intended to seek access rights.  This  is  a  mandatory  requirement
       under Section E-LTRPT 2.4(a) and (b) of Appendix FM. He  dealt  with
       this aspect in the previous paragraphs of his decision when he  made
       a number of negative  finding  about  the  child's  mother  and  his
       relationship which he concluded affected the weight to  be  attached
       to his evidence about the child.

   16. It therefore follows that although the Judge did not make a specific
       finding under Appendix FM it is clear from  his  decision  that  the
       appellant could not satisfy the Rules and that finding  was  clearly
       one open to him.

   17. The main thrust of the appeal before me centred around  the  Judge's
       approach  to  the  earlier  evidence  and  article  8.  Ms   Najma's
       submission effectively was that if the Judge erred  in  the  way  he
       approached that evidence then his findings under  both  Appendix  FM
       and article 8 contained an error.

   18. I accept that submission has merit. The failure to specifically make
       findings under Appendix FM only becomes significant if  the  Judge's
       approach to the evidence as a whole is in error.

   19. I have considered the written grounds of appeal and Ms Najma's  oral
       submissions.

   20. Although  the  appellant's  current  appeal  was  separate  to  that
       considered in 2014 it would be  wrong  for  the  Judge  to  overlook
       findings on credibility especially when the appellant's  credibility
       was an issue in this current case. It was the total absence  of  the
       child's mother from his earlier hearing in 2014 that contributed  to
       the Judge's adverse findings in this appeal. The Judge considered Ms
       Najma's explanation for the mother's absence and for the reasons  he
       gave in paragraph [31] he found against the appellant and  her.  The
       Judge decided on the evidence, or lack of it, that no  weight  could
       be attached to the witnesses' statement and he gave his  reasons  in
       paragraphs [31] to [35] of his decision.

   21. The Judge also was required to assess the  appellant's  relationship
       with the child's  mother  because  that  would  dictate  whether  he
       accepted  the  appellant  was  the  child's  father.  He  identified
       inconsistencies in his evidence and the Judge clearly  felt  he  was
       making his evidence up as he went along.

   22. It is therefore incorrect to say that his rejection of the claim was
       based on findings made in 2014. The Judge considered the  claim  and
       based on the evidence presented he was not prepared  to  accept  the
       appellant's account.

   23. Once that stage had been reached any  claim  under  the  Immigration
       Rules fell by way side and the only issue remaining is  whether  the
       Judge erred in the way he approached article 8 ECHR.

   24. Against the background of his findings he set out  the  Razgar  test
       and he was bound to make the findings in paragraph [56] and [57]. He
       then made the findings about Section 117B and concluded it would not
       be disproportionate to reject his claim.

   25. All the findings were open to him and there is no error in law.

DECISION

   26. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  uphold  the
       decision and dismiss the appeal.


Signed:                         Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award because I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:                         Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


