
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07868/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd February 2018                         |On 28th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Shakil Molla
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance or representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M B Hussein, allowing the  claimant's  appeal
    against her decision on 7 March 2016 to  refuse  the  claimant  further
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  pursuant  to  paragraphs
    322(1), (2) and (5) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as  amended)  with
    particular reference to the making  of  false  representations  or  the
    failure to disclose a material fact in the previous application.

 2. The claimant's Tier 4 application on 18 December 2012 relied on an  ETS
    TOEIC certificate obtained at the  Eden  International  College  on  21
    November 2012.

 3. Although the claimant appealed successfully to the First-tier Tribunal,
    he has not responded under Rule 24 to the grant of  permission  to  the
    Secretary of State  in  this  appeal  nor  has  he  attended  today  or
    explained his absence.  I approach this appeal on the  basis  that  the
    claimant has no interest in prosecuting it.

 4. Even if the claimant had appeared today, I  do  not  consider  that  it
    would have been possible to  uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal relied upon  that of
    the  Upper Tribunal in  SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof)
    [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) but failed to  take  into  account  the  improved
    evidence which was available to the Upper Tribunal in MA (ETS  -  TOEIC
    testing)  Nigeria  [2016]  UKUT  450  (IAC),  approved  in  Majumder  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 1) [2016] EWCA Civ 1167
    and Ahsan v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 2009.  That is an error of both fact  and  law,  for  which  it  is
    necessary to set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    remake it.



Remaking the decision

 5. The Secretary of State produced evidence to the First-tier Tribunal and
    the Upper Tribunal from the ETS Enhanced Lookup Tool showing that on 21
    November 2012, when the claimant alleges that he sat his TOEIC test  at
    Eden International College, 66% of the tests taken there were  invalid,
    34% were questionable and none were released as genuine.   The  average
    score out of 200 on that day was  180.9  for  speaking  and  172.5  for
    writing and the claimant's results were 180 for speaking  and  160  for
    writing.  ETS  has  withdrawn  the  certificate  relied  upon  and  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to place weight thereon.

 6. Much more evidence is available now as to the 'fraud  factories'  which
    operated  in  the  ETS/TOEIC  testing  field;   in  particular,   voice
    recordings of individual tests are available and can be  requested  and
    tested.  on that, and also on the evidence of the evidence of the Look-
    Up Tool that, on the day the claimant sat his test, 100% of  the  TOEIC
    tests at Eden International College were found to be either invalid  or
    questionable and none were released as genuine.

 7. Absent attendance or representation by the claimant at today's hearing,
    it is not possible to ascertain what his explanation might be.  Nor, it
    appears, has he  sought  to  recover  and  test  the  voice  recordings
    applicable to him.

 8. I am satisfied, on the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that
    the Secretary of State had  demonstrated  that  the  claimant  did  use
    deception and accordingly she was entitled to refuse  him  the  further
    leave sought.

 9. The appeal of the Secretary of State is  allowed  and  I  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the appeal.



Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.



Signed:  Judith A J  C  Gleeson                     Date:          26  March
2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
