
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/07047/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Upper Tribunal, Bradford    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th July 2018                        |On 11th October 2018               |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  qaisar bi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Ms S Khan of Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
  AMENDED DETERMINATION UNDER RULE 42, TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                                 RULES 2008


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Bradsaw made following a hearing at Bradford on 4th August 2017.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st  January  1935.   She
    entered the UK on 11th April 2016 as a visitor and, on 27th  July  2016
    applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  outside   the
    Immigration Rules.  She was refused on 2nd June 2017 and  it  was  this
    refusal which was the subject of the appeal before Judge Bradshaw.

 3. Judge Bradshaw recorded that it was not  in  issue  that  the  claimant
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules because there was no  in-
    country route as an adult dependent relative, but only  an  application
    for entry clearance.

 4. She stated that she had to take into account Sections 117A to D of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  in  particular  Section
    117B(2) which provides that the maintenance of immigration  control  is
    in the public interest  and  it  is  in  the  public  interest  and  in
    particular the interests of the economic  well-being  of  the  UK  that
    persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  UK  are  able  to  speak
    English, because people who can speak English are less of a  burden  on
    taxpayers and better able to integrate into society.

 5. In a detailed and thoughtful determination Judge Bradshaw then set  out
    the evidence and her findings.

 6. The judge noted that the claimant had a daughter in Pakistan and a  son
    and two daughters in the UK.   Whilst  there,  she  received  financial
    support first from her husband and also from her grandson who  was  now
    no longer able to afford to do so. She received practical help at  home
    from her daughter, who lives an hour to an hour and a  half  away  and,
    more latterly, from her granddaughter who has now married and is coming
    to the UK.

 7. Judge Bradshaw reviewed the medical evidence and said that there was no
    medical evidence to show that she was  currently  unwell  or  that  she
    needed any specific secondary  or  specialist  care  and  certainly  no
    urgent medical treatment in the UK.  The claimant is under the care  of
    a GP who has provided certain medication but she is  now  stable.   She
    does however require extensive assistance  because  she  is  physically
    disabled and cannot self-care.

 8. Judge Bradshaw regarded the claimant's daughter-in-law's evidence to be
    somewhat unconvincing in relation to the possibility of hiring  someone
    in Pakistan to care for her mother-in-law and she noted that Ms  Kauser
    confirmed  that  the  family  had  carried  out  no  research  on   the
    availability of suitable paid care.  Judge Bradshaw  found  the  report
    from  an  independent  occupational  therapist  to  be  unreliable  and
    unhelpful.

 9. On the other hand, she found the claimant's evidence clear and credible
    and was satisfied that she needed 24/7 care.  She said that  to  return
    her to Pakistan would mean a family member accompanying her and staying
    with her until proper  care  could  be  arranged.   It  might  well  be
    possible to pay for care but she would require more than a maid and her
    age, sex and cultural sensitivities and the nature of the personal care
    required would be very difficult to fulfil outside the family.

10. She recorded that there was no reasonable expectation of  her  learning
    much English and concluded as follows

         "She came to the UK with limited leave as a visitor knowing as  her
         family did that she had  to  return  to  Pakistan  when  her  leave
         expired.  However, her frailty, age and care needs are such that it
         is not proportionate to require her to return to Pakistan where her
         extensive and daily care needs could only  be  provided  with  some
         difficulty and without the close personal female  and  family  care
         she needs together with associated emotional care.  Her daughter in
         Pakistan by reason of distance alone could not be on hand daily  to
         provide such care even if she could to  some  extent  oversee  paid
         care."

11. She allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

The Grounds of Application

12. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred in her consideration of the availability of medical
    care for the claimant in Pakistan.  The family in the  UK  had  brought
    her here in the full knowledge that she would be required to return and
    she had failed to cite  any  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  family
    returning to Pakistan with her to  continue  their  family  life  there
    instead.  The judge had entirely failed to consider Section 117B.   The
    claimant was likely to be a considerable burden on the NHS and may  not
    be able to successfully integrate into British society.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge O'Brien on 30th January  2018
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

14. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds.  She submitted that it should have
    been a weighty matter for the judge that  the  claimant  arrived  as  a
    visitor with no expectation of being allowed to remain here.  Her  care
    needs were not such as to satisfy  the  adult  dependency  rules.   The
    judge had made contradictory findings in relation to the credibility of
    the daughter-in-law's evidence which did not sit well with her  overall
    conclusions.  It would be possible for a female nurse to attend to  the
    claimant in Pakistan and had the judge properly considered Section 117B
    she would have reached the conclusion that the  appeal  ought  to  have
    been dismissed.

15. Ms Khan defended the determination.  She reiterated that  the  crux  of
    this case was not medical care but personal care which  could  only  be
    provided by female family members.  The judge  was  entitled  to  agree
    with  the  submissions  made  that,  for  this  particular   appellant,
    attendance upon her by the family was essential.  The judge  had  noted
    the claimant's status as a  visitor.   She  was  not  a  drain  on  the
    economic resources of the UK since all of the care was provided to  her
    by family members and it was merely speculative to  conclude  that  she
    would require the NHS resources in the future.  The judge had  explored
    the option of the daughter in Pakistan  providing  assistance  but  had
    reasonably rejected it,  given  that  she  lives  some  way  away.  The
    claimant's state of health was stable but even if it were accepted that
    she might be an economic drain on the country the judge was entitled to
    conclude that her personal needs were such as to defeat  the  arguments
    put forward by the Secretary of State.

16. Finally, Ms Khan said it had been argued  before  the  judge  that  the
    claimant did in fact meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    with respect to private life and paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi),  namely  that
    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   applicant's
    integration into the country to which she would have to go if  required
    to leave the UK.

Findings and Conclusions

17. The Immigration Judge did refer to paragraph 117B at paragraph 10 but I
    am persuaded that she did not have it in mind when reaching her overall
    conclusion.  Although Ms Khan  strongly  submitted  that  it  was  mere
    speculation that the claimant would be an economic burden, it is  quite
    clear that a woman of 83 years old, who is physically disabled  to  the
    point where she  needs  24-hour  care  and  who  already  has  received
    treatment from the GP, is very likely indeed to require  assistance  in
    the future from the NHS.

18. It is not in the interests of the economic wellbeing of the UK for  the
    claimant to be permitted to remain here.  That  is  not  necessarily  a
    trump card, as Ms Khan correctly pointed out, but  I  cannot  see  from
    this determination that it was in the judge's mind  when  reaching  her
    conclusions.  There is no reference to the likely economic detriment to
    the UK by the claimant's presence here.

19. Accordingly the judge erred in law by  failing  to  have  regard  to  a
    relevant matter. The decision has to be remade.

20. The starting point is whether the claimant meets  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.

21. First, she cannot do so because she is not entitled to switch from  the
    status of a visitor to that of a dependent relative. The fact that  the
    claimant chose to come to the UK as a visitor and  three  months  later
    applied for indefinite leave to remain suggests  a  disregard  for  the
    law. There was no change in circumstances between her arrival  and  the
    application. That in  itself  is  an  important  consideration  in  the
    exercise of evaluating the proportionality of removal.
22. Second, Paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 states  that  the  applicant  or,  if  the
    applicant and their partner are the sponsor's parents or  grandparents,
    the applicant's partner, must be unable, even with  the  practical  and
    financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care  in
    the country where they are living, because -
         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
               can reasonably provide it; or
         (b)  it is not affordable.

23. I am not satisfied that the  claimant  meets  the  requirements  of  E-
    ECDR.2.5.  She could clearly continue to rely on the financial help  of
    the sponsor. She has the resources available to her  to  pay  for  some
    care and the family have simply not considered whether  this  would  be
    available since they have carried out no research. She has  a  daughter
    and several granddaughters in Pakistan, at least some of  whom  do  not
    live too far away.

24. It is her case that there can be no suitable paid care since the nature
    of the care required could never be provided by  anyone  other  than  a
    family member. I have some difficulty in  accepting  this  proposition.
    She lived alone for some years following the death of  her  husband  in
    Pakistan and she owns land in Pakistan and has a house there.  She  was
    provided with care by  her  daughter  and  granddaughter.   Whilst  her
    daughter has other caring responsibilities it is  likely,  on  balance,
    that she could continue to provide some kind of  supervision  for  paid
    care.  Moreover, that daughter appears to have a  number  of  daughters
    herself.

25. Like the Immigration Judge I accept that the claimant would much prefer
    to have her personal care provided by the family and this ought  to  be
    given some weight.  Against that, however, are the  substantial  public
    interest considerations set out in Section 117B(1), (2) and (3) of  the
    2002 Act.

26. I do not accept that there would be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her
    return.  The claimant lived for nearly 80 years  in  Pakistan  and  has
    close relatives a  short  drive  away  from  her  home.   She  has  the
    resources to buy in care which she needs and which could be  supervised
    by her daughter and/or granddaughters.

Decision

The original judge erred in law.  Her decision is set aside.  It  is  remade
as follows.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
decision to refuse her indefinite leave to remain is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 5 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
Decision & Reasons Promulgated



