
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07524/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 April 2019                               |On 29 April 2019              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                  Amgad [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bassett, instructed by P A Duffy & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt, born on 28  April  1987.   He  has
    been granted permission to appeal the decision dated 16 March  2018  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision refusing his application to join his
    spouse [NN] in the United Kingdom.


 2.  It  was  accepted  by  the  appellant  that  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules as a spouse by reference  to  the
    financial  requirements.   The  judge  also  dismissed  the  appeal  by
    reference to Article 8.  His approach is set out in paragraphs 24 to 31
    of the decision.


 3. The grounds of challenge  closely  typed  over  eight  pages  and  thus
    exceeding the decision in length raised a number  of  challenges  which
    were succinctly considered  on  a  renewed  permission  application  by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman in the following terms:


         "2.  The grounds in support of  the  application  assert  that  the
             Judge erred materially in law: (i) in failing to consider  the
             best interests of the Appellant's child; (ii)  in  failing  to
             provide reasons for his findings and (iii) in being influenced
             by a suspicion that the Appellant may have already contravened
             immigration control by being  in  the  UK  as  a  visitor  [8]
             refers, whereas the  Appellant  entered  the  UK  lawfully  in
             possession of a multi-entry visit visa, which  he  could  have
             adduced given the opportunity and  the  Judge's  decision  was
             contrary to the overriding objective.


         3.   The basis of the refusal of entry clearance was the  inability
             of the  Appellant  and  his  Sponsor  to  meet  the  financial
             requirements, either through the Sponsor's being  employed  in
             the UK or savings by the Appellant.  It was  apparent  at  the
             time of the Judge's consideration that  this  requirement  was
             still not met.  The  Judge  correctly  directed  himself  with
             regard to the judgment of the Supreme Court  in  MM  (Lebanon)
             [2017]  UKSC  10  as  to  the  lawfulness  of  the   financial
             requirement under the Rules.  There was no evidence  of  third
             party financial support before the Judge.  However,  it  would
             appear that the inability of the Sponsor to meet the financial
             requirements, despite being a teacher, is temporary due to the
             fact that she was on maternity leave.


         4.   The Supreme Court at [109]  found  that  the  requirements  of
             Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules do not give effect to the
             Secretary  of  State's  section   55   duty   to   take   into
             consideration the best interests of the children.  Whilst  the
             Appellant's  daughter  was  born  after  the  entry  clearance
             application had been refused it is  clear  from  the  evidence
             submitted and [26] of the decision that the  Judge  was  aware
             that there was now a child of the marriage.  Given that she is
             a British child residing in the United Kingdom it is  arguable
             that the Judge failed to consider her best interests.


         5.   Ground 2 is not particularized in respect  of  which  findings
             are impugned for a lack of reasons  and  does  not  raise  any
             arguable error of law.


         6.   There is nothing in the third ground of appeal: all the  Judge
             was saying at [7]  and  [8]  is  that  he  accepted  that  the
             Appellant was present in the UK as a visitor and  would  leave
             in good faith but were this not the case then  the  Respondent
             has the power to address any abuse."


   1. Mr Mathews raised a matter of the FtT's jurisdiction to  consider  the
      child best interests which he contended it was disqualified from doing
      so since the birth was a 'new matter' captured by section 85(5) of the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


   2. The relevant chronology is as follows:


   a) 13 March 2017:  application for entry clearance made.


   b) 17 May 2017: application refused.


   c) 25 June 2017: date of notice of appeal accompanied by letter dated  29
      June 2017 that refers to the appellant's wife's pregnancy and the  due
      date of 8 August 2017.


   d) 3 July 2017: notice of appeal received by the Tribunal.


   e) 14 August: child born.


   f) 23 November: Entry Clearance Managers review.


   g) 25 January 2018: a letter of this  date  sent  to  the  Tribunal  that
      refers to the birth of the child. On the  same  date  the  appeal  was
      allocated to the Judge Fox to decide the case without a hearing.


   3. Reliance was placed on the Tribunal decision in Mahmud (s.85 NIAA 2002
      - 'new matters': Iran) [2017] UKUT 488 (IAC) by Mr Mathews in  support
      if his contention that the birth was  a  'new  matter'  with  specific
      reference to para [31]:


         "31. Practically, a new matter is a factual matrix  which  has  not
             previously been considered by the Secretary of  State  in  the
             context of the decision in section 82(1) or a  statement  made
             by the appellant under section 120.  This requires the  matter
             to be factually distinct from that  previously  raised  by  an
             appellant, as opposed to further  or  better  evidence  of  an
             existing  matter.   The  assessment  will   always   be   fact
             sensitive.  By way of example,  evidence  that  a  couple  had
             married since the decision is likely to be  new  evidence  but
             not a new matter where the relationship  had  previously  been
             relied  upon  and  considered  by  the  Secretary  of   State.
             Conversely, evidence that a couple had had a child  since  the
             decision is likely to be a new matter as it adds an additional
             distinct   new   family   relationship   (with   consequential
             requirements to consider the best interests of the child under
             section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009) which itself  could  separately  raise  or  establish  a
             ground of  appeal  under  Article  8  that  removal  would  be
             contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights Act."

   4. By way of response Mr Bassett accepted the chronology set out  in  [5]
      above but nevertheless relied on notification by the appellant in  his
      entry clearance application in part 8.  In response  to  question  95,
      the appellant explained:


         "My wife really wants to return home.  Coming to Qatar was a chance
         for her to gain experience in teaching and provide  an  income  for
         herself now that we are married and expecting our first child.   We
         want to be settled  in  one  place  to  give  our  child  a  stable
         environment with a family network of support and love  to  grow  up
         in.  We do not know how our life will be in Northern  Ireland,  but
         after living away from our homes for a few years we are  now  ready
         to settle.  My wife really misses her family and friends and I know
         that she needs them close to her especially through  her  pregnancy
         and her parents really want to be part of their grandchild's  life.
         We have saved some money to help us guarantee an easy start and  we
         have good intentions to make our life in Northern Ireland work  for
         us and our baby.  We hope that the transition from our life here in
         Qatar and our life there will as [sic] easy as it can be, and  that
         it brings happiness to us."


   5. In my judgement this does  not  avail  the  appellant.   The  fact  of
      pregnancy does not mean that the Entry Clearance Officer  was  obliged
      to consider the application on the  expectation  of  the  birth  of  a
      child.  Section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
      2002 provides, relevant to this matter:


         "s.85 (1)     An appeal under  section  82(1)  against  a  decision
                  shall be treated by the Tribunal as  including  an  appeal
                  against any decision in respect of which the appellant has
                  a right of appeal under section 82(1).


                  ...


                  (4)  On an  appeal  under  section  82(1)  ...  against  a
                      decision the Tribunal may  consider  ...  any  matter
                      which it thinks relevant  to  the  substance  of  the
                      decision, including .... a matter arising  after  the
                      date of the decision.


                  (5)  But the Tribunal  must  not  consider  a  new  matter
                      unless the Secretary of State has given the  Tribunal
                      consent to do so.


                  (6)  A matter is a 'new matter' if -


                           (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of a  kind
                               listed in section 84, and


                           (b)  the Secretary of State  has  not  previously
                               considered the matter in the context of -


                               (i)   the  decision  mentioned  in   section
                                   82(1), or


                               (ii) a statement made by the appellant under
                                   section 120."


   6. Notice under section 120 was not served  on  the  appellant.   Section
      85(5) is in mandatory terms.  Mr Bassett  candidly  accepted  that  my
      decision on this aspect would be determinative of the appeal.


   7. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was on the papers.   It  was
      on human rights grounds.  Specifically in respect of the birth of  the
      child, Judge Fox explained at [26]:


         "26. The appellant relies upon the birth of a child to assert  that
             his circumstances should permit him to effectively  circumvent
             immigration control.  The appellant and sponsor both lived  in
             Qatar and they were both aware of  the  conditions  associated
             with the permission to reside there.  Conversely the appellant
             requires the respondent to waive the conditions  of  entry  to
             suit his personal circumstances."


   8. The grant of permission focused on an arguable failure by the judge to
      consider the child's best interests.  I am satisfied that the birth of
      the child was a new matter within the meaning  of  section  85(6)  and
      accordingly the First-tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to  consider
      this aspect. It follows that any consideration of the  child's  rights
      and interests could not form part of the  appeal.  The  only  arguable
      error by the First-tier Tribunal related to the presence of a child in
      the relationship. The judge had no  jurisdiction  to  deal  with  that
      aspect and his  error  in  not  having  regard  to  the  child's  best
      interests does not require his decision to be set aside.  Accordingly,
      this appeal must be dismissed. I have sympathy for the  appellant  and
      his wife however it remains open to him to reapply for entry clearance
      in the light of the birth of the child.


Signed                                  Date  23 April 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson



