
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07866/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 January 2019                   |On 01st March 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Fletcher, instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  claimant  (the
respondent in these proceedings) is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  claimant  or  any
member of his family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent in these proceedings, whom we  shall  refer  to  as  the
    claimant is a citizen of Pakistan, born January 1970.   His  appeal  is
    against a decision dated 21 May 2016 refusing a human rights claim that
    he had made on notification of a decision dated 19 May 2015 to  make  a
    deportation order under section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 on the
    basis that his presence in the United Kingdom was not conducive to  the
    public good.  The appeal was allowed by the First-tier  Tribunal.   For
    reasons given in his decision following a hearing on  3  November  2017
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor set aside the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal owing to legal error.  His immigration history and the matters
    relevant to the Secretary of State's decision  are  set  out  in  Judge
    O'Connor's decision as follows:-

         "3.  The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom  in  November  2000
             with his wife and two children (AH - born May 1999  and  HH  -
             born March 2000), in possession of a 24-hour transit visa.  He
             did not embark on his flight but instead chose  to  remain  in
             the United Kingdom unlawfully.  The claimant subsequently made
             an asylum application on 3 September 2001 and, thereafter,  an
             application for leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules  on  19
             December  2004  -  both  applications  being  refused  by  the
             Secretary  of  State.   A  third  child  of   the   claimant's
             relationship with his wife was born in October 2001 ("JH") and
             fourth child ("DH") on 6 April 2009.

         4.   On 18 August 2008, the claimant was granted  indefinite  leave
             to remain in the United Kingdom, ostensibly  because  his  two
             eldest children had, by that  time,  accumulated  seven  years
             continuous  residence  here.  The  claimant's  wife  and  four
             children are all now British citizens.

         5.   On 23 October 2009 the claimant was convicted,  at  Camberwell
             Green Magistrates' Court, of sexual  assault  with  intent  to
             cause a female to engage in sexual activity  without  consent,
             sentenced to six months' imprisonment and placed  on  the  sex
             offender's register for seven years.  This is  the  claimant's
             only conviction.

         6.   In her decision letter the Secretary of State  relied  on  two
             other alleged incidents  involving  the  claimant.  The  first
             involved the claimant's arrest on 15 September 2011 for sexual
             assault. It is said that no further action was  taken  against
             the  claimant  in  relation   to   this   incident,   due   to
             inconsistencies  in  the   victim's   account.   Nevertheless,
             Metropolitan Police  Service  documentation  states  that  the
             claimant is "viewed as a danger  to  vulnerable  females  with
             learning difficulties".  The second incident  relied  upon  by
             the Secretary of State involved the  claimant's  daughter  AH,
             who raised with a teacher a fear that  she  was  going  to  be
             taken to Pakistan and forced to  marry.   Her  teacher  raised
             safeguarding issues and the information was passed on  to  the
             Metropolitan Police Service.  The claimant and his  wife  were
             both arrested however, due to lack  of  evidence,  no  further
             action was taken.

         7.   On 19 May 2015, the Secretary of State notified  the  claimant
             of her decision to make a deportation order against  him.  The
             representations in response to such notification were  treated
             as a human rights claim. The Secretary of  State  refused  the
             claim and maintained her decision to make a deportation order,
             pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Immigration Act  1971.  It  is
             said by the Secretary of State that the claimant's presence in
             the UK is deemed not to be conducive to the public good.

         8.   The First-tier Tribunal heard  the  claimant's  appeal  on  18
             April 2017 and allowed it in a decision promulgated on 15  May
             2017,  having  concluded  that  the  claimant  satisfies   the
             requirements of paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules."

 2. A copy of Judge  O'Connor's  decision  is  annexed.   At  [28]  of  his
    decision it will be seen that he gave this  direction  as  to  the  re-
    making of the decision:-

         "The starting point for the Upper Tribunal's consideration  on  the
         re-making of the decision on appeal will be those findings  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal that have not been the  subject  to  successful
         challenge i.e. (i)  that  there  exists  family  life  between  the
         claimant, his children and his wife; and, (ii) those findings which
         have been made in relation to the 2011 and 2014 events. That is not
         to say, however,  that  further  evidence  cannot  be  produced  in
         relation to such matters."

Introduction

 3. At the hearing on 21 June we heard evidence from the claimant  who  was
    cross-examined.  In addition, his wife and two  of  his  children  were
    called, each adopting their statements.  None was cross-examined.   The
    hearing concluded with a direction that the parties were to  file  with
    the Upper Tribunal their submissions within  21  days  of  the  Supreme
    Court handing down its decision in KO (Nigeria) &  Ors  v  SSHD  [2018]
    UKSC 53.  The  claimant's  solicitors  have  complied  with  a  further
    direction for the lodging of a complete set of witness  statements  and
    other documentary evidence relied on which had been  necessary  in  the
    light of the chaotic preparation for this appeal.  Ms Fletcher accepted
    at the directions hearing on 24 January 2019  that  evidence  had  been
    closed following the hearing in June and accordingly does not  seek  to
    rely on new material in the revised statements that largely relates  to
    the return of one of the claimant's sons from  Pakistan  where  he  had
    been educated for a period.  We do  not  consider  that  any  prejudice
    stems from this as the claimant himself speculated in the course of his
    evidence in June that his son would  be  returning  in  September.   Mr
    Whitwell represented the Secretary of State at the  directions  hearing
    and he and Ms Fletcher were content to rely on the submissions that had
    been previously lodged in December 2018, however, permission was  given
    to Ms Fletcher to provide submissions in response to the  Secretary  of
    State's case.

The Evidence

 4. In reaching her decision the Secretary of State  relied  on  a  witness
    statement by DC Alan Yau dated 5 January 2015.  DC Yau was then working
    for Operation  NEXUS  based  at  New  Scotland  Yard  and  describes  a
    partnership operation with the Home Office tackling  foreign  nationals
    who breach immigration and criminal laws.  The information provided  in
    his statement was  recorded  on  Metropolitan  Police  Crime  Reporting
    Information System (CRIS) and the Police National Computer.  He  refers
    to the claimant having one conviction from two offences and  two  "non-
    convictions" from two offences.  He provides a summary of both  aspects
    as follows:-




         "PNC Conviction History

         Sexual Assault with Intent and Cause female  to  engage  in  sexual
         activity without consent  -  10/05/2009  -  Lambeth  -  Crime  Ref:
         1214401/09

         On 10/05/2009 at 03.00 hours, victim had wanted to  buy  a  can  of
         redbull from a local shop.  Victim has learning difficulties.  When
         she arrived, the shop was closing but the man there allowed her  to
         enter the shop.  The man police now knows to be [HR] had closed the
         shutters and started chatting to her.  He then  pulled  up  her  t-
         shirt and kissed her breast.  She pulled away from him  and  wanted
         to leave but he refused and locked  the  shop.   He  then  went  to
         switch the lights out.  He then got his penis out and took her hand
         and placed it on his penis which was hard.  She  pleaded  that  she
         had to go as her mum is worried about her.  [HR] then  allowed  her
         to leave the shop.

         [HR] was arrested and interviewed to which he denied  the  offence.
         He stated that he never saw victim and no  such  incident  happened
         that night.  ID Procedure conducted  to  which  victim  picked  out
         [HR].  CPS consulted and [HR] was charged with Sexual Assault on  a
         female and inciting female to engage  in  sexual  activity  without
         consent.

         On 23/10/2009 at Camberwell Green Magistrates Court,  [HR]  pleaded
         guilty to both offences and was sentenced to a total of six  months
         imprisonment and placed on sex offenders register for 7 years.

         PNC Non-Conviction History

         Forced Marriage Procuring an act of cruelty - 27/02/2014 -  Lambeth
         - Crime Ref: 1207051/14

         On 27/02/2014, information came in from the  school  that  victim's
         father [HR] and mother [BH] are trying to force victim to  marry  a
         male in Pakistan.  Victim is only 14 years of age.  [HR]  and  [BH]
         both were  arrested  and  interviewed  to  which  they  denied  the
         allegation.  Further investigations shows that there is lack of any
         evidence to suggest that there is a plan to force victim to  marry.
         As such, the case was No Further Actioned.

         Sexual Assault - 15/09/2011 - Lambeth - Crime Ref: 1231218/11

         Victim  has  learning  difficulties.   On  15/09/2011,  victim  was
         walking across a bridge when [HR] asked her if  she  had  a  mobile
         phone.  Victim replied that she did not to which [HR]  than  pushed
         her against the bridge railings and kissed her  on  her  mouth  and
         neck and ears and also touched her chest and back.  Victim told him
         to get off her to which  he  refused.   A  passerby  saw  what  was
         happening and grabbed [HR} by the back and  pushed  him  away  from
         her.  The passerby told victim to report this incident.

         [HR]  was  arrested  and  interviewed  to  which  he   denied   the
         allegation.  He stated that victim had initiated kissing him  first
         to which he responded by kissing her back.  He admitted that he did
         kiss her neck and ears but this  was  all  with  her  consent.   He
         denies sexual assault.

         Further  enquiries  shows  that  there  were  inconsistencies  with
         victims account and therefore this case was reviewed and  [HR]  was
         No Further Actioned.

         Intelligence Picture

         No intelligence to suggest other criminality or gang involvement.




         Domestic Circumstances

         Subject [HR] has a wife by the name of [BH], date of birth 1972  of
         [London].  He has two daughters, [AH], date of birth 1999 and [HH],
         aged 15.  [AH] has made allegations against her parents  that  they
         were trying to force her to marry a male in Pakistan.

         Summary

         [HR] has been arrested for two sexual assault allegations, and also
         a forced marriage allegation.  He pleaded guilty to sexual  assault
         and inciting a female to engage in sexual activity.  In  the  other
         sexual assault allegation, he had admitted  licking  the  neck  and
         ears of the victim however  there  were  insufficient  evidence  to
         charge him.  Both these victims had learning difficulties.

         [HR] has committed sexual offences of which he is placed on the sex
         offenders register for 7 years.  These sexual offences are  serious
         as he had locked the victim into his shop  and  sexually  assaulted
         her by pulling down her bra and kissing her breasts.  He  had  also
         refused to let her leave after the sexual assault and  grabbed  her
         hand and placed it on his erect penis.  He is viewed as a danger to
         vulnerable females with learning difficulties.  My opinion is  that
         his presence is not conducive to the  public  good.   Consideration
         should be made  to  have  him  removed  from  the  UK  as  soon  as
         possible."

 5. DC Boulderston from the Metropolitan Police gave  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He too is attached to Operation NEXUS.  The First-
    tier Tribunal records his confirmation that the claimant had  only  one
    conviction and that his placing on the sex offenders register for seven
    years had by the date of hearing expired.

 6. At the hearing before us the claimant relied on a witness statement, an
    updated version of which dated 12 November 2018  was  included  in  the
    composite bundle referred to above. In summary he refers to the absence
    of any incident involving the police since 2014 and that he is reformed
    character.  In addition, the claimant refers to the strong relationship
    he has with his family members and the circumstances  surrounding  JH's
    request to go to Pakistan and stay with  his  maternal  aunt  where  he
    continue to study.  He is the  main  breadwinner  for  his  family  and
    provides for their household needs as a sole  trader  for  a  stall  in
    south London from which he derives an income of some �10,000 per annum.
     There were no relatives of his own in Pakistan who could  support  him
    on return; his other family members remain habitually in Italy.

 7. The claimant relied on  an  earlier  statement  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  dated  21  November  2016.   This  refers  to  the   family's
    connection with north Africa and Italy.  His father  used  to  work  in
    Libya as an engineer in 1982 and  the  family  which  included  several
    siblings moved to Libya in 1985.  As the result of  an  accident  which
    disabled his father from working, the claimant took up his position  in
    the company he had been working for.  After  marriage  in  Pakistan  in
    1994, the claimant's wife joined him in Libya where they  remained  for
    six years until they decided to move back to Pakistan in 2000.  It  was
    during that journey whilst in transit in London  that  they  stayed  on
    unlawfully.  The claimant's siblings principally live in Italy with one
    in the United Kingdom.  In this statement the  claimant  addresses  his
    offending in 2009, the incident in  2011  and  the  circumstances  with
    regard to his eldest daughter's allegation  of  forced  marriage.   The
    claimant's denial in that statement in terms that he had not  assaulted
    his female victim in 2009 was amended prior to adopting that  statement
    at the hearing before us.  The amendment was also the subject of cross-
    examination.  He explains also in his statement  the  circumstances  of
    the incident in 2011 which also led to a number of questions in  cross-
    examination.  He finally addresses the circumstances of his  daughter's
    assertion and the impact on him and the family should he be deported.

 8. The claimant's wife adopted her statement  that  had  been  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in which she refers to the negative impact  on  the
    family wellbeing should the claimant be removed.  She  refers  also  to
    her health problems which includes difficulties with her back  and  the
    valued help that her husband provides with the children, the  shopping,
    the housework and the meeting with teachers and attending events.

 9. The claimant's eldest daughter AH adopted two statements.  As with  her
    father, this includes a more recent statement dated  12  November  2018
    and an earlier statement prepared for  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    more recent statement refers to the degree course she  is  pursuing  at
    university in BSc Criminology and Psychology and the fact that she  had
    overcome her troubles following her father's conviction which had  been
    resolved at therapy sessions at Maudsley Hospital.  She  is  no  longer
    self-harming and refers to her father's positive  support  as  a  rock.
    She explains in her earlier statement that her father had  never  tried
    to arrange a marriage for her but nor had he forced or  encouraged  her
    into something she was against.  She was unaware of the consequences at
    the time when she was 14 that her false allegations would bring  about.
    She  was  not  cross-examined.   The  three  other  children   provided
    statements before the First-tier Tribunal, the youngest,  DH  being  in
    the form of a letter.   The  two  older  children  have  also  provided
    updated statements.  HH explains the course she is  pursuing  currently
    in her education and refers to her fear that her father's removal would
    have a huge negative impact on the family.  JH refers to his return  to
    the United Kingdom from Pakistan and the course of  study  that  he  is
    pursuing at college in London.

10. At the hearing the claimant  was  evasive  when  questioned  about  his
    responsibility for the offence  in  2009  and  the  incident  in  2011.
    Although after some questioning he accepted his guilt in respect of the
    2009 offence and his reported behaviour in respect of the 2011 incident
    we are in no doubt that the  claimant  does  not  accept  that  he  was
    culpable.

11. We are also in no doubt that the family  is  close  knit  and  mutually
    supporting.  It is evident that  the  claimant's  conduct  resulted  in
    considerable tensions leading to mental  health  difficulties  for  his
    eldest daughter. There is no clear explanation why his elder son  chose
    to study in Pakistan for a period from 2014.  There now appears  to  be
    reconciliation within the family.

The Law

12. The Secretary of State's power to make a deportation order arises under
    section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 as follows:-

         "3(5)  A  person  who  is  not  a  British  citizen  is  liable  to
         deportation from the United Kingdom if-

         ..."

13. The Secretary of State's policy for deportation and  his  understanding
    of the public  interest  is  set  out  in  certain  provisions  in  the
    Immigration Rules.  Relevant to the circumstances of the claimant these
    are as follows:-

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

               a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

               b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good and in the public  interest  because  they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years
                  but at least 12 months; or

               c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
                  the public good and in the public interest because, in the
                  view of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused
                  serious harm or they are a persistent offender who shows a
                  particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State
                  in assessing that claim will  consider  whether  paragraph
                  399 or 399A applies  and,  if  it  does  not,  the  public
                  interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other
                  factors where there are very compelling circumstances over
                  and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
             if -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is
                  in the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                      least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of
                      the immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  live
                           in the country to  which  the  person  is  to  be
                           deported; and

                      (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain
                           in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                           deported; or

             (b)  the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
                  a partner who is in the UK and is  a  British  Citizen  or
                  settled in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                      (deportee)  was  in  the  UK   lawfully   and   their
                      immigration status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                      the country to which the person is  to  be  deported,
                      because of compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                      those described in paragraph EX.2.  of  Appendix  FM;
                      and

                  (iii)    it would be unduly  harsh  for  that  partner  to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
              applies if -

              (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most
                   of his life; and

              (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

              (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
                   integration into the country to which it is  proposed  he
                   is deported."

14. In addition para 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    sets out public interest considerations when considering  claims  under
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention as follows:-

         "Part 5A

         Article 8 of the ECHR: Public Interest Considerations

         117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article  8:  Additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)  In this Part-

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights; "qualifying child" means a person who is under the  age  of
         18 and who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
                  of seven years or more;

         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the  meaning
                  of the Immigration Act 1971-see  section  33(2A)  of  that
                  Act).

         (2)  In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,

             (b)  who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and

             (c)  who-

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                  least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                  serious harm, or

                  (iii)    is a persistent offender."

Our Conclusions

15. We are grateful to the parties for their written submissions  which  we
    take into account in reaching  our  conclusions.   We  begin  with  our
    consideration of the case under the Rules. It is  acknowledged  in  the
    submissions that paragraph 399 and  Part  5A  under  the  Act  are  not
    materially different and that  the  decision  in  KO  applies  to  both
    provisions. Nevertheless, the Rules are  our  starting  point  as  they
    contain the Secretary of State's view of the public  interest.  If  the
    claimant can succeed under the Rules, although they are not a  complete
    code, it is likely that the appeal will succeed under article 8 in  the
    light of the Secretary of State having himself decided where the public
    interest lies in the proportionality assessment.  If  the  claimant  is
    unable to succeed under the Rules, we still need consider  whether  his
    removal would nevertheless breach article 8 which is  the  trigger  for
    Part 5A as it involves further consideration of the public interest. At
    the hearing in June 2018, and affirmed in her submissions, Ms  Fletcher
    accepts that the conviction for  sexual  assault  in  2009  would  have
    caused the victim "serious harm" given the nature of  the  offence  and
    the fact that the  victim  had  learning  difficulties.  Our  attention
    therefore turns to paragraph 399. It is not argued that 399A is in play
    in this case.

16. We are satisfied  that  the  claimant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with two children JH and DH born on  respectively
    in 2001 and 2009.  The two other children of the family AH and  HH  are
    now over 18.  Both children are British citizens and we must  therefore
    decide whether it would be unduly harsh for either  child  to  live  in
    Pakistan to where the claimant would be deported and whether  it  would
    be unduly harsh for the  children  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without him.   The  focus  of  Ms  Fletcher's  submissions  is  on  the
    children.  It is not her case that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    claimant's wife to live in Pakistan because of compelling circumstances
    over and above those described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM or  for
    her to remain in the United Kingdom without him.

17. Ms Fletcher refers in her submissions to the negative impact on  AH  of
    her father's absence but as an adult,  this  is  not  an  aspect  which
    engages paragraph 399.  Likewise, in relation to her brother.

18. The Supreme Court makes it clear in KO that the claimant's  offence  is
    not a balancing factor to be taken into account.  As observed  by  Lord
    Carnwath giving the judgment of the court at [23]:

         "On the other hand the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   Further  the  word  "unduly"
         implies an element of comparison.  It assumes that there is a "due"
         level of "harshness", that is a level which may  be  acceptable  or
         justifiable in the relevant context.   "Unduly"  implies  something
         going beyond that level.  The  relevant  context  is  that  set  by
         section 117C(1), that is public interest in  the  deportation  what
         would  necessarily  be  involved  for  any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in my view  (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next  section)  is  a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the  parent's  offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence.  Nor  (contrary  to  the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR  240,
         paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement  to  show  "very
         compelling reasons".  That would be  in  effect  to  replicate  the
         additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect   to
         sentences of four years or more."

19. Lord Carnwath cites with approval the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
    MK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 233 at [27] of his decision:

         "27. Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh"  in
             this context was given by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (McCloskey  J
             President and  UT  Judge  Perkins)  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  UKUT  223
             (IAC), [2015] INLR 563, para 46, a decision given on 15  April
             2015.  They referred to the "evaluative  assessment"  required
             of the tribunal:

                  "By way of self-direction, we  are  mindful  that  'unduly
                  harsh' does not equate with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
                  undesirable or  merely  difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a
                  considerably more elevated  threshold.   'Harsh'  in  this
                  context, denotes something severe, or bleak.   It  is  the
                  antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.   Furthermore,  the
                  addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated
                  standard still higher."

             On the facts of that particular case, the Upper Tribunal  held
             that the test was satisfied:

                  "Approached  in  this  way,  we  have  no  hesitation   in
                  concluding that it would be unduly harsh for either of the
                  two seven year old British citizen children  concerned  to
                  be  abruptly  uprooted  from  their  United  Kingdom  life
                  setting and  lifestyle  and  exiled  to  this  struggling,
                  impoverished and plague stricken west African  state.   No
                  reasonable or right thinking person  would  consider  this
                  anything less that cruel."

             This view was based simply on the wording of  the  subsection,
             and did not apparently depend on  any  view  of  the  relative
             severity of the particular offence.  I do not  understand  the
             conclusion on the facts of that case to be controversial."

20. Earlier in his judgment, Lord Carnwath emphasises the importance of the
    general principles relating to the "best interests"  of  children.   At
    [15] he states:

         "15. I start with the expectation that the purpose is to produce  a
             straightforward set of rules,  and  in  particular  to  narrow
             rather than widen the residual area of discretionary  judgment
             for the court to take account  of  public  interest  or  other
             factors not directly reflected in the wording of the  statute.
             I also start from the presumption, in  the  absence  of  clear
             language to the contrary, that the provisions are intended  to
             be consistent with the  general  principles  relating  to  the
             "best interests" of children, including the principle that  "a
             child must not be blamed for matters for which he  or  she  is
             not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent" (see Zoumbas
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC  74,
             [2013] 1 WLR 3690, para 10 per Lord Hodge)."

21. He also cites with approval the decision in  EV  (Philippines)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874, in particular [58] of that decision:

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world.  If one parent has no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.   If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"

22. The claimant's wife and all  the  children  are  British  citizens  and
    therefore entitled to remain.  It is against that background we need to
    consider the minor children's best interests.  In our judgment they are
    best served  by  being  with  both  parents  in  a  family  unit.   The
    claimant's wife has not indicated  that  she  would  accompany  him  to
    Pakistan and accordingly the reality against which we are  to  consider
    matters is that the family unit  will  be  severed  by  the  claimant's
    deportation. Neither of the two minor children  has  shown  a  wish  to
    accompany their father.

23. We return to the enquiry whether it would be unduly harsh for the minor
    children to live in Pakistan and whether it would be unduly  harsh  for
    them to remain without the claimant. The Secretary  of  State  contends
    that none of the circumstances relied on by the claimant indicate  that
    the effective deportation would  be  unduly  harsh  as  "excessive"  or
    "severe" or "inordinate" or  "bleak".   It  is  argued  that  the  high
    threshold set out in KO (Nigeria) cannot be met in  this  case  because
    there is nothing out of the ordinary to  demonstrate  that  deportation
    would be unduly harsh.

24. Ms Fletcher argues that the fact of one child being temporarily outside
    the United Kingdom did not mean that undue harshness would not exist in
    respect of the other children.  The children have only been apart  from
    the claimant for a very short period of time, for three months,  whilst
    he was in prison.  Since the conviction nine year ago the  family  have
    re-established their lives in which the claimant is a  constant  figure
    for the life in particular of a child who was now 9 years old.  In  her
    submission it is the impact on AH which tips the balance.  As  we  have
    observed already, AH is not within  the  exceptions  contained  in  the
    Rules.

25. We ignore the claimant's offending in reaching  our  decision  on  this
    aspect. As we have found above, the best interests  of  the  two  minor
    children are served by the integrity of the family being maintained. We
    accept that the family will struggle financially without the  claimant.
    Although we do not have any direct evidence on the point,  we  consider
    it likely that such a split will result in a charge  on  public  funds.
    The development of the two children will  be  likely  to  be  adversely
    affected by the absence of a male role in the family although  we  take
    into account the fact that JH will be 18 this year.  He has resumed his
    studies here  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  absence  of  the
    claimant's presence adversely affected him whilst he was  in  Pakistan.
    We take account also the children's elder  sisters  who  appear  to  be
    flourishing. They have reached adulthood and they will be in a position
    to provide some emotional support to their younger siblings along  with
    their mother. Having regard to the fact that  the  two  minor  children
    were born here and are British, we find it would be unduly harsh for DH
    to live in Pakistan without the rest of his family. Given that  JH  has
    spent some time in Pakistan we are  not  persuaded  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for him to accompany his  father.  As  for  both  children
    remaining here without their father, the evidence does not  demonstrate
    it would be unduly harsh. There is no indication that JH will be unable
    to continue his studies and, in the  light  of  the  findings  we  have
    reached, his  younger  brother  will  have  the  continuing  supportive
    presence of the  rest  of  his  close  knit  family.  Accordingly,  the
    claimant has not demonstrated that paragraph 399 applies.  As  we  have
    noted, no case has been advanced that paragraph 399A applies.

26. That completes our consideration under the Immigration Rules and we now
    turn to whether despite that conclusion, deportation  of  the  claimant
    would nevertheless result in a disproportionate breach of the Article 8
    rights in play for this  family.   This  requires  application  of  the
    provisions in Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  As we have observed  the  focus
    of Ms Fletcher's case is on the impact on the children including  those
    who are now of majority.  The additional considerations we are required
    to apply pursuant to section 117C, in particular based on the case  put
    by Ms Fletcher are in Exception 2:

         "(5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh."

    We reach the same conclusion in respect of the  minor  children  as  we
    have under the Immigration Rules. The wider scope however of Article  8
    brings all factors into play. The Court of Appeal in  NA  (Pakistan)  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662 considered the  meaning  of  "very  compelling
    circumstances" which is the language employed in  paragraph  398(c)  in
    relation to the public interest where paragraphs 399 and  399A  do  not
    apply.

27. Jackson LJ explains at [29] to [33]:-

         "29. In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applies to those  provisions.   The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and  which  we
             have held is to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  "there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2".  As we have indicated above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

         30.  In  the  case  of  a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  One might describe that as a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On  the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2",  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8.

         31.  An interpretation of  the  relevant  phrase  to  exclude  this
             possibility would lead to  violation  of  Article  8  in  some
             cases, which plainly was not Parliament's intention.  In terms
             of relevance and weight for a proportionality  analysis  under
             Article  8,  the  factors  singled  out  for  description   in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 will apply with  greater  or  lesser  force
             depending on the specific facts of a particular case.  To take
             a simple example in relation to  the  requirement  in  section
             117C(4)(a) for Exception 1, the offender in  question  may  be
             someone aged 37 who came to the UK aged 18 and hence satisfies
             that requirement; but his claim under Article 8 is  likely  to
             be very much weaker than the claim of an offender now aged  80
             who came to the UK aged 6 months, who by dint of  those  facts
             satisfies that requirement.  The circumstances in  the  latter
             case might well be highly relevant  to  whether  it  would  be
             disproportionate and a breach  of  Article  8  to  deport  the
             offender, having regard to the guidance given by the ECtHR  in
             Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47, and hence highly relevant  to
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2."

         32.  Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all  he  could
             advance in support of his Article 8 claim was  a  "near  miss"
             case in which he fell short of bringing himself within  either
             Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be  possible  to  say
             that  he  had  shown  that   there   were   "very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2".  He would need to have a far stronger case  than  that
             by reference to the interests protected by Article 8 to  bring
             himself within that  fall  back  protection.   But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  The decision  maker,  be  it
             the Secretary of State or a tribunal, must  look  at  all  the
             matters  relied  upon  collectively,  in  order  to  determine
             whether they are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high
             public interest in deportation.

         33.   Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient."

28. The evidence clearly demonstrates the negative impact on the claimant's
    eldest child AH of his offending and  the  mental  health  difficulties
    that she suffered as a result.  This is referred to by Ms  Fletcher  in
    [24] in the following terms:

         "24. AH described periods of suffering from mental illness - "I was
             a self harmer in the past, I would cut my wrists ... my father
             never judged me but instead he  helped  me  step  by  step  to
             overcome my mental illness" (witness statement para 10 page  R
             HR witness statement bundle) "my father in particular has been
             my rock...my father's removal will have a huge negative impact
             on our family and the progress we  have  made...I  worry  that
             without him we will be  unable  to  cope."   (Further  witness
             statement of AH supplementary bundle page 13 paras  5-6).   It
             is clear that AH in particular is vulnerable, and without  her
             father present there would  be  a  potential  relapse  in  her
             mental health."

29. No medical evidence has been provided in support of the submission that
    without the claimant's presence there would be a potential  relapse  in
    AH's mental health other than her own expression of concern.

30.  Also  relevant  to   the   proportionality   consideration   are   the
    circumstances surrounding the three matters relied on by the  Secretary
    of  State  in  making  her   deportation   decision.    Ms   Fletcher's
    understandable acceptance that the conviction for sexual assault  would
    have caused the victim serious harm given the nature of the offence and
    the fact that the victim  had  learning  difficulties  engages  section
    117C(2).  There is in this  case  a  greater  public  interest  in  the
    claimant's deportation.  Whilst we readily note that the  claimant  was
    not convicted in relation to the incident  in  2011,  nevertheless  the
    manner in which the claimant dealt with his culpability in relation  to
    the first offence and the 2011 incident in cross-examination leaves  us
    with serious disquiet over the extent of his remorse.  We find that  he
    has no real remorse for those two incidents.  This finding does  impact
    on  what  otherwise  might  be  a   more   powerful   factor   in   the
    proportionality exercise of the conviction in 2009 being so  long  ago.
    Whilst the learning in KO (Nigeria) excludes  the  offending  from  our
    consideration of the undue harshness on  the  children  of  separation,
    nevertheless that offending is relevant to our overall consideration of
    proportionality given that we have concluded it  would  not  be  unduly
    harsh.  Taking all matters in the round  our  conclusion  is  that  the
    deportation of the claimant in all the circumstances of this case would
    be proportionate to the public interest.  Accordingly, this  appeal  is
    dismissed.


Signed   Date 22 February 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


Annex

"DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

      1. The appeal before the Upper Tribunal is brought by the Secretary of
         State for the Home Department.  I shall refer herein to HR as  'the
         claimant'.

      2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan, born in  January  1970.   He
         appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the SSHD's decision  of
         21 May 2016 to refuse a human rights claim, such claim having  been
         made on 15 June 2015.

      3. The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom in  November  2000  with
         his wife and two children (AH - born May 1999 and HH -  born  March
         2000), in possession of a 24-hour transit visa.  He did not  embark
         on his flight but instead chose to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
         unlawfully.  The claimant subsequently made an  asylum  application
         on 3 September 2001 and, thereafter, an application  for  leave  to
         remain outside the Rules on 19 December 2004  -  both  applications
         being refused by the Secretary of State.   A  third  child  of  the
         claimant's relationship with his wife  was  born  in  October  2001
         ("JH") and fourth child ("DH") on 6 April 2009.

      4. On 18 August 2008, the claimant was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom, ostensibly  because  his  two  eldest
         children had, by that  time,  accumulated  seven  years  continuous
         residence here. The claimant's wife and four children are  all  now
         British citizens.

      5. On 23 October 2009 the claimant was convicted, at Camberwell  Green
         Magistrates' Court, of sexual assault with intent to cause a female
         to engage in sexual activity  without  consent,  sentenced  to  six
         months' imprisonment and placed on the sex offender's register  for
         seven years.  This is the claimant's only conviction.

      6. In her decision letter the Secretary of State relied on  two  other
         alleged incidents involving the claimant. The  first  involved  the
         claimant's arrest on 15 September 2011 for sexual  assault.  It  is
         said that no further action  was  taken  against  the  claimant  in
         relation to this incident, due to inconsistencies in  the  victim's
         account. Nevertheless, Metropolitan  Police  Service  documentation
         states that the claimant is  "viewed  as  a  danger  to  vulnerable
         females with learning difficulties".  The  second  incident  relied
         upon by the Secretary of State involved the claimant's daughter AH,
         who raised with a teacher a fear that she was going to be taken  to
         Pakistan and forced to  marry.   Her  teacher  raised  safeguarding
         issues and the information was passed on to the Metropolitan Police
         Service.  The claimant and his wife were both arrested however, due
         to lack of evidence, no further action was taken.

      7. On 19 May 2015, the Secretary of State notified the claimant of her
         decision  to  make   a   deportation   order   against   him.   The
         representations in response to such notification were treated as  a
         human rights claim. The Secretary of State refused  the  claim  and
         maintained her decision to make a deportation  order,  pursuant  to
         Section 5(1) of the  Immigration  Act  1971.  It  is  said  by  the
         Secretary of State that the claimant's presence in the UK is deemed
         not to be conducive to the public good.

      8. The First-tier Tribunal heard the claimant's  appeal  on  18  April
         2017 and allowed it in a  decision  promulgated  on  15  May  2017,
         having concluded that the claimant satisfies  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules.

    Immigration Rules

      9. It is important at this stage  to  set  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision within the proper context of the relevant Rules:

             "398.    Where a person claims that their deportation would be
                  contrary to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the
                  Human Rights Convention, and

                  (a)  ...

                  (b)  ...

                  (c)   the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                      conducive to  the  public  good  and  in  the  public
                      interest because, in the view  of  the  Secretary  of
                      State, their offending has caused serious harm ...

                  the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
                  consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies, and, if it
                  does not, the public interest in deportation will only  be
                  outweighed  by  other  factors  where   there   are   very
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraphs 399 and 399A.

             399. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                  applies if:

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a child under the age of  18  years
                      who is in the UK, and

                      (i)  the child is a British citizen; or

                      (ii) ...; and in either case

                           (a)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                               live in the country to which the  person  is
                               to be deported; and

                           (b)  it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                               remain in the UK without the person  who  is
                               to be deported; ..."

    Grounds of Challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's Decision

     10. The Secretary of  State's  pleaded  grounds  of  challenge  can  be
         summarised thus:

          i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to make  findings  as
             to whether the claimant assaulted an individual  in  September
             2011.   Alternatively,  the  First-tier  Tribunal   erred   in
             attaching no weight to this incident;

         ii) The First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that it would  be  unduly
             harsh for the children to relocate to Pakistan is irrational;

        iii) The First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing  to  give  lawfully
             adequate reasons for its conclusion that it  would  be  unduly
             harsh for the children to remain in the United Kingdom, if the
             claimant were to be deported.

     11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Plimmer in a decision of 11 September 2017,  on  the
         following basis:

         "2.  It is arguable that the assessment at [79] to  [82]  does  not
             factor in the appellant's offending and  focuses  solely  upon
             the impact on the children."

    Submissions

     12. At the hearing, Ms Isherwood relied upon the grounds  of  challenge
         and the terms of the grant of permission, asserting that when  read
         as a whole it could not be said that the First-tier  Tribunal  took
         account of all material matters in its consideration of whether  it
         would be unduly harsh for the children to leave the UK and live  in
         Pakistan or, alternatively, remain here without the claimant.

     13. Mr Sobowale, who said all that could reasonably be said  on  behalf
         of the claimant, submitted that:

          i) The First-tier Tribunal had, at [70], made clear  findings  of
             fact in relation to the September  2011  incident,  concluding
             that although an incident had occurred - as  admitted  by  the
             claimant - it had not been demonstrated that any serious  harm
             had been caused by the claimant.  Consequently, the First-tier
             Tribunal attached no weight to the incident in its  assessment
             of whether removal would breach Article 8, as it was  entitled
             so to do;

         ii) As to the alleged offence in  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             concluded that there had been no intention on  behalf  of  the
             claimant,  or  his  wife,  to  force  their  child  to  marry.
             Consequently, no weight was attached to such incident;

        iii) The submitted failure  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  take
             account of all relevant matters, in particular the conviction,
             in its assessment of whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
             require the children to move to Pakistan with the claimant or,
             alternatively, to remain in the United  Kingdom  without  him,
             had not been made out by the Secretary of State  On  a  proper
             reading of its decision, in particular paragraph  69  onwards,
             it is clear that the First-tier Tribunal had well in mind  all
             relevant circumstances when coming to its conclusion  on  such
             issues.

    Discussion and Decision

     14. For the reasons  which  follow,  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's decision  does  contain  an  error  of  law  capable  of
         affecting the outcome if the appeal and I set it aside.

     15. An analysis of the structure of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
         is beneficial.  The core conclusions and reasons are  to  be  found
         between paragraphs  66  and  83  of  the  decision.   Paragraph  66
         contains a summary of events relating to the 2009 conviction, which
         is  immediately  followed  by  a  direction  as  to  the   relevant
         Immigration Rules and identification that the  Tribunal  considered
         paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of those Rules, as well as Section  55
         of the 2009 Borders Act.

     16. Paragraph 68 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  begins  in  the
         following terms:

             "The respondent's decision was made  on  the  basis  that  the
             appellant's  offending  behaviour  as  demonstrated   by   his
             conviction,  had  caused  serious   harm.    The   appellant's
             representatives submitted that the grounds of serious harm had
             not been made out ..."

     17. Immediately  following  this  statement,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         engages in an analysis of whether the  circumstances  of  the  2009
         offence caused 'serious harm'. That  analysis  is  carried  through
         into paragraph 69, it ultimately being found that the  factors  put
         forward  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  relation  to  the  2009
         conviction "are on  the  face  of  it  sufficient  to  justify  the
         discretionary  decision  that  the  public  interest  requires  the
         appellant's deportation unless and accepting paragraphs 399 or 399A
         applies." Set in its proper context it is clear that the  reference
         therein to "discretionary decision" is reference to the  assessment
         to be carried out under paragraph 398(c) of the Rules.

     18. It is, also, instructive to  observe  that  paragraphs  70  and  71
         begin, respectively, as follows:

             "70. I do not attach weight to the 2011 alleged  offence  when
                  considering offending behaviour that  has  caused  serious
                  harm because ...

             71.  I do not attach weight to the 2014 alleged  offence  when
                  considering offending behaviour that  has  caused  serious
                  harm because ..."

     19. The First-tier Tribunal thereafter, in  both  paragraphs,  consider
         the alleged events of 2011/2014  in  the  context  of  the  gateway
         provision in paragraph 398(c) i.e. whether claimant's behaviour had
         "caused serious harm".

     20. In paragraphs 72 of its decision the First-tier  Tribunal  turn  to
         analyse the best interests of the respective children -  observing,
         inter alia, that the Secretary of State accepted that it  would  be
         in the best interests of the  children  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom in the care of their mother. At paragraph 74 the First-tier
         Tribunal correctly directs itself as to the  Secretary  of  State's
         position that the claimant  had  not  demonstrated  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with his children, nor had it been
         demonstrated that the unduly harsh "test" had been met.

     21. Moving on, in paragraphs 75 to 78, the First-tier Tribunal  analyse
         the extent of the family life between the claimant and his children
         and then turn to the issue of undue harshness in paragraphs  79  to
         82, concluding as follows:

             "79. The respondent accepts in the refusal that it is  in  the
                  best interests of the appellant's children  to  remain  in
                  the UK.  I find that it has been clearly demonstrated that
                  it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  separate  them  from  the
                  appellant.

             80.  The appellant accepts that all his  children  speak  Urdu
                  and is anxious that they should  speak  the  language  and
                  understand  something  of  the  culture  and  society   in
                  Pakistan.  The respondent does not strongly challenge  the
                  evidence that the appellant's relatives are in  Italy  and
                  not in Pakistan.  It is accepted that the  witness  B  has
                  family in Pakistan.  It is accepted that J (not a witness)
                  was able to relocate to Pakistan for  some  time  to  live
                  with relatives there.  However, this is not sufficient  to
                  justify a finding that the return of  the  four  children,
                  with the appellant and B, in terms of a deportation order,
                  which  the  respondent  accepts  is  not  in  their   best
                  interests, is anything other  than  unduly  harsh  because
                  they are British citizens who have  been  in  the  UK  for
                  virtually their whole lives in the cases  of  A,  H  (from
                  2000) and J (from 2001) and for his whole life in the case
                  of D, from 2009.

             81.  Various aspects of the appellant's evidence  were  relied
                  upon in submissions by the respondent so  as  to  indicate
                  that the appellant is of an undesirable character as shown
                  by his  convictions  and  non-convictions  but  the  issue
                  before me is if the exception in  paragraph  399  is  met,
                  given that the appellant's children are  British  citizens
                  that is, if it would be unduly harsh for them to  live  in
                  Pakistan (which the respondent accepts  is  not  in  their
                  best interests) or unduly harsh for them to remain in  the
                  UK without the appellant.  I find that the answer to  both
                  questions is positive.  Given their ages,  time  spent  in
                  the UK, settled status as  British  citizens,  integration
                  and education and the fact that the family who are settled
                  in the UK would have to start again in Pakistan,  with  no
                  accommodation or work identified for the family as a unit,
                  it is unduly harsh for the children to live in Pakistan in
                  order to live in a family  unit  with  the  appellant  and
                  unduly harsh for them to remain  in  the  UK  without  the
                  appellant.

             82.  Any decision to remove the appellant would undoubtedly be
                  unduly harsh for A.  It is likely to have  a  particularly
                  devastating effect on her and upon the family unit because
                  of the background  to  the  deportation  order.   A  acted
                  correctly in reporting her concerns at school  but  it  is
                  now accepted  by  the  police  who  investigated  that  in
                  reality she was not at risk of forced marriage.  Given the
                  terms  of  the  CRIS  report  it  is  not  clear  why  the
                  investigation and allegation  was  included  for  judicial
                  consideration.  No action was taken after the 2009 offence
                  or the 2011  allegation.   In  all  the  circumstances  to
                  proceed and make a finding that it is not unduly harsh for
                  this settled family, with three teenage  British  children
                  to be required to live in Pakistan, which it  is  accepted
                  is not in their best interests, if  they  wish  to  remain
                  together is, on the evidence before me  not  justified  or
                  sustainable."

     22. In MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 617 the Court of  Appeal  considered
         the ambit of the unduly harsh threshold  in  the  context  of  both
         section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
         and paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules, stating as follows:

             "23. The context  in  these  cases  invites  emphasis  on  two
                  factors, (i) the public interest in the removal of foreign
                  criminals and (ii) the need for a proportionate assessment
                  of any interference with Article 8 rights ...

             24.  This steers  the  Tribunals  and  the  courts  towards  a
                  proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation  in
                  any given case.  Accordingly the more pressing the  public
                  interest in his removal, the harder it  will  be  to  show
                  that the effect on his child or  partner  will  be  unduly
                  harsh.  Any other approach in my judgment  dislocates  the
                  "unduly harsh" provisions from their  context.   It  would
                  mean that the question of undue hardship would be  decided
                  wholly without regard to the force of the public  interest
                  in deportation in a particular case.  But in that case the
                  term "unduly" is mistaken for "excessive" which imports  a
                  different idea what is due or undue  depends  on  all  the
                  circumstances, not merely the impact on the child  or  the
                  partner in the given case ..."

     23. Nowhere in its decision does the First-tier Tribunal direct  itself
         to the interpretation of the words "unduly harsh" and, furthermore,
         there is no reference therein  to  the  decision  in  MM  (Uganda).
         This, of course, does  not  of  itself  constitute  an  error.  The
         critical issue for this Tribunal is whether the relevant principles
         are lawfully applied by the First-tier Tribunal.

     24. A fair reading of paragraphs 68 to 83 of the First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision discloses that consideration of the 2009 offence, and  the
         events in 2011 and 2014, is restricted to the assessment of whether
         the claimant's actions caused serious harm i.e. whether the gateway
         provision in paragraph 398(c) had been satisfied.

     25. The critical reasoning on the issue of whether it would  be  unduly
         harsh for the children to live in Pakistan, or remain in the United
         Kingdom without  the  claimant,  does  not  explicitly  incorporate
         within it an analysis of the weight to be attributed to the  public
         interest in deporting the claimant, which is to be primarily  drawn
         from the claimant's offending and other relevant behaviour; nor  in
         my view can such a consideration be  implied  into  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's decision. The  First-tier  Tribunal's  analysis  of  the
         'unduly harsh' issue focuses entirely on the consequences  for  the
         children. There is no cognisance in the analysis of the combination
         of factors identified in paragraph  3  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in MM (Uganda).

     26.  Consequently,  I   conclude   that   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
         consideration of the issue of whether the exceptions  in  paragraph
         399 of the Immigration Rules can be made out  is  flawed  by  legal
         error.  It was not  asserted  that  such  error  was  incapable  of
         affecting the outcome  of  the  appeal,  nor  could  it  be  in  my
         conclusion. Accordingly, I  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision.

     27. It was agreed by the parties that the appeal should  be  remade  by
         the Upper Tribunal.  Unfortunately, the hearing of the appeal could
         not proceed immediately after my announcement of  the  decision  to
         set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision because the claimant's
         Counsel did not have a  copy  of  either  the  respondent's  "nexus
         folder" or the  claimant's  bundles  of  evidence.   Plainly,  such
         documentation will  be  of  importance  in  the  re-making  of  the
         decision.  For  the  sake  of  completion,  the  absence  of   such
         documentation did not hamper the claimant's  Counsel's  ability  to
         properly present the  case  at  the  error  of  law  stage  of  the
         proceedings.  I provided the claimant's counsel with an opportunity
         to consider the evidence at the outset of the hearing  and,  having
         done so, he indicated that he was content to proceed  and  did  not
         require any additional time or an adjournment.

     28. The starting point for the Upper Tribunal's consideration on the re-
         making of the decision on appeal will  be  those  findings  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal that have not been the  subject  to  successful
         challenge i.e. (i)  that  there  exists  family  life  between  the
         claimant, his children and his wife; and, (ii) those findings which
         have been made in relation to the 2011 and 2014 events. That is not
         to say, however,  that  further  evidence  cannot  be  produced  in
         relation to such matters.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The decision on appeal is to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal

    DIRECTIONS

      i) Each party must file and  serve  a  composite  bundle  of  ALL  the
         evidence that such party  intends  to  rely  upon  (even  if  filed
         already), by no later than 14 days prior to the  date  of  hearing.
         The bundles must be tabulated so that evidence that was not  before
         the First-tier Tribunal can be clearly be identified;

     ii) The hearing will have  a  3-hour  time  listing.  If  either  party
         disagrees with this time estimate then that party MUST  notify  the
         Tribunal within 7 days of the date of the sending of this  decision
         (copied  to  the  opposing  party),   giving   reasons   for   such
         disagreement and the time estimate proposed.




         Signed:
         [pic]
         Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor"


