
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07315/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th September 2018                        |On 25 September 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mr Bijay Nembang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bhattarai (Bhattarai & Co)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a Decision and reasons of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge
    Manyarara, promulgated on 28th February 2018.

 2. The appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  related  to  a  Nepalese
    national born in 1990 who is the adult son of  a  former  Gurkha.   The
    circumstances of this particular case were rather unusual in  that  the
    Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a student with  valid  leave
    before his parents came, as his father was  entitled  to  as  a  former
    Gurkha.  The Appellant then sought leave to remain as the  adult  child
    of a Gurkha.  At the hearing it was  acknowledged  that  the  Appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Rules as he was already  in  the
    UK.  The appeal proceeded on the basis of  human  rights,  outside  the
    Immigration Rules only.

 3. The Judge found as a fact that since 2014 the Appellant had been living
    as part of the family unit and was dependent on his father.  The  Judge
    made findings in relation to family life being engaged at paragraph  79
    of the Decision where he says:

         "Whilst the sponsor  spent  some  time  in  Bahrain  prior  to  the
         family's arrival in the United Kingdom,  I  accept  that  this  was
         because he needed to support his family and he could not  find  any
         employment in Nepal after his discharge as a Gurkha.  This was  the
         only reason for the geographical separation of the family.  I  find
         that the sponsor's decision to go and work in  another  country  in
         order to support his family financially is a testimony to the  ties
         that exist in this family unit.  The appellant is now aged  27  and
         is living in  a  single  family  unit  with  his  parents  and  his
         siblings.  As a result of the shared history in this appeal,  I  am
         satisfied that there is a family life in this appeal and  the  ties
         that exist in this family  unit  are  more  than  normal  emotional
         ties."

 4. Having so found, the Judge then falls into error in concluding that  it
    was appropriate to remit the matter to  the  Home  Office  to  consider
    whether a grant of leave is appropriate in line with published guidance
    in the light of the findings that he had made.  The amended Section  84
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which  sets  out  the  possible
    grounds in an appeal, no longer includes as a ground  of  appeal,  that
    the decision is unlawful. The Tribunal is empowered, in a human  rights
    appeal, only to allow it if the Decision is in breach of  the  ECHR  or
    dismiss it if it is not.  To that extent the Judge  erred  in  reaching
    the Decision that he did and the Decision must therefore be set  aside.
    So much is accepted by both parties before me.

 5. Mr Jarvis then helpfully indicated that in the light  of  the  findings
    that family life was engaged and in light of case law  in  relation  to
    family members of former Gurkhas, the Home Office would  be  unable  to
    put forward an argument that removal  was  proportionate  and  thus  it
    would be appropriate for me to redecide the  appeal  and  allow  it  on
    human rights grounds.  Accordingly, that is what I do.

Notice of Decision

 6. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed  and  in  redeciding  the
    appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision,  the  appeal  is
    allowed.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed [pic]                            Date 20th September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because it was only on appeal that a finding was made  that  Article  8  was
engaged.  The Appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules.




Signed [pic]                            Date 20th September 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


