
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: H U/07372/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                  |Direction sent:                 |
|                                |On 31 October 2017              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before:

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


                                  Between:

                                    [F B]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL
    (Pursuant to rule 17 Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008)

1. On 3 May 2017, the Appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Phillips.
   By his decision, promulgated on 5th April 2017, Judge Phillips  dismissed
   the appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of  17th  August
   2015 refusing  her  application  for  leave  to  enter  as  a  child  for
   settlement to join her father, who had  ILR,  and  her  mother,  who  had
   discretionary leave under Article 8 of the ECHR valid until 1 June  2017.
   Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  given  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Robertson on 31st May 2017.

2. Following a hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 18 July 2017 sitting  at
   Field House, on 7 August 2017 I found a material  error  of  law  in  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal (FTT). In particular,  I  found  that
   the decision of the FTT had mistakenly referred to paragraph 297  of  the
   Immigration Rules rather than the correct rule which was paragraph 301 of
   those Rules. Both parties agreed that that was  the  case,  although  the
   appellant's representatives have  urged  me  to  decide  the  case  under
   Article 8. I directed the parties to make written representations  as  to
   the respondent' s suggested solution to the error, which was to  withdraw
   the original decision and make a fresh decision under  the  correct  rule
   (paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules).

3. By a letter dated 25 August 2017, the Respondent wrote  to  the  Tribunal
   indicating that the Respondent wished  to  inform  the  Tribunal  of  her
   intention to withdraw the decision  of  the  ECO  dated  14  August  2015
   refusing to issue the appellant entry clearance to the UK. Mr C Avery,  a
   Home Office presenting officer, who had appeared at  the  hearing  on  18
   July 2017, had already undertaken to the  Tribunal  that  the  respondent
   would make a fresh decision under the correct rule in the event that  the
   appeal was withdrawn. He undertook on behalf of the  respondent  that  to
   consider any fresh documentation submitted in support of the  application
   and would, of course,  consider  the  appellant's  protected  private  or
   family life under the provisions of Article 8.

4. This was followed by a letter dated 14  September  2017  written  by  the
   appellant' s representatives  to the Respondent (copied to the  Tribunal)
   in which it was suggested that "the fact that there is another applicable
   Immigration Rule in the form of paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules...
   signifies that there was no identified need in a  democratic  society  to
   interfere with family life, and it would be disproportionate to do so, as
   the immigration rules which are supposed to reflect the  public  interest
   public interest are met". The representatives went  on  to  suggest  that
   there is no need to withdraw the decision and there  is  no  need  for  a
   fresh decision to be made - the Tribunal has jurisdiction  to  re-make  a
   decision under article 8 of the ECHR.

5. A further direction was sent out on 16 October 2017 by which  I  directed
   the Appellant "to make representations as to why the appeal should not be
   treated as withdrawn. The Tribunal notes that the appellant may raise any
   arguments under the European Convention on Human Rights  in  response  to
   any fresh immigration decision the respondent shall make". In response to
   the above direction, the Appellant's  representatives  submitted  by  fax
   dated 23 October 2017:  "We interpret the letter  dated  25  August  2017
   from the Secretary... As an indication of an intention  to  withdraw  the
   substantive decision rather than an actual withdraw, and therefore giving
   us the opportunity to respond on behalf the appellant in accordance  with
   the terms of the Upper  Tribunal's  directions  of  7  August  2017.  The
   Appellant's position continues to be that the merits of the case  insofar
   is the article 8 element of the decision are concerned is  a  matter  for
   the Tribunal  to  determine  for  the  reasons  stated  in  our  previous
   correspondence, and in the grounds in  support  of  the  application  for
   permission to appeal  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Phillips."

6. Paragraph 17 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
   provides that a party may withdraw its case  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
   only with the consent of the Tribunal. If the Tribunal  does  so  consent
   this would amount to a final disposal of  the  appeal  before  the  Upper
   Tribunal.

7. In light of the clear indication by the  Respondent  on  25th  of  August
   2017 that she withdrew her decision on  behalf  of  the  Entry  Clearance
   Officer dated 14 August 2014, there is no substantive decision before the
   Upper Tribunal against which the appellant can appeal. It appears to  the
   Tribunal to be unfair to the respondent to make a decision under  Article
   8 before the matter has been properly considered by her in the context of
   the correct Immigration Rule - i.e. paragraph 301 of  those  Rules.  When
   that Rule  is  fully  considered,  the  appellant  will  be  given  every
   opportunity to make representations including  under  Article  8  of  the
   ECHR. The appellant will have a fresh right of appeal to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal against that decision should it go against her.


8. In reaching that conclusion, I have  had  regard  to  the  case  of  S  M
   (withdrawal of immigration decision: effect) and  note  that  since  that
   decision the Immigration Act 2014 has come into force. Therefore, some of
   the provisions under discussion by the Upper Tribunal in that case are no
   longer relevant. However, I also have regard to the more recent case of Z
   E I and others (decision withdrawn) and LB (Jamaica) v Secretary of State
   for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ  1420.  In  the  light  of  those
   authorities, and the discussion of them in Mac Donald's Immigration  Law,
   it is clear that it is for the appellant's representatives to give a good
   reason  why,  notwithstanding  the   respondent's   withdrawal   of   her
   substantive decision, the appeal should be treated as continuing. I  have
   not identified any good reason  here  for  that  given  the  respondent's
   undertaking to consider all  relevant  matters  which  will  include  the
   application of Article 8 to the facts of the case in  the  light  of  any
   fresh representations made. I find the absence of any  "good  reason"  to
   allow  this  appeal  to  continue  in  the  light  of  the  circumstances
   summarised above. The suggestion in the fax dated 23  October  2017  that
   there had not been an "actual withdrawal" seems  opaque.  I  accept  that
   there would be a discretion to treat the appeal as  ongoing  and  make  a
   decision, but and consider it  to  be  inappropriate  to  do  so  in  the
   circumstances.  In  addition,  the  appellant  may  well  be  in  a  more
   favourable position  if  her  application  under  paragraph  301  of  the
   Immigration Rules is decided  affirmatively.  It  is  of  note  that  the
   appellant has a less onerous test to surmount if she is to succeed  under
   that paragraph.

9. I therefore the direct that the present appeal be treated  as  withdrawn,
   as is the respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance under paragraph
   297 of the Immigration Rules. This  amounts  to  final  disposal  of  the
   Appellant's appeal to this Tribunal.

10. The avoidance of doubt, there is no anonymity  direction  in  this  case
   and no fee award.


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury                    Date: 30th October 2017
