

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07386/2015
                                                             & HU/07389/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 28 September 2017                      |on 02 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 GINALYN [M]
                                      &
                                    [M A]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Manila
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     [AM], the sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are mother and daughter, citizens  of  the  Philippines,
    born on 25 June 1988 and [ ] 2006.  The sponsor,  the  husband  of  the
    first appellant, is a UK citizen.  The first appellant and the  sponsor
    have a son, born on [ ] 2010, who is a dual citizen.  At  the  time  of
    the FtT hearing he was living here with his father.

 2. The ECO refused the appellants' applications for  entry  clearance  for
    reasons set out in decisions dated 7 September 2015.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle dismissed the appellants'  appeals  for
    reasons set out in his decision promulgated on 17 October 2016.

 4. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the UT by an  application
    (out of time) presented by the sponsor.  The gist  of  the  grounds  is
    that the judge did not carefully consider all  the  documents  provided
    and should have found the article 8 case was established, based on  the
    sponsor's inability to work and support his family in the  Philippines,
    his ability to provide for his family here, his wife's ability to  work
    here, and the better education  and  prospects  available  to  the  two
    children.

 5. On  24  August  2017  FtT  Judge  Simpson  extended  time  and  granted
    permission, on the view that arguably the judge "leap-frogged"  the  5-
    stage approach  required  by  Razgar  by  addressing  the  question  of
    compelling circumstances at the outset rather than at the  end  of  the
    proportionality assessment; notwithstanding  reference  to  ZH  and  to
    Zoumbas, failed to make a real assessment of the best interests of  the
    two children in the case; and had insufficient regard to the nature and
    force of family ties between the sponsor and his sister.

 6. [AM], who of course is not a lawyer, adopted the  points  suggested  by
    the grant of permission.  He described the  wish  of  the  four  family
    members to live together in Scotland,  and  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to appreciate what the case really involved for them.

 7. I explained to [AM] that the first question for the UT was whether  the
    FtT made any error of law, based on the facts evidenced at the time  of
    the FtT hearing - not on any further evidence about those facts, or  on
    the position today.  That would be relevant only if  the  FtT  decision
    was found to be wrong on  a  point  of  law,  and  had  to  be  remade.
    However, I did find out from him some of  the  more  up-to-date  facts.
    His son missed his mother. When they last visited the Philippines,  his
    son remained with her and  is  there  now.   The  applications  to  the
    respondent which lead to these proceedings failed due to  shortfall  in
    the minimum income requirements, although not by much.  The sponsor has
    for the last 4 months been employed in a job  which  would  meet  those
    requirements (and so fresh applications might  well  be  made,  once  6
    months of financial proof is available).  He preferred to proceed  with
    these appeals, hopes having been raised by the grant of permission,  as
    that might be a more rapid route, and  would  not  involve  the  delay,
    expense and uncertainty of further applications.

 8. Mrs O'Brien submitted that the grant of permission was based on natural
    sympathy rather than on legal error, and that none was to be  found  in
    the decision.  Even if it was possible that another  judge  might  have
    decided otherwise, that was beside the point.   It  had  been  conceded
    that the cases did not meet the terms of the  immigration  rules.   The
    rules were purposefully to the effect that some families could not live
    together in the UK unless their terms were met.  Such outcomes are  not
    generally overridden by article 8.  There might  be  better  facilities
    for the two children in the UK, but nothing had  been  shown  by  which
    relative advantage to them might have been so strong as to  change  the
    outcome.  The relationship between  the  sponsor  and  his  sister  was
    another sympathetic aspect of the case, but not such as to give rise to
    a finding of family life between  siblings  qualifying  for  article  8
    protection.  The judge had not left anything relevant out of account or
    failed to appreciate  the  facts;  his  assessment  was  based  on  the
    realities. There was nothing compelling which might  have  justified  a
    favourable outcome on human rights grounds.   Based  on  the  essential
    finding, properly open to the judge, that the family had a choice where
    to live, the outcome was plainly proportionate.  There was no error  of
    law which would entitle the UT to interfere.

 9. [AM] in reply said that although the judge found that it was  a  choice
    whether the family lived in Scotland or the Philippines, in truth there
    was no choice.  He was permitted to be in the  Philippines  only  as  a
    visitor, not in the long term, and not to work.  It  took  3  years  to
    obtain a work permit.  That had to be based on establishing a  business
    and the conditions were such as he was unlikely  to  meet.   The  small
    business set up had been run by his wife, not by him, and was destroyed
    by the typhoon.

10. I reserved my decision.

11. I have considerable sympathy for the position of the appellants and  of
    the rest of the family.  It is worth recording that although  this  has
    been without doubt a trying situation, [AM] presented  the  appellants'
    case moderately and sensibly, and that he and his  family  have  always
    sought scrupulously to comply with the immigration rules.

12. There is no legal requirement  to  work  through  all  the  preliminary
    stages of Razgar, in a case which arrives at the final question.

13. On the best interests of the children, there was only the vague  notion
    that education and prospects must be  better  in  the  UK.   There  was
    nothing to show that the children would not thrive with their  parents,
    wherever they chose to settle; and it  appeared  there  was  a  choice.
    There was no basis on which the appeal might have succeeded in  respect
    of the children's interests.

14. The situation of the sponsor's sister was never likely  to  demonstrate
    that the appellants had a right of settlement in the UK.

15. There was scant evidence of  the  relative  difficulty  of  the  family
    establishing itself in the Philippines. There was  some  evidence  that
    had already been tried and proved unsuccessful, but  no  evidence,  for
    example, of the immigration law of the Philippines to  show  difficulty
    in the future.

16. There is nothing to suggest that the finding  that  the  family  had  a
    realistic choice was not properly open to the judge,  on  the  evidence
    before him at the time.  Based on  that  finding,  the  proportionality
    assessment is one which was plainly open to the FtT.

17. Thus, the outcome is as I warned was likely: there is  no  error  on  a
    point of law in the decision of the FtT, such as might entitle  the  UT
    to set it aside.

18. There was some discussion at the hearing of the possibility of  further
    applications to the respondent.  It was made clear that it is  not  the
    function of the tribunal or of a presenting officer  to  offer  advice,
    that applications will be assessed on their own  merits,  and  that  no
    assumption  should  be  made  of  success.   However,  I  think  it  is
    appropriate to record that it may well be that  the  appellants  within
    the relatively near future will be in a position to apply  again,  with
    apparently reasonable prospects, and that although their appeals to the
    FtT and to the UT have failed, nothing has emerged which should  be  in
    any way prejudicial to future applications.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

20. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            29 September 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




