
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/07938/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 February 2019                     |On 13 March 2019                    |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                           miss kenny sarah akinde
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, Counsel instructed by Chris Alexander
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Roopnarine-Davies  promulgated  on  9th  November  2018
    following an appeal heard at Taylor House on 30th October 2018 in which
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the  Appellant's  human  rights
    appeal.  The Appellant now seeks to challenge that decision. Permission
    to appeal has been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison
    on 18th January 2019, who found it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    misdirected  herself  by  failing  to  consider  Section  117  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  when  dealing  with  the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim.

 2. It was the Appellant's case that she was born in the United Kingdom  on
    23rd November 1989, but was a national of Nigeria.  It  was  said  that
    she left the UK and went to live in Nigeria  and  then  re-entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2000 with her father. It is her  case  that  she  had
    been left in the care of his relatives and she had remained in  the  UK
    since then. She says that she had a son from a  previous  relationship,
    who was born on 29th July 2010 and that all of  her  close  family  and
    relatives were presently settled in the UK, including  her  mother  and
    she is also in  relationship  with  a  Mr  Kareem,  who  has  permanent
    residence in the UK.

 3. Judge Roopnarine-Davies did not find the Appellant  to  be  a  credible
    witness. In fact at paragraph 9 of the judgment she found the Appellant
    reluctant to  volunteer  details  of  her  circumstances  under  cross-
    examination and considered the discrepancies and contradictions in  her
    evidence. The Judge stated that the Appellant  had  failed  to  provide
    examples of evidence that were material to her claim, which  the  Judge
    considered could have easily been provided.  The Judge found there  was
    insufficient evidence the Appellant had been living  in  the  UK  since
    2000.

 4. Judge Roopnarine-Davies noted that the Appellant had said she had  been
    to primary school in Nigeria and then to a secondary school and college
    in the UK, and had obtained GCSEs and A levels here and  that  she  had
    obtained admission to university  on  production  of  a  British  birth
    certificate.  The Judge found it to  be  wholly  implausible  that  the
    Appellant did not have documentary evidence in support of those claims,
    on the basis that the Appellant said she had entrusted documents to her
    mother who had lost them over time,  because  of  her  mother's  mental
    health condition. The Judge noted  that  the  Appellant's  relationship
    with her partner was said to have broken down around April 2018, a year
    after application, which she found was  'pithy'.   The  judge  did  not
    accept evidence given  on  the  morning  of  the  hearing  regarding  a
    telephone call from the Appellant's sister indicating that  the  sister
    had been granted leave on the basis of a lesbian relationship  and  the
    judge found that that was wholly unsubstantiated.

 5. The Judge considered an OT occupational therapist's report  in  respect
    of the Appellant's mother and the fact that she suffered from  paranoid
    schizophrenia and osteoarthritis of the lumber spine.  The  Judge  also
    considered the Appellant's own  health  difficulties  in  paragraph  16
    regarding the Appellant undergoing surgery for a tumour at the front of
    her skull in 2010 and further surgery when a plate  was  inserted.  The
    Appellant said she still suffering  from  severe  headaches  linked  to
    problems with the plate.  The Judge found that there was no evidence of
    the reoccurrence of the  tumour  and  that  the  Appellant  was  simply
    waiting reconstruction of  her  skull  vault  which  surgery  had  been
    described as being 'a challenge'.  The  Judge  took  account  that  the
    Appellant had been given appointment for surgery in December 2018,  but
    the judge found that there will not be very  significant  obstacles  to
    her reintegration back  into  life  in  Nigeria  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 6. The Judge found that the Appellant had  not  been  truthful  about  her
    circumstances and did not accept that she had been in the UK since  the
    year 2000 as claimed.  On the evidence before her she  found  that  the
    Appellant had actually spent the majority of her life in Nigeria.   The
    Judge found that although there was family life between  the  Appellant
    and her mother the interference with that  was  proportionate  and  the
    mother had indefinite leave to remain and can access support  from  her
    daughter in Manchester or social services, and also had the  option  of
    moving to Nigeria with the Appellant and her son.

 7. In respect of the son the Judge found at paragraph 21 that he was  only
    8 years old and had a Nigerian passport and had only started school  in
    2006.  She stated he was in good health and was not at a crucial  stage
    in his education.  His best interests were to be with  his  mother  and
    she found that it was reasonable to expect him to leave the UK with his
    mother.  She did not accept that the Appellant did not have  family  in
    Nigeria to whom she could return.  The Judge  found  that  the  removal
    decision was proportionate under Article 8 and further that there  were
    no compelling or exceptional circumstances,  resulting  in  justifiably
    harsh  consequences,  to  mean  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed,
    following the case of R (on the application of Agyarko) v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 11.

 8. The Appellant seeks to appeal against the  judgment  on  four  grounds,
    which as accepted by  Ms  Nnamani  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  are
    actually interlinked to some degree.  The first ground is  that  it  is
    argued that  the  Judge  failed  to  properly  assess  the  Appellant's
    credibility and it said that the Judge made flawed findings in  respect
    of credibility and provided unsustainable  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's account.  It said the Appellant had explained why  she  had
    struggled to submit evidence confirming her length of  residence  since
    2000 and that the judge failed to assess the supporting material, which
    was  before  her  and  gave  inadequate  reasons  for   rejecting   the
    Appellant's account on the basis of her credibility.

 9. In the second ground it is argued that the judge failed  to  adequately
    consider the Appellant's son's best interests and failed  to  undertake
    an evaluative assessment of the child's  best  interests  and  did  not
    justify or substantiate the conclusion that it was reasonable  for  the
    child to leave the UK. It is argued that the Judge failed to take  into
    account that 'seven years' has been identified as a crucial  length  of
    residence for the child both under the Immigration Rules  and  for  the
    purposes of Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2012.

10. In the third ground  it  said  that  the  Judge  failed  to  adequately
    consider the Appellant's mother's circumstances  having  accepted  that
    family life existed between the Appellant and her mother and  that  the
    Judge's analysis was flawed, taking into account  the  absence  of  any
    involvement or care currently being provided by the Appellant's  sister
    and the insufficiency of care available from social  services.   It  is
    argued that the finding that the mother could move to Nigeria with  the
    Appellant and her son, failed to  take  into  account  the  significant
    health concerns and the infringement of the mother's human rights.

11. In the  fourth  ground  it  is  argued  that  the  Appellant's  medical
    condition was such that it is argued that she could not be expected  to
    return to Nigeria and that the Judge has inadequately  reasoned  as  to
    why there will not be very significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    reintegration in Nigeria since her departure in 2000.

12. I am grateful to the helpful submissions of both Ms Nnamani, Counsel on
    behalf of the Appellant and Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer on behalf of the Secretary of State.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

13. In respect of the first Ground of Appeal in which it is argued that the
    Judge failed to take proper account of the  explanation  given  by  the
    Appellant as to why she struggled to  submit  evidence  confirming  her
    length of residence since 2000, in my judgment when one  considers  the
    findings made by the learned First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  respect  of
    that issue, the Judge did not simply take  into  account  the  lack  of
    corroborative documentary evidence.  The  Judge  also  found  that  the
    Appellant was  not  a  credible  witness,  who  appeared  reluctant  to
    volunteer details of  the  circumstances  under  cross-examination  and
    found that there were discrepancies and contradictions in her evidence.
    The Judge did not accept and found wholly implausible  the  explanation
    that the  Appellant  had  simply  entrusted  her  schooling  and  other
    documents to her mother who had lost them  over  time  because  of  her
    mother's condition and the judge found that basically  those  documents
    could have been obtained again if various bodies  had  been  approached
    and asked for confirmation of her attendance  and  what  those  records
    showed.  In respect of that ground I  find  that  the  judge  did  make
    findings which were open  to  her  on  the  evidence.   The  judge  was
    entitled to take account of the discrepancies and contradictions in the
    Appellant's evidence and the lack of documentary evidence but  she  has
    also  considered  the  explanation  given  but  did  not   accept   the
    explanation given that she had actually  simply  left  the  documentary
    evidence to show that she had lived in  the  UK  since  2000  with  her
    mother.  That was a finding open to her.

14. In respect of the second and third Grounds of Appeal in fact both  make
    reference to the failure of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to adequately
    deal with Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended, both in respect family life with the child and also in
    respect of the family life with the Appellant's mother.

15. Under Section 117A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    Part 5A applies where a Court or  Tribunal  is  required  to  determine
    whether a decision would amount to a breach  of  a  person's  right  to
    family or private life under  Article  8  and  as  a  result  would  be
    unlawful for the purposes of Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. In
    considering the public interest  question  under  Section  117A(2)  the
    Court or Tribunal must have  regard  in  all  cases  to  considerations
    listed in Section 117B. That is  a  mandatory  requirement  it  is  not
    optional and although in that regard Ms Isherwood is quite  correct  in
    saying that in the case of Dube (ss117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90, the Upper
    Tribunal made it clear that  substance  rather  than  form  has  to  be
    considered, such that even  if  there  is  not  specific  reference  to
    Section 117 if the relevant considerations have been taken into account
    that is sufficient.  But in this case what we have in this decision  is
    not only a failure to actually make reference to Section 117A-D, and in
    particular  117B,  but  no  proper  analysis  of   the   considerations
    applicable in all cases under Section 117B.

16. Although the Judge makes reference to the fact that the Appellant is in
    receipt of child benefit, child tax credits and  working  tax  credits,
    she has not  actually  specifically  dealt  with  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant is financially independent.  There is no consideration as  to
    whether or not the Appellant can speak  English  for  the  purposes  of
    Section 117B(2) and no  reference  to  the  consideration  that  little
    weight should be given to any private life or relationship formed at  a
    time when the person was in the UK unlawfully and  that  little  weight
    should be given to private life established by a person at a time  when
    the person's  immigration  status  is  precarious.  Particularly,  when
    considering the Appellant's child there  is  no  consideration  Section
    117B(6) which states that,

         "In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where:

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             UK."

17. Section 117D makes it clear that a  qualifying  child  either  means  a
    British citizen or a person who is under the age 18 who  has  lived  in
    the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more.   In
    this case the Appellant's son by the date of the hearing had  lived  in
    the UK continuously for eight years and therefore  would  have  been  a
    qualifying child. That is not sought to be challenged by  Ms  Isherwood
    before me today.  There is no reference to s.117B(6) or to the criteria
    set out therein. All there is at paragraph 21 is a simple one  sentence
    finding by the Judge that she found it reasonable to expect  the  child
    to leave the UK with his mother, having found that he was only 8  years
    old and he had a Nigerian passport and he started school in  2016,  was
    of good health and not at a crucial stage of his education and that his
    best  interests  were  to  be  with  his  mother.   But  there  is   no
    consideration of the fact that after a child has been  here  for  seven
    years as stated by Lord Justice Elias in the case MA (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 at paragraph 46 that:

         "The child will have put down roots and developed social,  cultural
         and educational links in the UK such that it is likely to be highly
         disruptive for the child to be required to leave.  That may be less
         so when the child is very young because the focus of their lives is
         likely to be on their families, but  the  disruption  becomes  more
         serious as they get older."

18. In this case the Judge has simply relied upon the fact that the son  is
    only 8 years old she does not seem to have  noticed  that  there  is  a
    difference between children who have lived her for  under  seven  years
    and those who have lived here for more than seven years.  Although  she
    says he had only started school in 2016 clearly  by  the  date  of  the
    hearing he had been in school for two years, as  the  decision  was  in
    November 2018.  The Judge then went on to find that the child  was  not
    at a crucial stage of his education.  As Ms Isherwood said the  crucial
    stage of any education is often something like GCSEs or  A  levels.   A
    crucial stage of his education would be when he  has  actually  reached
    the age of 15 or 17.  That wholly misses the consideration of the  fact
    that children who have been here for more than seven  years  are  in  a
    separate category.  Then consideration has to be given as to whether it
    is reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom obviously
    taking account of their social, cultural and educational ties  and  the
    like at that stage.

19. I find that this is not simply an error of substance  over  form.   The
    judge has not properly considered Section 117B(6)  in  respect  of  the
    child and has  not  adequately  considered  what  ties  the  child  had
    developed.

20. It is argued by Ms Isherwood that effectively any error in  that  point
    in that regard is not material.  In that regard she relies upon  little
    evidence regarding the son's position in  the  UK  or  his  life  here.
    However, in terms of materiality obviously at this stage we  had  an  8
    year old child who had been in education for two years.  I am not in  a
    position to say that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    would necessarily have been the same had she properly  looked  at  this
    case through the lens of Section 117B(6) and the case law  both  of  MA
    (Pakistan) and KO (Nigeria).  Neither case was actually considered  and
    in my judgment therefore  the  failure  to  properly  consider  section
    117B(6) does amount to a material error of law in this case.

21. Also when considering the Appellant's family life with her mother,  the
    judge has also not made reference to Section 117B or taken  account  of
    the relevant considerations.  I  am  less  persuaded  that  that  error
    therein in terms of Ground 3 is material.  There seem to be none of the
    factors in Section 117B which  actually  accounts  in  the  Appellant's
    favour in that regard given the judge's consideration  of  family  life
    with the  mother.   Although  it  is  said  there  was  an  absence  of
    involvement of care from the Appellant's sister and  insufficient  care
    from social services does not  mean that it would necessarily be  wrong
    to expect the sister, given her  own  circumstances,  to  help  in  the
    future.  The judge did not accept what was being said of  the  evidence
    regarding the sister having been granted leave on the basis of her  own
    relationship, on the basis that that was unsubstantiated.  The problems
    in terms of her helping out were unsubstantiated. The mother  had  been
    assessed for care to be provided  by  social  services.   There  is  no
    evidence to support the assertion that such care would  be  inadequate.



22. Finally, in respect of the fourth Ground of Appeal the judge again  has
    considered the extent of the Appellant's medical problems and the  fact
    of the surgery for the tumour but found that there is  no  evidence  of
    recurrence of the tumour and found that she was waiting  reconstruction
    of the skull vault and had an appointment for surgery in December 2018.
    The judge then did go on to consider the  extent  to  which  she  could
    reintegrate back into life in Nigeria for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    276ADE.  Although it is argued by Ms Nnamani that there is no  evidence
    of the judge having considered the Appellant's medical evidence in that
    regard or her state of health, the Judge has given clear, adequate  and
    sufficient reasons as to why the Appellant would be able to reintegrate
    back into  Nigerian  society  and  did  take  account  of  her  medical
    condition  and  that  appointment  for  surgery  in  December  was  for
    reconstruction of the skull vault rather than due to  a  recurrence  of
    the tumour.  ***

23. However for reasons set out above I do find that the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies does contain a material error  in
    terms of her failure  to  properly  consider  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

24. Having discussed the issue with both legal representatives,  they  have
    both agreed that as this is a human rights appeal  such  that  any  re-
    hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  have  to  consider  the
    situation on human rights grounds based at the date of  the  rehearing,
    that there should be no preserved findings of fact.

25. I therefore do set aside the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Roopnarine-Davies in its entirety and order that the case  be  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for a           re-hearing  before  any
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Roopnarine-Davies.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies does  contain  a
material error of law and is set aside.

No anonymity direction is made.  No such direction  was  sought  before  the
First-tier Tribunal and no such direction was sought before me.

Signed                                  Date 7th March 2019

DUTJ McGinty

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
