
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07647/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 December 2016                  |On 17 January 2017                   |
|Prepared 22 December 2016            |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    h i i
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Subbarafan, Counsel instructed by Sivaramen
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  Appellant,  a  national  of   Nigeria,   appealed   against   the
    Respondent's decision, dated 24 September  2015,  to  refuse  leave  to
    remain pursuant to an application made on 31 July 2015.

2.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Watson  (the  judge)
    who, on 29 June 2016, dismissed the appeal of  the  Appellant  made  on
    human rights grounds.  Permission to appeal that decision (D) was given
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on 4 November 2016.

3.   The grounds on which permission were granted were essentially that  the
    Judge had not sufficiently or arguably sufficiently dealt with the best
    interests of the young child M and had failed to in  the  round  assess
    the best interests of the two children J and M.

4.   So far as the issue of the Judge failing to give  "due  weight  to  the
    social services reports" the position  is  that  I  was  taken  to  the
    relevant social work assessment that was  carried  out  as  part  of  a
    review of what  seemed  to  be  care  type  proceedings.  Also,  I  was
    addressed  about  a  letter  from  a  social  worker,  Sally  Attfield,
    concerning the two children (J and M).  It is clear from that  material
    that the Appellant plays a significant role in the care and development
    of the J and M. When the matter  came before  the  Judge  he  concluded
    with reference to those materials (D 10) that the consideration of  the
    facts was at the date of the hearing in that respect he was correct and
    he correctly expressed the account and importance of the  consideration
    of the children's interests having regard to, and applying  Section  55
    of the BCIA 2009.   The  criticism  is  essentially  that  he  did  not
    expressly set out his finding on their best interests.  In this respect
    there is nothing to gainsay the contents of the decision itself and  to
    this extent the exercise the Judge  carried  out,  in  considering  the
    welfare of the children, the  significance  of  those  matters  in  the
    direct consideration of Article 8 ECHR as claimed.

5.   It seemed to me that the  Judge  (D  23)  had  correctly  set  out  the
    evidence coming forward from Social Services about the children and  as
    such had given it the weight that he thought it merited in the  overall
    assessment of the evidence as a whole.  I do not  conclude  that  there
    was a material error  of  law  in  the  assessment  of  that  evidence:
    Although the grounds make a generality of the point it seems to me that
    the Judge had done enough.  It is trite law that it is not  appropriate
    for this Tribunal to substitute its own views for that of the Judge who
    has heard the evidence, heard the witnesses and has made an  assessment
    of them unless demonstrably wrong or there is  a  failure  to  properly
    deal with the evidence raised.  In this case the Respondent cited to me
    the case of Muse and Others [2012] EWCA Civ 10  particularly that there
    should be sufficient and adequate reasons given to properly address the
    matters raised : A point which applies as  much  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as to an Appellant generally.

6.   I have carefully considered the analysis that the  Judge  gave  to  the
    children's wellbeing and to the consideration that the Judge  gives  in
    the overall assessment of proportionality.  I conclude  that  whilst  I
    might not have written the decision in the same way, the  substance  of
    the material advanced was addressed and the Judge was entitled to  take
    the view that he did and the reasons whilst may not be  as  fulsome  as
    one  would  wish  and  hope  for,  do  not  indicate  an   absence   of
    consideration of the evidence or that a different Tribunal  considering
    the same evidence would in all likelihood  give  rise  to  a  different
    decision.  For those reasons therefore I am satisfied that there is  no
    error of law by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Original  Tribunal's
    decision stands.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal against the Original Tribunal's decision is dismissed.

ANONYMITY

An anonymity order is required given the involvement of the two  children  J
and M.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   Date 10 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   Date 10January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

