
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/07409/2018
                                                               HU/08423/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Cardiff CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2019                               |On 21 March 2019              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  Sarel [M]
                                  Maria [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Da Silva, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are nationals of South Africa  born  in  1935  and  1934
    respectively.  They are husband and wife.  They arrived in the UK on 17
    October 2016 with entry clearance as  visitors  valid  until  15  April
    2017.  On 20 April 2017 they applied for leave to remain  "outside  the
    Rules because of compelling compassionate circumstances"  stating  that
    both are elderly persons with  chronic  illnesses  who  would  have  no
    family care and support available to them in  South  Africa  and  their
    rental property, having been demolished, would no longer  be  available
    to them.  It was requested that regard be  had  to  their  relationship
    with the first appellant's daughter and son-in-law, with whom they have
    a strong and close relationship.

2.   In a decision made on  14  March  2018  the  respondent  refused  their
    claim.  They appealed.  In a decision sent on 20 September  2018  Judge
    Solly of the First-tier Tribunal (FTT) dismissed their appeals.

3.   The grounds of appeal were twofold.  The first alleged that  the  judge
    had erred by failing to perform a proper assessment of the family  life
    rights  of  the  appellants,  confining  her  assessment  to  the  care
    situation in South Africa and the appellants'  immigration  status  and
    failing to weigh in the balance  the  couple's  relationship  with  the
    daughter and son-in-law and the grandson and great-grandson.   As  part
    of the grounds it was argued that the judge  acted  in  a  procedurally
    unfair manner by virtue of making a finding that the couple's ties with
    family members in the UK did not  constitute  family  life  within  the
    meaning of Article 8(1) ECHR, even though it had  been  agreed  between
    the parties that the only issue was proportionality.  It was noted that
    the judge did not invite submissions on the Razgar questions 1 and 2.

4.   The appellants' second ground contended that the judge erred by
    failing to take into account the best interests of the child, namely
    the great-grandchild, L, and whether his emotional needs were being
    met.

5.   I had helpful submissions from Da Silva and Mr Howells.

6.   It will assist to set  out  at  this  stage  what  the  judge  said  at
    paragraphs 38 - 39.

         "38. I have not however looked at this appeal simply on  the  basis
             of the issues of care.  I accept that  being  in  the  UK  has
             enabled the appellants to develop a closer  relationship  with
             their great grandson and grandson as well  as  the  Huxtables.
             They  are  presumably  also  near  the  other  family  members
             referred to in the visa application.


         39.  Nevertheless, in S v UK [1984] 40 DR 196  Sedley  LJ  made  it
             clear that 'Neither blood ties nor the concern  and  affection
             that ordinarily go with them are, by themselves altogether, in
             my judgment enough to constitute family life.  Most of us have
             close relations of whom we are  extremely  fond  and  whom  we
             visit, or who visit us, from time to  time;  but  none  of  us
             would say on those grounds alone that we have  a  family  life
             with them in any sense capable of coming  within  the  meaning
             and purpose of Article 8'.  In Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170
             the CA said that, in order to establish  family  life,  it  is
             necessary to show that here is a real committed  or  effective
             support or relationship between the  family  members  and  the
             normal emotional ties between a mother and an adult son  would
             not, without more, be enough."

7.   Having set out these paragraphs it is convenient to deal first  of  all
    with the allegation of procedural unfairness.  It is also pertinent  to
    set out what the judge set out at paragraphs 29 and paragraphs  35  and
    38:

         "29. The first three steps of Razgar are satisfied in this case and
             I therefore turn to the last two  and  in  particular  to  the
             issue of proportionality.  I bear in mind that the  appellants
             do  not  satisfy  the  immigration   rules.    The   statutory
             presumption is that the maintenance of  effective  immigration
             controls is in the public  interest.   This  is  an  issue  of
             weight  to  be  applied  in  against  them  in  the  issue  of
             proportionality.


         ...


         35.  What is put to me is that they are an elderly  couple  with  a
             number of chronic illnesses reliant on the care and support of
             their family members in the UK.  It is said that  such  family
             members support would  not  be  available  to  them  in  South
             Africa.  I have looked at this carefully in the light  of  all
             of the evidence before me.  There is no medical evidence  that
             the 1st appellant requires care from others and I find he does
             not.  The 2nd appellant does require care and/or  supervision.
             Mr Huxtable said that he would sell the UK house and  move  to
             South Africa to care for the appellants and if he did so, care
             and accommodation would be available.   I  bear  in  mind  the
             recent news that the South African daughter is shortly to lose
             her job which may mean that she will be at home and  available
             to provide some  caring  responsibilities  however  the  other
             option is to purchase care. In this respect the appellants are
             in no different position now to what they would have  been  in
             had they remained in  South  Africa.   I  accept  that  family
             provided care will  be  less  expensive  than  purchased  care
             however it is clear from the evidence that purchased  care  is
             certainly available in South Africa from the evidence produced
             by the appellant.  I find that a  combination  of  family  and
             purchased care is available in South Africa.


         ...


         38.  I have not however looked at this appeal simply on  the  basis
             of the issue of care.  I accept  that  being  in  the  UK  has
             enabled the appellants to develop a closer  relationship  with
             their great grandson and grandson as well  as  the  Huxtables.
             They  are  presumably  also  near  the  other  family  members
             referred to in the visa application."

8.   I am not persuaded that  there  is  an  inconsistency  in  the  judge's
    treatment of the issue of family life.  The grounds are  wrong  to  say
    that the judge went "back on  herself"  in  addressing  the  issues  of
    family life (and seemingly not accepting family life) when the  parties
    had agreed at the hearing that the only issue was proportionality.

9.   The fact that the judge stated at paragraph 29  that  the  "(the  first
    three steps of Razgar are satisfied in this case" was strictly  correct
    because, whilst seemingly not accepting that the appellants had  family
    life ties with their relatives in the UK,  she  clearly  accepted  that
    their right to respect to private life was engaged by the circumstances
    of the case.  The respondent's decision letter had also taken a similar
    view as to the basis in which Article 8 (1) was engaged, namely private
    life.

10.  Mr Howells stated that the HOPO's note contains  no  reference  to  any
    agreement.  However, even assuming the agreement between the parties at
    the hearing was that the proportionality assessment encompassed  family
    as well as private life, I do not consider that  the  judge  fell  into
    material error.  First of all, the appellants were clearly able at  the
    hearing to give evidence regarding the strength of their family ties in
    the UK (the first appellant and the son-in-law gave evidence) and their
    representative clearly made submissions highlighting  the  strength  of
    these ties; see e.g. paragraph 35.

11.  Secondly even though seemingly not prepared to treat  their  ties  with
    family in the UK as family life ties  within  the  meaning  of  Article
    8(1), the judge clearly did consider these ties as  relevant  to  their
    private life circumstances. (I accept that  paragraph  39  is  unclear,
    although the fact that it begins with the word "Nevertheless" does tend
    to suggest the judge was rejecting family life).  At paragraph  38  she
    expressly stated that she was not confining the appeal "simply [to] the
    case of care" and acknowledged that "being in the UK  had  enabled  the
    appellants to develop a closer relationship with  their  great-grandson
    and grandson as well as the Huxtables".  At paragraph 41  she  referred
    to "a family life and  private  life  established  during  such  time".
    Clearly when deciding what weight to accord to such ties the judge  was
    obliged by S117B(5) of the  NIAA  2002  so  far  as  private  life  was
    concerned  to  attach  "little  weight"  because  of  their  precarious
    immigration status, but such an assessment was  also  open  to  her  in
    respect of these ties even if considered in terms of family  life:  see
    Rajaedran [2016] UKUT138 (IAC).

12.  Thirdly, the grounds fail to make my challenge to the judge's  findings
    at paragraph 39 that the appellant's ties did not constitute family lie
    ties and at best imply a disagreement with those findings.

13.  Reverting to the principal basis  of  challenge  raised  in  the  first
    ground, I disagree with its contention that the  judge  unduly  limited
    her proportionality assessment to the issues of care and precariousness
    of immigration status. As noted  already  at  paragraph  38,  she  also
    considered the appellants' relationship with  the  great-grandson,  the
    grandson and the Huxtables.  Alongside a  holistic  assessment  of  the
    appellants' circumstances in the UK was a very detailed  assessment  of
    the couple's circumstances in South Africa, concluding at paragraph  35
    that

         "35. What is put to me is that they are an elderly  couple  with  a
             number of chronic illnesses reliant on the care and support of
             their family members in the UK.  It is said that  such  family
             members support would  not  be  available  to  them  in  South
             Africa.  I have looked at this carefully in the light  of  all
             of the evidence before me.  There is no medical evidence  that
             the 1st appellant requires care from others and I find he does
             not.  The 2nd appellant does require care and/or  supervision.
             Mr Huxtable said that he would sell the UK house and  move  to
             South Africa to care for the appellants and if he did so, care
             and accommodation would be available.   I  bear  in  mind  the
             recent news that the South African daughter is shortly to lose
             her job which may mean that she will be at home and  available
             to provide some  caring  responsibilities  however  the  other
             option is to purchase care. In this respect the appellants  re
             in no different position now to what they would have  been  in
             had they remained in  South  Africa.   I  accept  that  family
             provided care will  be  less  expensive  than  purchased  care
             however it is clear from the evidence that purchased  care  is
             certainly available in South Africa from the evidence produced
             by the appellant.  I find that a  combination  of  family  and
             purchased care is available in South Africa."

14.  I would add that  the  grounds  nowhere  raise  any  challenge  to  the
    findings regarding the couple's care needs and how they would be met.

15.  As regards the appellants' second ground, it is  true  that  the  judge
    did not conduct a best interest of the child assessment of  the  child.
    However, the appellants' ties with L had not even been  raised  in  the
    appellants' application for leave made  in  April  2017  and  were  not
    raised specifically in the grounds of  appeal.   It  appears  that  the
    appellants' representatives barely touched on this question.   Further,
    there was no evidence produced whatsoever to suggest  that  L  was  not
    receiving  full  parental  care  from  his  father  and  mother.    The
    appellants had not been admitted to the UK as adult dependent relatives
    and came purely as visitors.   On  the  judge's  finding  they  had  no
    legitimate expectation that they could remain in order  to  deepen,  in
    contravention of immigration law, ties with  their  great-grandson.   I
    reject this ground unhesitatingly.

16.  For the above reasons I conclude  that  the  judge's  decision  is  not
    vitiated by material error of leave and accordingly it must stand.

17.  Having read the file I would observe that I do not see this as  a  case
    in which the fact that the appellants have attempted to stay by way  of
    a human rights appeal should count against them, if in future they  are
    able to show they meet the dependent relatives rule in the  context  of
    an application for entry clearance. But clearly they are  not  able  to
    meet that rule's requirements presently.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 14 March 2019

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

