
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07325/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th February 2019                |On 12th March 2019                   |
|Typed, corrected, signed and         |                                     |
|Sent to Promulgation on 6th March    |                                     |
|2019                                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                               Kimesha Mccleod
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Ojo, Legal Representative, Law Eagles
For the Respondent:    Mr N McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a national of Jamaica born on 23rd  January  1995  and
    she applied for indefinite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    14th March 2017.  That application was refused by the respondent on 7th
    March 2018.

2.   It is asserted by the respondent  that  the  appellant's  circumstances
    had changed since two previous issues of discretionary leave  had  been
    granted to her, first on 26th January 2011  and  later  on  12th  March
    2014, namely the fact that she was no longer in a relationship  with  a
    British citizen and instead was in a relationship with another Jamaican
    citizen who had no status in the United Kingdom. The appellant appealed
    to the First Tier Tribunal.

3.   The appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clarke  at  Taylor
    House.  Unfortunately, nowhere in the judge's decision does he identify
    what standard of proof he relied upon.  The grounds of  challenge  were
    unnecessarily  lengthy,  the  obvious  error  appears  to   have   been
    identified by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies, who granted  leave
    to appeal on 19th December 2018.

4.   Mr McGirr suggested  that  there  was  no  error  of  law  because  the
    findings of fact speak for themselves, but of course  without  a  clear
    indication of the standard of  proof  the  judge  has  applied  to  the
    determination, one cannot ascertain whether he  was  entitled  to  make
    those findings.   The other difficulty is that the First Tier  Tribunal
    Judge has not set out anywhere in the determination what  the  evidence
    was that he heard.

Notice of Decision

5.   I find that the determination cannot stand and the matter will have  to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in order that clear, logical and
    properly reasoned detailed findings can be made on the evidence.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




