
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07816/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th August, 2016                 |On 30th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Hajrah Bibi
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Marcus of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal the appellant is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to avoid confusion I shall refer to her as  being,  "the
    claimant".  The respondent is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  on  28th
    September, 1971 and who on 10th  September,  2013  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on a multiple entry visit visa valid for 24  months  from  22nd
    July, 2013 to 22nd July, 2015.

2.   On 25th October, 2015, the respondent applied for leave to remain as  a
    partner (ten year route), but was refused on eligibility grounds.   The
    appeal was heard on 18th March,  2014  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer  ("the  first  judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 20th March, 2014.  The respondent's appeal  rights  then
    became exhausted.

3.   The respondent made a further application  on  30th  July,  2015,  this
    time on the basis  of  her  family  and  private  life  rights  and  on
    compassionate grounds under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  for
    the Protection of Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms.   On  28th
    September,  2015,  the  claimant  made  a  decision   to   refuse   the
    respondent's human rights claim and to refuse her leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  The claimant provided  detailed  reasons  for  the
    decision in a letter dated 28th September, 2015 ("the refusal letter").

4.   The claimant was satisfied that  the  respondent  had  not  shown  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles as to  why  his  family  could  not
    continue family life in Pakistan.  The claimant was not satisfied  that
    EX.1 applied and  concluded  that  the  respondent  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of R-LTRP.1.1(d).  The respondent appealed and her  appeal
    was heard at Bradford on 17th December,  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Buster Cox.  The judge noted that the appellant had married  some
    25 years earlier and had four children.  The youngest child, Umar Khan,
    was born on 3rd May, 2002.  He was found to have two holes in his heart
    following his birth and his early life was blighted with poor health.

5.   The respondent and her family lived in Pakistan until coming to the  UK
    in  September,  2013.   They  had  lived,  it  was  claimed,  with  the
    respondent's in-laws until  a  year  before  coming  to  the  UK.   The
    respondent's husband's parents had been helping to support the  family,
    but forced them to leave the home because  of  her  husband's  gambling
    which had also led to the respondent's husband "falling out"  with  his
    relatives.  The respondent and her family went to stay  with  a  friend
    but the  friend  was  unable  to  provide  long-term  support  and  the
    respondent's husband found it difficult to find work.

6.   The respondent and her family decided to come to the UK and arrived  in
    September, 2013.  Since then the  respondent's  husband  has  had  some
    work.

7.   In March, 2014 Umar underwent a heart operation which  was  successful.
    The respondent maintained that she had nowhere to live in Pakistan  and
    no family to support her.  She maintained that she was  Umar's  primary
    carer and that he is wholly dependent upon her.

8.   The judge noted that the claimant  accepted  that  Umar  is  a  British
    citizen  and  that  the  respondent  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with him.  The representatives agreed with the judge  that
    the sole issue for him to determine was whether  or  not  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect Umar to leave the UK.  The judge  noted  that  the
    respondent's original appeal  was  dismissed  in  March,  2014  and  he
    applied Devaseelan* [2013] UKIAT  702  and  concluded  that  the  first
    judge's determination was the starting point for his determination.

9.   Judge Cox heard oral evidence from the respondent's  husband  and  from
    the respondent.  He found that the respondent had  still  not  provided
    cogent or satisfactory evidence of her circumstances  in  Pakistan  and
    that he had no reason to go behind the  first  judge's  findings.   For
    reasons given by the first judge, Judge Cox was not satisfied that  the
    respondent's circumstances in Pakistan were as they had been claimed to
    be.

10.  Judge Cox noted what  the  first  judge  said  about  the  respondent's
    children.  He noted a report from  an  independent  social  worker  and
    considered  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;
    onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC).  The judge agreed with the first
    judge that Umar's best interests are that he remains with his  parents,
    but that does not necessarily mean that this should be  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He noted the contents of Umar's  witness  statement  and  the
    evidence of Ann Buckley and noted that the  appellant's  children  were
    British.  At paragraph 45 the judge noted that the representatives  had
    agreed that although the respondent is not seeking to  compel  Umar  to
    leave the United Kingdom, it is for the judge to determine  whether  in
    reality he would be compelled to leave the EU and  return  to  Pakistan
    with the appellant  if  she  returned.   He  reminded  himself  of  the
    claimant's current policy guidance:-

         "'Appendix FM Section 1.0 Family Life (as a Partner or Parent)  and
         Private Life: 10-Year Routes' (August  2015)  expressly  recognises
         that, 'where a decision to refuse the application would  require  a
         parent or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU,  the
         case must always  be  assessed  on  the  basis  that  it  would  be
         unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with
         that parent or primary carer' (paragraph 11.2.3)."

11.  The judge acknowledged that the appeal was difficult to  determine  and
    noted that the first judge had found  that  the  respondent  had  shown
    blatant disregard for UK immigration law.  In the  view  of  Judge  Cox
    this weighed heavily against her and  he  attached  no  weight  to  her
    evidence.  However, at paragraph 49 of his determination he said this:-

         "Nevertheless, on balance I am satisfied that although Umar is  not
         being compelled to leave the UK, if the appellant  is  required  to
         leave the UK, then he will leave with her.  I have had the  benefit
         of Umar's written evidence and evidence from an independent  social
         worker.  Although I have reservations about  some  aspects  of  Ann
         Buckley's report, i.e. where she  has  commented  on  the  family's
         circumstances in Pakistan, I am  satisfied  that  I  should  attach
         weight to her assessment of the appellant's relationship with Umar.
          I do not doubt that as Umar's early years would have been blighted
         with poor health, the [respondent], as his mother, would have taken
         a special interest in him and inevitably they would have  developed
         a very close relationship."

    The judge found no reason to  question  Umar's  evidence  and  attached
    weight to his wishes.  On the totality of the evidence  he  found  that
    the respondent is Umar's primary  carer  and  was  satisfied  that  the
    respondent's removal would be contrary to Umar's genuine  enjoyment  of
    the subsistence of the  rights  attached  to  his  status  of  European
    citizen.  He found it would not be reasonable to expect Umar  to  leave
    the UK and was satisfied that the appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    EX.1(b).  Accordingly he found that the respondent met the requirements
    of R-LTRP1.1 and that the claimant's decision  was  not  in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules and law.  He allowed the appeal.


12.  Dissatisfied with the judge's decision,  the  claimant  challenged  the
    decision asserting that it showed that the  judge  had  erred.   Having
    found that Umar is not being compelled to leave the United Kingdom, the
    judge found at paragraph 51 that  the  respondent's  removal  would  be
    contrary to Umar's genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of  the  rights
    attached to his status as an EU citizen.  He then found that  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect Umar to leave the  UK.   It  was  suggested
    that these were contradictory findings and that the judge had conflated
    the reasonableness test and the compelled test under EU law.

13.  For the claimant, Mr Diwncyz told me that other than  the  grounds,  he
    had no papers because the Home Office file  had  been  destroyed  in  a
    flood suffered by the Home Office.

14.  For the respondent Mr Marcus suggested  that  the  judge  had  properly
    identified the issues and recorded the fact  that  the  representatives
    had agreed with the judge that the sole  issue  for  him  to  determine
    would be whether or not it would be reasonable to expect Umar to  leave
    the UK and the judge has not made any conflicting finding.

15   At paragraph 49 of the determination,  Judge  Cox  was  satisfied  that
    although Umar is not compelled to leave the UK, he would leave with the
    respondent if the respondent were required to leave and that the two of
    them had developed a very close relationship.  He found,  at  paragraph
    51 that the respondent was Umar's primary carer and as such Home Office
    policy requires that the case must be assessed on  the  basis  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect a British child to leave the EU with  a
    parent or primary carer; the claimant's decision was  contrary  to  her
    own policy.

16.  Mr Diwncyz, responding on behalf of the claimant, apologised again  for
    having little evidence before him.  He pointed out that it had not been
    accepted by the claimant that the respondent was the primary carer.   I
    reserved my determination.

17.  I do not believe that in making his decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Buster Cox has erred in law.

18.  It seems to me to be quite clear from the determination  that  he  very
    carefully considered all the evidence placed before  him.   He  clearly
    found it distasteful that the respondent had  shown  blatant  disregard
    for UK immigration laws, but on the evidence found that  she  and  Umar
    had developed a very close relationship and was Umar's primary carer.

19.  The judge made findings which were clearly open to him to make  on  the
    evidence before him.  He was clearly aware  that  Umar  was  a  British
    citizen and that were the respondent to leave the United Kingdom,  Umar
    would leave with the respondent, because she is his primary  carer  and
    they have such a close relationship.  I do not accept  that  the  judge
    has conflated the reasonable test considered by the first judge and the
    compelled test under EU law as set out  in  paragraphs  76  and  77  of
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v AQ (Nigeria) & Ors  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 250.  The judge was clearly aware of Home  Office  policy  and
    the fact that it had not been applied in this case.

20.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Buster Cox did not make any error of law  and
    his decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Cox shall stand.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
Date: 30th August 2016
