
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07773/2018
                                                               HU/07775/2018
                                                               HU/07778/2018
                                                               HU/07779/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2018                           |On 2 January 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     ba
                                     aa
                                     da
                                     dja
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Atuelbe
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  They are a wife,  husband  and
    two of three children.  By decisions dated 15 March 2018 the appellants
    were refused further leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis
    of their family life.  They appealed on human rights grounds (Article 8
    ECHR) to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis) which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 July 2018, dismissed the appeal.  The appellants  now
    appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside.  Both parties agree that  the  judge  failed  to  make  a  clear
    finding with regards to the best interests of the minor appellants  who
    are "qualifying  children"  for  the  purposes  of  the  2002  Act  (as
    amended); the two minor appellants have been  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than 7 years.  Further, Mr Tan, who appeared  for  the
    Secretary of State, acknowledged that the operation of the respondent's
    own relevant policy and the  absence  of  "strong  reasons"  to  refuse
    further leave to remain to  the  minor  appellants  rendered  continued
    opposition to the appeal against the immigration decision pointless.

 3. The remaining ground (concerning the judge's alleged failure to  either
    consider  or  grant  an  adjournment   of   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    proceedings) was not pursued before the Upper Tribunal.  There  appears
    to be some dispute as to whether an application for an adjournment  was
    actually made to the judge.  I make no finding on that issue  as  there
    is no need for me to do so.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  11
    July 2018 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.   I
    have  re-made  the  decision.   The  appellants'  appeals  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 15 March 2018  is  allowed  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

 5. An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 30 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
