
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07731/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 14 February 2019                |On 20 February 2019                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                         SAMUEL OLUWASEUN OLAYIWOLA
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mrs H Gore (counsel) instructed by the appellant
For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Lucas promulgated on 26 November 2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 11 November 1994 and is a national of  Nigeria.
On  10  February  2018  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Lucas ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  27  December  2018  Judge
Hollingworth gave permission to appeal stating

      It is arguable that an insufficient analysis has been set out  of  the
      application of the criteria pursuant to section 117.  It  is  arguable
      that insufficient weight has been attached by the Judge to the age  of
      the appellant when the appellant was brought to the United Kingdom  or
      arrived in the United Kingdom. It is arguable that a full analysis was
      required in relation to the question of the engagement of  article  8,
      the extent to which the immigration rules are not met if that  was  so
      and the totality of the factors falling for consideration in  relation
      to the proportionality exercise.

The Hearing

5.  For the appellant, Mrs Gore moved the grounds of  appeal.  She  referred
me  to  the  appellant's  witness  statement  and  reminded  me   that   the
appellant's father died  when  the  appellant  was  a  child  and  that  the
appellant has no network of family support to return to in the Nigeria.  She
emphasised that the appellant has no  home,  no  family,  no  friends  &  no
employment in Nigeria. She told me that  the  Judge  did  not  make  express
findings on any of those important factors  in  the  appellant's  case.  She
told me that the Judge has not properly  considered  the  difficulties  that
the appellant would face on return to Nigeria. She urged  me  to  allow  the
appeal and set the decision aside.

6. (a) For the respondent, Mr Wilding relied on  the  respondent's  rule  24
response, dated 30 January 2019. He told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law. He told me that the Judge found  that  returning  the
appellant to  Nigeria  is  not  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
article 8 private life, and that was a finding  well  within  the  range  of
reasonable findings available to the Judge.

(b) Mr Wilding told me that [19] of the decision  might  be  brief,  but  it
contains a succinct explanation of the factors which led the  Judge  to  his
decision. He urged me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.


The Facts

7. Parties agents agree that  there  is  no  challenge  to  the  appellant's
credibility. The appellant's witness statement dated 29  October  2018  sets
out the following relevant facts of this case.

8. The appellant was 15 when he entered the UK  on  17  February  2010.  His
mother and his stepmother arranged his travel to the UK. He entered  the  UK
in possession of a visit visa which expired on 7 June 2010. He has  not  had
leave to remain in the UK since 7 June 2010.

9. The appellant had secondary and tertiary education in the UK. He has  now
obtained a BTEC in mechanical engineering. He would like to  pursue  further
studies in engineering and become an engineer. The appellant is  a  popular,
athletic, young man.

10. The appellant's mother is still in the UK and does not have leave to  be
in the UK. The appellant is 24 years old. He will 25 in November this  year.
The appellant relies on the generosity of friends  and  his  church  because
his immigration status means that he cannot work.

The Immigration Rules

11. The appellant is single and  has  no  dependents.  He  cannot  meet  the
requirements of appendix FM of the immigration rules.

12. Because of a combination of his age and the length of time he  has  been
in the UK, the appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph  276  ADE
(1)(i) to (v) of the immigration rules.

13. To meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of  the  rules  the
appellant would have to establish that there are very significant  obstacles
to integration in Nigeria. Understandably, the appellant is reluctant to  go
to a country where he has no family, no friends, no home  and  no  job;  but
that is not all there is to this case.

14. The appellant  is  a  healthy,  young,  intelligent,  well-educated  and
charming man. He would return  to  Nigeria,  where  he  spent  most  of  his
childhood, with education & skills  which  make  him  employable.  He  is  a
resourceful young man who, at the  moment,  is  living  on  the  charity  of
others.

15. In SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 it was held  that  the  concept  of
integration into a country was a broad one.  It  was  not  confined  to  the
mere ability to find a job or  sustain  life  whilst  living  in  the  other
country.  It would usually be sufficient for a court or tribunal  to  direct
itself  in  the  terms  Parliament  had  chosen  to  use.    The   idea   of
"integration" called for a broad  evaluative  judgment  to  be  made  as  to
whether  the  individual  would  be  enough  of  an  insider  in  terms   of
understanding how life in the society in that other country was  carried  on
and a capacity to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable  opportunity
to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day  basis  in  that
society and to build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a  variety  of  human
relationships to give substance  to  the  individual's  private  and  family
life.

16. In the case of Sanambar v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1284 the Court of  Appeal
said that consideration of the issue of obstacles  to  integration  requires
consideration of all relevant factors some of which might  be  described  as
generic.   Factors  such  as   intelligence,   employability   and   general
robustness of character could clearly be relevant to that issue.  The  broad
evaluation required could also include the extent to which a  parent's  ties
might assist with integration.

17. There are no insurmountable obstacles to  integration  in  Nigeria.  The
appellant's childhood immersed him in Nigerian culture. His time in  the  UK
has given him an education which is the  gateway  to  employment.  The  fact
that he would leave his home & his friends  behind  is  not  the  test.  The
appellant cannot meet the immigration rules.

18. GEN 3.2 of appendix FM to the rules requires evidence  of  unjustifiably
harsh consequences on return to Nigeria. There was no  evidence  before  the
First-tier Judge which could have brought him to the conclusion  that  there
are any exceptional circumstances in the appellant's case which  would  make
return result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.

Article 8 ECHR

19.   In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60  it  was  made  clear  that
(even in a deport case) the Rules are not a  complete  code.  Lord  Reed  at
paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality  (to
be found in Razgar) and said "what has now become the established method  of
analysis can therefore continue to be followed..."

20. In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, Lord Reed (when explaining  how  a  court  or
tribunal  should  consider  whether  a  refusal  of  leave  to  remain   was
compatible with Article 8) made clear that the critical issue was  generally
whether, giving due weight  to  the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in
removal, the article 8 claim was sufficiently strong to outweigh it.   There
is no suggestion of any threshold to be overcome before proportionality  can
be fully considered.

21.  The appellants private  life  consists  of  his  home,  his  circle  of
friends and his desire for further education in the UK.

22. Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that  immigration  control  is  in
the public interest. In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

Analysis

23. I consider whether there is something in the  appellant's  private  life
which displaces the public interest in immigration control.  I  must  remind
myself that the appellant's private life was established when  his  presence
in the UK was illegal. S.117B(4) and (5) tells  me  that  I  can  only  give
little weight to the appellant's private life.

24. The private life that the appellant has established in  the  UK  can  be
recreated in Nigeria. He does not have to lose  contact  with  his  friends.
What he does not  have  in  the  UK  is  employment  and  further  education
opportunities. What he can have in Nigeria is employment, a home, &  further
education opportunities.

25. The only  reasonable  conclusion  to  reach  is  that  the  respondent's
decision is not a  disproportionate  interference  with  article  8  private
life.

26. A more detailed analysis of the facts in this case  brought  me  to  the
same conclusion that the Judge reached.  The  Judge's  findings  are  brief.
Even though the Judge does not cite s.117B of the 2002 Act, He clearly  (and
correctly) considers S.117B in his proportionality assessment.

27. In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT  254  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
said that


      Giving weight to a factor one way or another is for the  fact-finding
      Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely  give  rise  to  an
      error of law.

28.  In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

29. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge  applied  the
correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all  of
the  evidence.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's   fact-finding
exercise. The appellant  might  not  like  the  conclusion  that  the  Judge
arrived at, but that conclusion is  the  result  of  the  correctly  applied
legal equation. The correct test in law has been applied. The decision  does
not contain a material error of law.

30.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION

31.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 26 November 2018, stands.

Signed
                   Date 18 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

