
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07366/2015
                                                               HU/07368/2015
                                                               HU/07369/2015
                                                               HU/07371/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 17 July 2017                                 |On 31 July 2017            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     MR
                                     RB
                                     KRF
                                     MR
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr J Butterworth, instructed by Zhara & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellants'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cooper promulgated 16.11.16, dismissing on  all  grounds
    their linked appeals against the decisions of the Secretary  of  State,
    dated 28.9.15, to refuse LTR on human rights grounds.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 5.10.16.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lambert  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    10.5.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 17.7.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of of the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside.

 6. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Lambert considered it  arguable
    that, "the judge's reasoning was contradictory and/or  inadequate  both
    in terms of analysis of the Secretary of State's approach  to  and  the
    appellant's own argument under paragraph 276ADE."

 7. There is no merit in the first ground of appeal, that the pre-July 2012
    Immigration Rules relating to length of residence should apply  to  the
    application made on 25.11.00. That situation only applied to  a  narrow
    window of a few months before the Rules were  amended  to  require  all
    applications to be decided on the basis of the current Rules. The  fact
    that the appeal was previously remitted by Judge Smith to the Secretary
    of State for reconsideration of the application on pre-2012 Rules is no
    relevant. Ultimately, Mr Butterworth accepted  this  ground  of  appeal
    could not succeed.

Assessment of dependency

 8. The next ground of appeal is that the judge's assessment of the article
    8 family life claim was inadequate. In particular, it is submitted that
    the judge misapplied the Kugathas definition of dependency in  relation
    to the support the appellants provide to their relatives in the UK.

 9. At [54] the judge accepted the evidence that the help provided by Ms  B
    is of very considerable help to the  family  and  they  would  struggle
    without it. However, the judge gave cogent reasons for concluding  that
    the evidence  did  not  demonstrate  "further  elements  of  dependency
    involving  more  than  normal  emotional  ties,"  between  these  adult
    relatives.  Mr  Butterworth  directed  me  to  the  evidence   in   the
    appellants'  bundle  dealing  with  this  issue,  comprising   medical,
    consultant and social work assessments of the support provided for  the
    child relative. One of these reports suggests that if it were  not  for
    Ms B being on hand to provide practical support, the family  would  not
    have coped with the immense stress due to the relapse  of  the  child's
    acute myeloid leukaemia. She was described as very much needed to  keep
    the household and the family going. Another child  of  the  family  has
    autism. Ms B provides care for the children in the  home,  cooking  and
    cleaning,  making  the  school  run  and   transporting   to   hospital
    appointments.

10. It is not the case that the judge has ignored  this  evidence.  To  the
    contrary, it is clear that it has been fully considered and taken  into
    account. The challenge is not as to reasons or omission  to  take  into
    account relevant evidence. In essence, the submission of the grounds as
    advanced by Mr Butterworth is that the decision is perverse.  I  cannot
    accept this submission. It was open to the judge to assess the evidence
    and reach the conclusion that if Ms B and her family were removed  from
    the UK, other assistance would be available to the  relatives,  who  in
    the judge's view would "rally round." The child  in  question  and  the
    family would also be entitled to state support. In the circumstances, I
    am not satisfied that this ground has been made out.

Failure to address the Immigration Rules

11. The remaining ground of appeal is to the effect that the judge  was  in
    error at [50] in stating that the appellants'  representative  conceded
    that none of the appellants  could  meet  the  requirements  of  either
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE. The grounds  argue  that  it  was  and
    remains the adult appellants' case  that  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles  to  their  integration  in  Bangladesh.  The  claim  that  a
    concession was not made would normally have required evidence from  the
    representative at the hearing. However, the  judge's  typed  record  of
    proceedings records that in submissions the appellants'  representative
    asserted, "the appellants  rely  both  on  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8." In the circumstances, I  accept  that  the  appellants  did
    pursue their claim under 276ADE and the statement to  the  contrary  at
    [50] must be in factual error.

12. The import of that error is that the judge  gave  no  consideration  to
    paragraph 276ADE  and  the  issue  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration, proceeding immediately at [51] to consider the claim under
    article 8 ECHR. There was no adequate consideration of the Rules and no
    consideration of very significant obstacles, relied  on  by  the  adult
    appellants in their witness statements.

13. I have carefully examined the decision to see whether  there  has  been
    anything that could amount to an assessment of obstacles to integration
    on return to Bangladesh. Whilst the judge has  cited  extensively  from
    the refusal decision, which does  deal  with  this  issue,  the  actual
    findings in the decision are relatively brief and do  not  address  the
    difficulties which the appellants claim they would face  on  return  to
    Bangladesh.  I  cannot  say  that  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  would
    necessarily  have  been  the  same  had  this  issue   been   addressed
    adequately. I am driven to conclude that for this reason  an  otherwise
    carefully drafted decision is inadequate and thus in error of law.

14. The decision is also devoid of  public  interest  considerations  under
    s117B of the 2002 Act, which would itself be an error  of  law,  though
    not one relied by the Secretary of State in any cross appeal.

15. Mr Butterworth also sought to rely on the delay of some 5 years between
    application and refusal, but that was not a ground of  application  for
    permission to appeal and I decline to address it further. It may  be  a
    matter that will be developed further on a rehearing of the appeal.

Remittal

16. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. The error of law vitiates  all  all
    findings of fact and the conclusions from those facts,  so  that  there
    has not been a valid determination of the issues in the appeal.

17. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the parties of a fair  hearing  and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
                       [pic]
                    Signed
                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated



Consequential Directions

19. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House;

20. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

21. The ELH is 3 hours;

22. An interpreter in Bengali (Sylheti) will be required;

23. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Cooper;

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


