
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07726/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On 2 September 2021                  |On the 11th October 2021             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Ms Mst Iffat Jahan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iqbal, instructed by Sindhu Immigration
Services LTD


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against a decision of a
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal who allowed the appeal of the respondent
Ms Jahan against the Secretary of State's decision of 15 April 2019
refusing her application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.  That
application was made on 31 July 2012, and it was common ground that as a
consequence of the timing of the original application and date of decision
Ms Jahan was entitled to appeal on any grounds including those in section
84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 due to the
transitional provisions (Commencement No. 3 (Transitional and Saving
Provisions Order 2014 S 2014/2771)).

2.   In the event, little need be said about the judge's decision.  Mr
Walker very helpfully and realistically conceded that the grounds were
poorly reasoned and that in fact the judge had carefully considered the
expert report with regard to relocation and made brief but clear findings.
As a consequence, he agreed that the judge's decision should stand.

3.   As a consequence, I did not need to call on Ms Iqbal.

4.   I agree with the submission made on behalf of the Secretary of State
in this case.  The judge's decision, though relatively brief on the point,
is properly reasoned with regard to the issue of very significant obstacles
to relocation in Bangladesh for the appellant, bearing in mind the risk
from her husband's brother and incorporating the views of the expert Dr
Amundsen on that and the lack of police protection and the broader
background evidence with regard to the rifeness of corruption and the
failings of the justice system for women who are pursued for so-called
honour-based violence.

5.   As a consequence, the judge came to conclusions that were open to him
with regard to the very significant obstacles issue, and as a consequence,
the decision allowing the appeal on that basis is upheld.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the judge allowing the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]

Signed                                  Date 9 September 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

