
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
HU/07481/2018

                                                HU/07483/2018

                                                HU/07488/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 December 2018                     | On 01 February 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                 mr T B W M
                                 mrs L N S P
                                 miss N Y W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Sowerby, Counsel instructed by Nandy & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity direction under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in order to protect the  anonymity  of  the
    Appellants.  This  direction  prohibits  the  disclosure  directly   or
    indirectly  (including  by  the  parties)  of  the  identity   of   the
    Appellants. Any disclosure and breach of this direction may amount to a
    contempt of court. This direction shall remain in force unless  revoked
    or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Perry  in  which  he
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellants  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse their application for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 3. The application under  appeal  was  refused  on  14  March  2018.   The
    Appellants exercised their right of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came before Judge Perry on 20 August 2018 and was dismissed.
    The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Their application was granted by Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    MacDonald on 25 October 2018 in the following terms

       The Judge referred to numerous case law including  MA  which  stated
       that seven years residence established a starting point  that  leave
       should be granted  unless  there  were  "powerful"  and/or  "strong"
       reasons to the contrary.

       The grounds of application note that the  Judge  accepted  that  the
       child was a qualifying child and there were no such powerful reasons
       as set out in MA.


       While the Judge gave clear reasons for his decision it is  arguable,
       for reasons given in  the  grounds,  that  there  were  no  powerful
       reasons why the child who has been in the United  Kingdom  for  over
       ten years should be removed.


Background


 4. The history of this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellants  are
    citizens of Sri Lanka born respectively on 4 November 1975,  28  August
    1978 and 31 July 2009.  The  First  Appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 22  September  2005,  the  Second  Appellant  arrived  on  5
    February 2006 and the Third Appellant was born in the  United  Kingdom.
    The First and Second  Appellants  were  married  in  Sri  Lanka  on  12
    September 2005 (10 days before the First appellant's arrival in the UK)
    and the Third Appellant is their daughter and she has been continuously
    present in the United Kingdom since her birth.  The  First  and  Second
    Appellants both came to the United Kingdom as visitors and their  leave
    to remain expired 6 months after their respective arrivals.  The  Third
    Appellant has never  had  leave  to  remain.  On  17  August  2016  the
    Appellants submitted an application for leave to remain on human rights
    grounds. This application was refused on  14  March  2018  and  is  the
    subject of this appeal.

 5. The basis of the Secretary of State's refusal was, essentially,  three-
    fold. Firstly, the Secretary of State was satisfied that the Appellants
    did  not  meet  eligibility  and  suitability   requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules. Secondly the Secretary of State considered that  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules were not  met
    since  there  were  no  significant   obstacles   to   the   Appellants
    reintegrating into Sri Lanka. Thirdly the Secretary of State considered
    that there were no exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a  departure
    from the requirements of the Immigration Rules which would  render  the
    refusal of the application a breach of Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

 6. The appeal came before Judge Perry and was dismissed. It  was  accepted
    that the Appellants did not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and in  any  event  there  was  no  right  of  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules. The Judge found that  the  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom of the adult Appellants had been unlawful since their leave  to
    remain as visitors expired more than 10 years previously.  He  did  not
    accept the  adult  Appellants'  account  of  being  rejected  by  their
    families or that they were without ties to  or  a  support  network  in
    their home country. He found that  the  best  interests  of  the  Third
    Appellant,  a  'qualifying  child'  under  section   117D   Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  were to be with her parents and  that
    it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave  the  United  Kingdom
    with her parents when they return to Sri Lanka.


Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Sowerby appeared  for  the  Appellants.  Mr
    Sowerby agreed that the issue centred upon  the  Third  Appellant.  She
    will be 10 years old next year and has never  visited  Sri  Lanka.  The
    Judge accepted that her return would be a culture shock  and  that  any
    move would be disruptive and destabilising. However in referring to  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at paragraph  47  of  his  decision  the
    Judge acknowledges that  leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are
    powerful and/or strong reasons to the  contrary.  The  Judge  fails  to
    identify any such powerful or strong reasons and this is  an  error  of
    law. Mr Sowerby referred to KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 60 at paragraph 17
    which in turn refers to the Home Office IDI guidance. He added that the
    Third Appellant is currently studying for her 11 plus  examination  and
    would be eligible to apply for British nationality when she reached  10
    years of age next year.


 8. For the Respondent  Ms  Holmes  said  that  this  is  a  very  thorough
    decision. The Judge goes through the relevant  case  law  including  MA
    (Pakistan), he considers the Home Office guidance and he is fully aware
    of the situation. At paragraph 42 he  refers  to  the  Third  Appellant
    asking "when are we going home". There is  no  apparent  error  of  law
    disclosed.

 9. I gave an extempore decision dismissing the Appellants' appeal and give
    my written reasons below.


Decision

10. This case revolves around the position of a 9-year-old  child  and  for
    that reason it is important to be very careful in the consideration  of
    the circumstances.  The child was born in the United  Kingdom  and  has
    never left the country; indeed, she would not have been able to  do  so
    as neither she nor her parents have had leave to remain  and  therefore
    if they had left they would not have been able to return. It is  common
    ground that the child  is  a  'qualifying  child'  under  section  117D
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, that neither she  nor  her
    parents have any lawful right to remain under the Immigration Rules and
    that the only issue is whether it is reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the United Kingdom by reference to section 117B(6).

11. In this respect there, in my judgement, is no doubt that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge conducts an exhaustive assessment of  the  circumstances
    of the parents and the child and there was no suggestion either in  the
    grounds of appeal or in oral submissions to the contrary.

12. The error of law which it is  suggested  occurred  is  that  the  Judge
    failed to identify powerful and/or strong reasons  why  the  9-year-old
    child having passed the seven-year threshold should leave  the  country
    as the Judge was required to do by MA (Pakistan).  The grounds add that
    the Judge has failed to  place  sufficient  weight  upon  the  positive
    factors pertaining and has not made clear findings in  respect  of  the
    prospects of integration.

13. This was a very carefully worded decision by Judge Perry.  It  is  very
    detailed.  I agree with Ms  Holmes  that  the  Judge  refers  and  self
    directs to all the relevant case law including MA (Pakistan).

14. The starting point must be that the first two Appellants, the  parents,
    have no right to be in the United Kingdom.  They have had no  right  to
    be in the United Kingdom for almost the all the  time  that  they  have
    been  here.   Their  immigration  history  shows  that  having  arrived
    separately as visitors almost immediately  after  their  marriage  they
    have used subterfuge and other methods to prolong  their  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Their child was born  in  the  United  Kingdom  during
    their unlawful stay. The conduct of the parents is not  a  matter  that
    should be taken against the child and  there  is  in  my  judgement  no
    indication  that  Judge  Perry  fell  into  error   in   this   regard.
    Nevertheless, it is beyond doubt that the best interests of  the  child
    are to remain with the parents.  Nobody has suggested to the  contrary.
    In the normal course of events the parents  would  not  be  here,  they
    should not be here. Indeed the proposition is that the  parents  should
    be allowed to remain solely because it would be unreasonable to  expect
    the child to leave.

15. The Judge went through  the  family  circumstances  painstakingly.   He
    found that the parents were not telling the truth about lack of contact
    with Sri Lanka, that there was a family support network  in  Sri  Lanka
    and that such support network did not exist in the United Kingdom.   He
    found, contrary  to  the  father's  assertion,  that  the  child  spoke
    Sinhalese.  Maybe she did not speak it as well as  a  person  born  and
    brought up in Sri Lanka, but the Judge  found  that  was  the  language
    spoken by the family at home.  The Judge found that there were cultural
    links to Sri Lanka.  The Judge was aware of the position of  the  child
    so far as her education was concerned and it has been pointed out by Mr
    Sowerby that she is being coached for the 11-plus exam which she is due
    to take in a little less than a  year's  time  and  she  will  then  be
    changing schools.  I assume, with her being aged 9 now,  she  would  be
    moving from junior school to  secondary  school  in  Autumn  2020.   Mr
    Sowerby also points to the fact that the  child  will  be  eligible  to
    apply for British citizenship in July 2019 upon attaining the age of 10
    years.

16. The best interests of the child are to remain  with  her  parents.   As
    Lord Carnwath points out in KO (Nigeria) at paragraph 19 (in  reference
    to MA (Pakistan) whether it is reasonable to expect the child to follow
    the parent with no right to remain must be considered in the real world
    in which the child finds itself.  In the real world these  are  parents
    who have no right to remain in the United Kingdom  and  who  should  be
    returning to Sri Lanka.

17. There are strong and powerful reasons why the child in this case should
    return with her parents.  These reasons are clearly identified by Judge
    Perry in his decision. The family have  strong  cultural  ties  to  Sri
    Lanka, they all speak the language, they have a family support  network
    in that country. Judge Perry could have added,  and  for  the  sake  of
    completeness I now add, that in terms of the Appellant's education this
    is the best time for there to be a change of school when there will  be
    the minimum of disruption because the child is due to change school  in
    any event. I would also add that the fact that the child  will  qualify
    to apply for British nationality in a few months' time is an irrelevant
    factor so far as the reasonableness of her return is concerned.

18. I find no error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge. This appeal is dismissed.




Summary of decision

19. Appeal dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.








Signed                                  Date: 16 January 2019


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


