
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/07805/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28th September 2016                     |On 14th October 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                               ISHTIAQ RAHEEM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Janjua, Janjua & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant a citizen of Pakistan  appeals  with  permission  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal dismissing
    his appeal against the Respondent's refusal of his human rights  claim,
    that he should be granted leave to remain as the partner of  a  British
    national.

 2. The Respondent's grounds of refusal,  amounted  to  saying  that  as  a
    starting point the  Appellant could not meet the Immigration rules  and
    therefore a  decision  requiring  him  to  leave  the  UK,  was  not  a
    disproportionate breach of his Article 8 ECHR family/private rights. In
    particular the decision maker  had  regard  to  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  in
    Appendix FM and found that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    the Appellant's family life with his UK partner continuing abroad.   In
    addition the Appellant could not meet the private life requirements  of
    Rule 276ADE.

 3. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's decision. It is correct to  say
    that the only matter with which the Appellant took  issue,  centred  on
    that part of the decision where the Respondent found that the Appellant
    could not meet the English language  requirement  as  set  out  in  the
    Rules. His  claim  amounted  to  saying  that  the  Respondent  wrongly
    rejected his English language test certificate because  she  failed  to
    follow her own policy  relating  to  transitional  provisions  for  ELT
    certificates and thus deprived him of the benefit of that  policy.  The
    FtT recorded that no other substantive grounds of appeal  were  put  in
    issue by the Appellant.

The FtT's Decision

 4. When the appeal came before the FtT, it was heard on the papers at  the
    Appellant's request.  The judge had before him two documents  which  he
    set out in [11] reproduced below.

         "(a) His original Graded Examination  in  Spoken  English  ('GESE')
             Entry Level ESOL (Speaking and Listening) CEFR Level  A1  with
             Merit certificate issued by Trinity College on 10  April  2014
             in respect of an exam which he took at the premises  of  Extra
             Learning UK ("ELUK") at 104 High Street,  Smethwick  in  March
             2014, plus a letter from ELUK  to  UKBA  dated  7  March  2014
             confirming that he had taken the test that day,  had  achieved
             level  A1  and  was  awaiting  his  certificate  from  Trinity
             College;

         (b)  His original Graded Examination  in  Spoken  English  ('GESE')
             Entry Level ESOL (Speaking and Listening) CEFR Level  A1  with
             Merit certificate awarded by Trinity College on  29  September
             2015 in respect of the same exam which he took at the premises
             of Extra Learning UK at 104 High Street,  Smethwick  in  March
             2014."

 5. The judge also set out at [4] to [9] that the  Respondent  had  refused
    the application because the Appellant could meet neither  EX.1.(b)  nor
    276ADE  and  that  no  ground  had  been  put  in  arguing  exceptional
    circumstances outwith the rules.

 6. He then spent the greater part of his consideration  setting  out  that
    the transitional provisions of the Rules regarding the ELT requirements
    did not avail the Appellant  and  therefore  he  could  not  meet  that
    provisions in the Rules. He also clearly set out however in  [21]  that
    the Appellant took no issue with his inability to satisfy EX.1.(b), and
    did not pursue an appeal against the decision not to grant him  Article
    8 relief outside the Rules.  He dismissed the appeal.  I pause here  to
    record that the Judge incorrectly in his decision notice said  that  he
    dismissed the appeal "under the Rules."  There was no appeal under  the
    Rules.  The appeal before him was a restricted appeal on  Human  Rights
    grounds.  In the event  I  find  that  this  error  of  itself  is  not
    sufficient to set aside the decision, as will be seen from my reasoning
    later in this decision.

Onward Appeal

 7. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal. The  grounds
    seeking  permission  argued  that  the  FtT  had  wrongly  applied  the
    transitional provisions relating to the  ELT  and  that  therefore  the
    Respondent's decision in respect  of  the  Appellant's  application  to
    remain on account of his family/private life was unlawful.   Permission
    was granted in terms focussing solely on that issue.

    Thus the matter  comes  before  me  to  decide  initially  whether  the
    decision of the FtT contains an error of law requiring  it  to  be  set
    aside and remade.

The UT Hearing

 8. Before me Mr Janjua appeared for the Appellant; Mrs Petterson  for  the
    Respondent.  I heard brief submissions from both  representatives.   Mr
    Janjua's submissions reiterated the grounds seeking permission.  He had
    no further evidence to call.

 9. Mrs Petterson, who had only been served with the appeal papers  shortly
    before the hearing, defended the FtT's decision on the following basis.
     She emphasised  that  what  was  before  the  FtT  was  an  Article  8
    family/private life appeal only. This was the only route of appeal open
    to the Appellant. Therefore whether or  not  the  Appellant  should  be
    given the benefit of the ELT transitional provisions  was  to  a  great
    extent immaterial to this appeal. The Appellant had disagreed with  the
    Respondent's decision on that one ground only. Even if it  were  to  be
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  could  meet   the   ELT   requirements,
    nevertheless he had not shown that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  a
    disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights. The  Appellant
    had not argued against his inability  to  satisfy  EX.1.(b),  nor  that
    276ADE applied. Therefore there was no real evidence to show  that  the
    Appellant could satisfy the Immigration Rules and although the  grounds
    seeking  permission  did  mention  that  the  Appellant's  partner  had
    recently lost her father and was under pressure  because  of  her  work
    commitments, those factors fell far short  of  that  required  to  show
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in  Pakistan.   In
    short she submitted the Appellant's appeal should be dismissed.

Consideration

10. I find I am satisfied that the decision of the FtT contains no material
    error requiring it to be set aside and I now give my reasons for this.

11. Mrs Petteren was quite correct to submit that what was before  the  FtT
    was  an  appeal  limited  by  the  changes  implemented  in  the   2014
    Immigration Act.  Whilst I accept that the FtT Judge  appears  to  give
    the impression in his decision notice that what was before him  was  an
    appeal under the Rules this was incorrect.  However the saving grace in
    this decision is that he  makes  a  clear  finding  at  [21]  that  the
    Appellant took no issue with his inability to satisfy EX.1.(b)  and  it
    would seem there was no evidence led about  his  inability  to  satisfy
    276ADE.

12. Mr Janjua came to the hearing expecting simply to argue  that  it  does
    appear that transitional arrangements did exist which  meant  that  the
    ELT certificate held by the Appellant was acceptable as  evidence  that
    the language requirements were met. Following on from that, Mr Janjua's
    argument is that the appeal should simply be allowed as  "unlawful".  I
    disagree with that submission. It is clear from the jurisprudence  that
    the Rules are a starting point in any Article 8 consideration  and  the
    fact that the Appellant may be deemed to satisfy the  English  language
    test may well diminish  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control. However it remains that no issue was taken by  the
    Appellant before the FtT of his inability to satisfy  EX.1.(b)  of  the
    Rules.

13. For the sake of completeness I refer to the grounds seeking  permission
    which uses the phrase "insurmountable obstacles" in the context of  the
    Appellant's partner going through emotional and mental hardship.  It is
    said  that  the  sponsor  has  suffered  a  miscarriage  and  that   is
    undoubtedly a sad event.  Her father has  died  adding  to  her  mental
    stress.  However whilst not seeking to diminish  the  impact  of  those
    events, the evidence falls far short of  that  required  to  show  that
    these  amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles  to  their   family   life
    continuing abroad.  For those reasons the  Respondent's  decision  does
    not amount to a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 rights and this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed. The FtT's decision stands.

The Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him
leave to remain is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     13 October 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award because the Appellant's appeal has been dismissed.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     13 October 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts


