
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07741/2018
                                                HU/07745/2018, HU/07747/2018
                                                HU/07748/2018, HU/07754/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th May 2019                     |On 10th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            OO (first Appellant)
                            JO (second Appellant)
                            LO (third Appellant)
                            SO (fourth Appellant)
                            AO (fifth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr H Dieu of Counsel, instructed by Chetna & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of Judge Page (the judge) of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 30th August 2018.

 2.  The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Nigeria.   The  first  and  second
    Appellants are the parents of the three minor Appellants who were  born
    on  19th  April  2010,  22nd  July  2013,  and  18th   September   2014
    respectively.  The minor Appellants were all born in the UK.

 3. On 23rd June 2017 the Appellants applied for leave to remain in the UK.
     The main basis of the application was that  the  third  Appellant  had
    accrued  more  than  seven  years'  continuous  residence  and  it  was
    contended that he satisfied paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the  Immigration
    Rules, as it would not be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

 4. The applications were refused on 13th March 2018, and the appeals heard
    together on 21st August 2018.  The appeals were dismissed.

 5. The Appellants, through their solicitors,  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds  are  briefly  summarised
    below.

 6. It  was  claimed  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  properly  consider
    "reasonableness"  as  required  by  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv).   It  was
    submitted  that  the  judge  had  applied  an  incorrect  test,  simply
    considering whether  removal  from  the  UK  would  deprive  the  third
    Appellant of all possible treatment for autism.

 7. It was contended that the judge had described "a paucity  of  evidence"
    when assessing reasonableness, but had  failed  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the children and had failed to make a finding as to  their
    best interests.  It was further submitted that the judge had  erred  by
    failing to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Haria who found  it  arguable
    that the judge  had  focused  on  the  medical  issues  as  opposed  to
    considering whether in all the circumstances it would not be reasonable
    to expect the third Appellant to leave the UK.  It was found  that  the
    judge had arguably erred on that point and arguably erred by failing to
    undertake a full consideration of Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the 2008 Procedure Rules arguing that the  judge
    had directed himself appropriately.  It was claimed that  the  evidence
    produced at the hearing was almost solely  in  respect  of  the  autism
    suffered by the third and fourth Appellants, and the judge could not be
    criticised for  focusing  to  a  large  extent  on  the  issue  of  the
    children's medical conditions.



Error of Law

10. On 24th January 2019 I heard submissions as to error of law.  On behalf
    of the Appellants, reliance was placed  upon  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal had been granted.  On behalf  of  the  Respondent,
    reliance was placed upon the rule 24 response.  It  was  accepted  that
    the judge had not made a specific  finding  in  relation  to  the  best
    interests of the children, but it was submitted that  this  was  not  a
    material error as it could be implied from reading  the  decision  that
    the judge had decided that the best interests of the children would  be
    to remain with their parents whether that be in the UK or  in  Nigeria.
    It was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  erred  when  considering
    reasonableness, and was entitled to find that it  would  be  reasonable
    for the third Appellant to return to Nigeria  notwithstanding  that  he
    had accrued more than eight years' continuous residence in the  UK,  as
    there would be treatment for his autism in Nigeria.

11. I set out below paragraphs 11-18 of  my  decision  dated  4th  February
    2019, which contain my reasons for concluding that the FtT erred in law
    and the decision must be set aside and remade;

         "11. Although the decision of the FtT has been prepared with  great
             care, and the  judge  was  not  assisted  in  considering  the
             extensive documentary evidence as a skeleton argument had  not
             been prepared, I am persuaded that the judge materially  erred
             in law for the following reasons.

         12.  The best interests of the children should have been considered
             as a primary consideration.  That is not  to  say  their  best
             interests are a paramount consideration, and it  is  the  case
             that the best interests of children can be outweighed by other
             considerations.   There  should  however  be  a  comprehensive
             assessment and a specific finding  in  relation  to  the  best
             interests of children,  and  as  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
             Respondent at the hearing, in this case there was no  specific
             finding in relation to the best interests of the children.

         13.  The judge recognised that the crucial issue in the appeal  was
             the fact that the third Appellant is  a  qualifying  child  by
             reason of having accrued more  than  seven  continuous  years'
             residence in the  UK.   At  the  date  of  hearing  the  third
             Appellant had resided in the UK for approximately eight  years
             four months continuously, having been born  in  this  country.
             It was accepted that the third Appellant suffered with  autism
             as did one of his siblings.

         14.  I do not find that the judge adopted the correct approach when
             considering whether it would be reasonable to remove  a  child
             with more than seven years' continuous residence from the  UK.
             The Respondent's own guidance which was in force at  the  date
             of the FtT hearing (the guidance having been published on 22nd
             February 2018) confirms that significant weight must be  given
             to such a period of continuous residence.  Strong reasons will
             be required in order to refuse a case where the  outcome  will
             be removal of a child with continuous UK  residence  of  seven
             years or more.

         15.   This  guidance  was  prepared  following  cases  such  as  MA
             (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 in which it  was  decided  that
             the fact that a child had been in the UK for seven years would
             need to be given significant  weight  in  the  proportionality
             exercise for two related reasons, one being the  relevance  to
             determining the  nature  and  strength  of  the  child's  best
             interests, and the  other  being  that  it  establishes  as  a
             starting point that leave should be granted unless  there  are
             powerful reasons to the contrary.

         16.  The judge was referred to MT and ET Nigeria [2018] UKUT  00088
             (IAC) which at paragraph 33 makes reference to  MA  (Pakistan)
             and refers to the need for powerful reasons why  a  child  who
             has been in the UK for  over  ten  years  should  be  removed,
             notwithstanding that her best interests lie in remaining.  The
             reference to ten years was made because the child in that case
             had over ten years' continuous residence.

         17.  I conclude that the judge materially erred by failing  firstly
             to consider and make a finding as to the best interests of the
             children, and thereafter failing to adopt the correct approach
             when considering whether it would be reasonable to expect  the
             third Appellant to leave the UK.  The judge  does  extensively
             examine the documentary evidence and comments upon the medical
             evidence, and finds that there is some treatment for autism in
             Nigeria  and  on  that  basis  concludes  that  it  would   be
             reasonable for the Appellants to leave the  UK.   In  my  view
             that it is an incomplete analysis.

         18.  I must set aside the decision of the FtT as in my view  it  is
             unsafe.  It is not appropriate to remit this  appeal  back  to
             the FtT.  I do not  find  it  is  appropriate  to  remake  the
             decision  without  a  further  hearing.   In  my  view  it  is
             appropriate  to  have  a  further  hearing  before  the  Upper
             Tribunal to consider the best interests of  the  children  and
             whether it is reasonable to  expect  the  third  Appellant  to
             leave the  UK.   Medical  facilities  in  Nigeria  will  be  a
             relevant consideration but not the only consideration."

Remaking the Decision - My Conclusions and Reasons

12. At the commencement of the hearing I indicated to  the  representatives
    that I had considered the documentation that was before  the  FtT,  and
    further evidence, including the medical evidence contained in a  bundle
    of documents submitted on  behalf  of  the  Appellants,  containing  92
    pages.

13. Mr Howells indicated that the  Respondent  conceded  that  the  appeals
    should be allowed with reference to Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention.  Mr Howells confirmed that it was accepted  that  the  best
    interests of the children would be to remain in  the  UK,  taking  into
    account that the third  and  fourth  Appellants  have  a  diagnosis  of
    Autistic Spectrum Disorder.  Mr Howells confirmed that  the  Respondent
    accepted that the third Appellant is a qualifying child having  accrued
    more than eight years'  continuous  residence,  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

14. In view of the  concession,  which  I  found  to  be  rightly  made,  I
    indicated to Mr Dieu that I did not think I needed to hear  submissions
    from him.  Mr Dieu indicated that he had nothing to add.

15. I therefore indicated that the  appeals  were  allowed  and  a  written
    decision confirming this would be produced.

16. My reasons for allowing the appeals are that I find it is in  the  best
    interests of the three  children,  to  remain  in  the  UK  with  their
    parents.  This is because two of the children,  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants, have a diagnosis of Autistic  Spectrum  Disorder  and  have
    special educational needs and are receiving  appropriate  treatment  in
    the UK.  The bundle containing 92  pages  contains  ample  evidence  of
    their needs and the treatment they are receiving.

17. The appeals are allowed not simply because it is in the best  interests
    of the children to remain in the UK.  I  find  that  only  one  of  the
    children is a qualifying child, that being the third Appellant who  was
    born on 19th April  2010.   He  had  accrued  seven  years'  continuous
    residence by the time the applications for leave to remain were made on
    23rd June 2017.  I agree with the concession  made  by  the  Respondent
    that it would not be reasonable, in the circumstances,  to  expect  the
    third Appellant to leave the UK.  When assessing reasonableness I  take
    into account KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 in which it was  decided  that
    the assessment of reasonableness in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) is directed
    solely to the position of the child.  The conduct  of  parents  is  not
    relevant to the assessment of the impact on the child.

18. Reference has already been made to the diagnosis of  Autistic  Spectrum
    Disorder that the third Appellant  has,  and  the  special  educational
    needs provided to him, and the medical treatment in this country.

19. At paragraph 49 of MA (Pakistan) it was stated that where a  child  has
    accrued seven years' residence, the starting point  is  that  leave  to
    remain should be granted unless  there  are  powerful  reasons  to  the
    contrary.  In this case the Respondent concedes that there are no  such
    powerful reasons.  Therefore I conclude that it would not be reasonable
    for the third Appellant to leave the  UK  and  he  satisfies  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv).

20. I also consider section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002.  Section 117B(6) is set out below;

    '(6) In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.'

21. It is accepted by the Respondent that the first and  second  Appellants
    are the parents of the third Appellant.  It is accepted that they  have
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship, and the third Appellant
    is a qualifying child by reason of in excess of seven years' continuous
    residence.  I have already found that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the third Appellant to leave the UK, and  therefore  I  conclude
    that the public interest does not require the removal of the first  and
    second Appellants.

22. It is clear that the appeals of the fourth and fifth Appellants  should
    also be allowed, so that the family  unit  can  remain  together.   The
    appeals therefore are allowed with reference to Article 8 of  the  1950
    European Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds with reference to Article  8
of the 1950 Convention.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead
to contempt of court  proceedings.   This  direction  is  made  because  the
third, fourth and fifth Appellants are minors.


Signed                              Date 29th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeals, I have  considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award.  I make no fee award.  The  appeals  have  been  allowed  because  of
evidence considered  by  the  Tribunal  that  was  not  before  the  initial
decision maker.


Signed                              Date 29th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

