
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07367/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th March 2020                            |On 20th April 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                SAYDUR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Junior of Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Lucas (the judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 18th September 2019.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 6th January 1993.   He
    is now 27 years of age.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the UK as a child visitor, together  with  his
    mother, on 11th February 2009.   He  had  leave  to  remain  from  19th
    January 2009 until 19th July 2009.

 4. The Appellant was 16 years of age when he entered the UK.  On 6th  July
    2009 he submitted form FLR(O) requesting further leave  to  remain.   A
    covering letter was submitted with the application explaining that  the
    application was based on compassionate circumstances, and human rights.
     The covering letter alleged that a fatwa had been issued in Bangladesh
    against the Appellant's mother as it was alleged she had been having an
    affair.  The Appellant had had no communication from his  father  since
    1999.

 5. The Appellant's mother left him in the UK on 15th  May  2009.   He  had
    been unsuccessful in making any contact with her after  her  departure.
    The letter, which was dated 1st July 2009, explained that the Appellant
    was being supported by friends and  staying  in  various  places  on  a
    temporary basis.

 6. The application was refused on 8th April 2019,  approaching  ten  years
    after it had been made.  The Respondent noted that  the  Appellant  did
    not claim to have a partner, parent or dependent children  in  the  UK,
    and therefore did not consider family life pursuant to Appendix FM.

 7. The Appellant's private life had  been  considered  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1).  The Respondent found that the application  failed
    on grounds of suitability under section S-LTR.1.6  as  the  Appellant's
    presence in the UK is not conducive  to  the  public  good.   This  was
    because on 20th April 2012 he had been convicted of  an  act  outraging
    public decency for which he had received a conditional discharge of six
    months.

 8. The Appellant was 16 at the date that  he  had  applied  for  leave  to
    remain and  the  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  he  satisfied  the
    requirements of any of the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1).

 9. The Respondent did  not  accept  that  the  application  disclosed  any
    exceptional circumstances which would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences if  the  Appellant  had  to  return  to  Bangladesh.   The
    Respondent noted that the Appellant had given a false  address  in  his
    application.  This had been discovered by Social Services  who  visited
    the address in February 2010 and  discovered  that  the  Appellant  had
    never lived there.  It was noted that the Appellant's mother  had  been
    able to return to Bangladesh without any apparent difficulty.   It  was
    noted that the Appellant's mother had  been  successful  in  making  an
    entry clearance application to return to the UK on 12th February  2018.
    She had entered the UK with the Appellant's siblings.

10. The appeal was heard on 3rd  September  2019.   The  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the Appellant and his mother.   It  was  noted  that  the
    Appellant's father did not attend the hearing, and neither did  any  of
    his siblings.

11. The judge found that the Appellant was  not  a  reliable  or  plausible
    witness.  It was accepted at paragraph 28 that he had "been within  the
    UK for around ten years".  The judge found  that  the  application  for
    leave to remain made in 2009 was based mainly on false information.  It
    was accepted by the Appellant that a fatwa had not been issued  against
    his mother, and his parents had never separated.  A bogus  address  had
    been provided. The judge found the Appellant had not sought to  correct
    the bogus information.

12. The Appellant stated that an agent had made the application for him but
    the judge  did  not  find  that  plausible,  as  at  the  time  of  the
    application the Appellant had two adult parents in the UK.

13. The judge found that the Appellant's mother had returned to  Bangladesh
    on more than one occasion.  There was no explanation why the  Appellant
    chose to remain in the UK between 2009-2017 when the rest of his family
    were in Bangladesh.  The judge did not accept the claim that the family
    home in Bangladesh had been sold.  The appeal was dismissed.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

14. It was contended that the judge had erred by failing to  consider  that
    the Appellant was a minor when he arrived in the  UK.   The  judge  had
    also erred by failing to address the effect of the  Respondent's  delay
    in making a decision upon the application for leave to remain.

15. It was claimed that the Appellant had a legitimate expectation of being
    given discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  after  ten  years'
    residence.  It  was  not  disputed  that  false  information  had  been
    provided in the application, but it was submitted that  the  judge  had
    erred by failing to consider that the Appellant was  a  minor  at  that
    time, and the false information was submitted by a third party.  It was
    claimed that the Appellant  was  not  aware  of  the  contents  of  the
    application until he received the refusal letter in April 2019.

16. It was contended that the judge had erred by finding that the Appellant
    had two parents in the UK when the application for leave to remain  was
    made.  The Appellant in his witness statement claimed that  his  mother
    had gone back to Bangladesh.  It was claimed that the judge  had  erred
    by finding that there was no explanation why  the  Appellant  chose  to
    remain in the UK between 2009-2017 when the  remainder  of  his  family
    were in Bangladesh.  The judge had failed to take into account that the
    Appellant's mother explained that she had left him in the  UK  for  his
    own safety.

17. It was submitted that the judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  apply  or
    consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and had therefore failed  to  consider
    whether there were significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration
    in Bangladesh.

18. It was contended that the judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  make  any
    finding on the public interest considerations in section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

19. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Appleyard  in  the  following
    terms;

         "2.  The grounds assert that the judge erred in his approach to the
             evidence with particular reference to credibility,  the  issue
             of delay, the  use  of  an  agent,  evidence  as  to  why  the
             Appellant remained in the  United  Kingdom  between  2009  and
             2017, erred in his approach to significant  obstacles  to  the
             Appellant's reintegration back in Bangladesh,  the  fact  that
             the  Appellant  was  a  minor  at  the  time  of  his  initial
             application and has failed to make findings in relation to the
             public interest.  While some of these grounds are far stronger
             than others they are nonetheless arguable".

20. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

21. Mr Junior relied upon the grounds upon which permission to  appeal  had
    been granted.  His initial submission was that the judge had  erred  by
    not considering paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) but  he  did  not  pursue  that
    submission, when it became apparent that the Appellant was  not  18  at
    the date of application which is a requirement.

22. It was submitted that the judge had  not  considered  the  Respondent's
    delay in making a decision upon the Appellant's  application,  and  had
    failed  to  take  properly  into  account  the  Appellant's  length  of
    residence in the UK.

23. It was submitted that the judge had failed to take  into  account  that
    the Appellant's family are in the UK and settled, although upon  closer
    inspection of  the  documentary  evidence  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's father is settled but his mother and sisters  have  limited
    leave to remain.

24. Mr Tufan submitted that there were no material errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of the FtT.  It was submitted that part of the delay had  been
    caused by the Appellant providing what was subsequently accepted to  be
    a bogus address, and it was submitted that the Appellant had  not  been
    prejudiced by the delay.

25. I asked Mr Tufan for his views on the omission by the judge to refer to
    section 117B, and was told that this was  an  error  of  law,  but  not
    material in the circumstances.  It was submitted that the  judge  could
    not have come to any other conclusion than to dismiss the appeal.

26. In responding Mr Junior reiterated that although the  address  provided
    in the application had been bogus,  that  was  not  the  fault  of  the
    Appellant but was the fault of the agent who submitted the application.
     I was referred to the Appellant's bundle before the FtT at pages 20-25
    which demonstrated that the Appellant's representatives  had  attempted
    to "chase" the Respondent  for  a  decision  in  this  matter  and  had
    provided the Appellant's correct address.

My Conclusions and Reasons

27. I do not find that the judge erred in law by failing to appreciate that
    the Appellant was a minor when he arrived in  the  UK.   In  the  first
    paragraph of the judge's decision, the Appellant's  date  of  birth  is
    recited.  In paragraph 5 the judge records that the  Appellant  entered
    the UK on 11th February 2009.

28. The judge was aware of the delay in the Respondent reaching a  decision
    on the  application.   At  paragraph  3  the  judge  records  that  the
    application for leave to remain was made on 6th July 2009, and  in  the
    first paragraph of the decision the judge records that the Respondent's
    decision was not made until 8th April 2019.  I do  not  find  that  the
    judge erred on this issue, and the delay made the application  stronger
    than it might have been, had the Respondent  made  a  decision  shortly
    after the application had been made.

29. The judge at  paragraph  38  did  not  err  when  concluding  that  the
    application for leave to remain, made in 2009, "was based largely  upon
    bogus information with a false address".

30. The judge did not err, in  not  accepting  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    legitimate expectation that he was entitled  to  be  granted  leave  to
    remain after being resident in the UK for ten years.  In fact,  section
    117B(5) provides the opposite, in that little weight should be given to
    a private life established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
    immigration status is precarious.

31. I find no error of law at paragraph 31 in which the  judge  rejects  as
    implausible the Appellant's explanation that an agent was to blame  for
    the false information contained in the application for leave to remain.
     The judge found there was no need for the Appellant to use an agent as
    he had two adult parents who cared for him at that  time.   It  may  be
    that  the  Appellant's  mother  had  departed  from  the  UK  when  the
    application was made,  but  the  witness  statement  submitted  by  the
    Appellant's father, which was in the Appellant's bundle before the FtT,
    and is dated 20th August 2019, confirms that he first came to the UK on
    3rd November 2001 and "finally got my status in September 2009".  It is
    not clear why the Appellant's father did not submit the application for
    leave to remain on behalf of the Appellant.

32. The judge did  not  err  in  not  considering  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    because,  leaving  aside  the  issue  of  suitability  raised  by   the
    Respondent in the refusal decision, the Appellant was  not  18  at  the
    date of application.

33. The judge did err by failing to consider section 117B of the 2002  Act.
    This error is not however material in the circumstances of this appeal.

34. This is because  section  117B(1)  provides  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is in the public interest.   The  judge's
    failure to consider this cannot be of assistance to the Appellant.   In
    fact, it is detrimental to the Appellant's case.  The Appellant, or his
    family on his behalf,  submitted  a  false  application  for  leave  to
    remain.

35. Section 117B provides that it is in the public interest that  a  person
    seeking  leave  to  remain  can  speak  English  and   is   financially
    independent.  These are neutral factors,  in  that  the  Appellant  can
    speak English, and is not reliant upon public funds.

36. Section 117B(5) relates to the Appellant.  This is because he has  only
    ever had a precarious immigration status.  He submitted an  application
    for leave to remain prior to the expiry of his leave in 2009,  but  has
    never held any leave other than as a child  visitor  which  expired  in
    2009.  It is appropriate to attach little weight to  the  private  life
    that he has established in those circumstances.

37. In my view the judge erred by not adopting a structured approach.   The
    judge should firstly have made a finding as to whether  Article  8  was
    engaged.  It appears that it is accepted that Article  8  was  engaged,
    based on the Appellant's private life.   The  judge  should  then  have
    considered  whether  the  Appellant  could  succeed  by  reliance  upon
    Appendix FM in relation to  family  life,  or  paragraph  276ADE(1)  in
    relation to private life.  The judge would have had to have found  that
    the Appellant could not succeed on those grounds.

38.  The  judge  should  then  have  considered  whether  there  were   any
    exceptional circumstances which would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences if the Appellant was not allowed to remain in the UK.   It
    is not expressly stated that the judge did this, but it can be  implied
    from  the  decision  that  the  judge   found   no   such   exceptional
    circumstances existed.

39.  The  failure  to  adopt  a  structured  approach  is  not,  given  the
    circumstances of this appeal, a material error of law.  In this appeal,
    the Appellant presented as  a  single  man  on  whose  behalf  a  false
    application for leave to remain had been submitted.  He  had  residence
    in  excess  of  ten  years  but  his  immigration  status  was   always
    precarious.  There were no relevant medical issues, and there  were  no
    language  or  cultural  difficulties  if  the  Appellant  returned   to
    Bangladesh.  The judge did not find the Appellant and his witness to be
    credible and gave reasons for that finding.

40. The judge was entitled to find that the  Appellant  had  established  a
    private life in the UK, but that interference with  that  private  life
    was necessary in the interests  of  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control, and proportionate in the circumstances.  Had the judge adopted
    a structured approach, based on the evidence presented on behalf of the
    Appellant, the judge would have had to, in my view, dismiss the appeal.

41. I conclude that the judge's decision does not contain a material  error
    of law.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT did not involve the making of an error of  law  such
that the decision must be set aside.  I do not set aside the decision.   The
appeal is dismissed.




There has been no application for anonymity and I see no  need  to  make  an
anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date         18th March 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date         18th March 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
