
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07421/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10th August 2017                   |On 20th September 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               aftab najmuddin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Powell, promulgated on 16th  November  2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Newport  on  9th  November  2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born on 2nd  March
    1968.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  17th
    November 2015, refusing his application to remain as a spouse, who  was
    present and settled in the UK, such an application having been made  on
    6th August 2015.  It is a feature of this  appeal  that  there  was  an
    earlier decision by Judge Coaster in February 2015, where he had  found
    that there were no exceptional circumstances on which the Secretary  of
    State could exercise her discretion to allow  the  Appellant  leave  to
    remain.  Judge Coaster had also taken into account Section  55  of  the
    BCIA 2009 and the Human Convention on the Rights of a Child.

The Judge's Findings

 3.  Judge Powell, who determined the appeal on the  basis  of  submissions
    made to her without the calling of oral evidence, noted the  submission
    on the part of the Appellant, namely, that there had been a significant
    change of circumstances in that the Appellant's 17  year  old  daughter
    had now completed seven years residence in the United Kingdom  and  his
    wife had also been made a British  citizen  (paragraph  14).   Although
    there had been a previous decision by Judge Coaster, Judge Powell  held
    that time had now moved on in that  the  Appellant's  son  was  now  at
    university and is no longer a child and that he was over  18  years  of
    age.  His daughter was 17 and she was also studying in the  sixth  form
    and doing very well and had an ambition of becoming a doctor.  She  had
    completed seven years' residence in this country (paragraph 20).

 4. In terms of the proportionality of the Secretary of  State's  decision,
    the judge held that, given that the Appellant's wife had  now  acquired
    British citizenship status, their daughter could continue to live  with
    the British citizen mother, whilst undertaking her A  levels,  and  she
    would not be required to leave the United Kingdom  if  the  Appellant's
    appeal was unsuccessful (paragraph 21).  The judge  further  held  that
    the Appellant's wife could  also  continue  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom even if her husband's appeal fails.  She had expressed  a  fear
    that she would be unable to pay her mortgage or to  continue  with  her
    relatively well paid job here or of being further still  able  to  find
    suitable employment in a male dominated employment market in India were
    she to return there (paragraph 22).   Taking  all  these  matters  into
    account, the judge  held  that  although  it  was  the  case  that  the
    Appellant had lived with his children since March 2013,  "there  is  no
    sufficient evidence to suggest that, if there is a  further  period  of
    separation,  the  children's  safety  or  welfare  would  be   damaged"
    (paragraph 25).

 5. Given the submission on the Appellant's part  from  his  representative
    was that the Appellant was now able to meet the Immigration Rules,  the
    judge held that in that event, the Appellant could return to India  and
    make a fresh application under the  Immigration  Rules.   It  had  been
    suggested on the Appellant's behalf  that  there  were  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to this course of  action  because  of  the  impact  on  the
    Appellant's wife and daughter and  that  this  would  be  unreasonable.
    However, the judge rejected this contention on the basis  that  it  did
    "not carry particular weight because neither his wife nor his  daughter
    are required to leave if the Appellant's appeal fails" (paragraph 27).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that by the date of the hearing before
    Judge Powell, the Appellant's child had become a  qualified  child  and
    his  wife  had  also  become  a  British  citizen.   It  was  in  these
    circumstances that it fell upon the judge to determine whether it would
    be reasonable for the daughter to leave the UK or  whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles that prevented the wife from leaving  the  UK,
    because otherwise there would be a separation between the Appellant and
    the rest of his family.  It was in this respect that Article 8  had  to
    be considered properly.

 8. On 29th June 2017, the Upper Tribunal granted permission on  the  basis
    that when  conducting  the  balancing  exercise  under  Article  8  (at
    paragraph 24 onwards) the judge failed to attach significant weight  to
    the child's residence of over seven years in this country  pursuant  to
    the guidance given in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705.   The  judge
    also failed to apply Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before  me  on  10th  August  2017,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Chohan and  the  Respondent  was  represented  by  Mr
    Kotas.  Mr Chohan submitted that the  Appellant  would  have  made  his
    application alongside that of the rest of his family were  it  not  for
    the fact that the 2002 Rule changes came into effect and prevented  him
    from doing so.  However, by  the  date  of  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Powell, he had clearly managed to comply with the new Rules.  In  those
    circumstances his appeal should have  been  allowed  because  he  could
    demonstrate compliance and this meant that an adverse decision would be
    disproportionate to his Article 8 rights because such a decision  would
    require his separation from the rest of his family.

10. Second, it was perverse to suggest that a child who had been in the  UK
    for seven years, but had done so at the lower end  of  the  age  scale,
    would be able to demonstrate a lack of proportionality,  if  separation
    ensued between father and the rest of the family; but a  child  at  the
    top end of the age group, who faced a similar separation, would not  be
    able to so demonstrate.

11. This is because the Appellant's daughter was in the final year of her A
    levels, was planning to become  a  doctor,  and  was  living  with  her
    father, and if she were to be separated from her father, the Appellant,
    then the impact of this separation will be far greater at her age, than
    it would be had she been 6 or 7 years of age.  Her "best interests" and
    her welfare was far more closely intertwined with the presence  of  her
    father in the United Kingdom than would the  case  had  she  been  much
    younger.

12. For his part, Mr Kotas submitted that even if what Mr Chohan  submitted
    was correct, there was simply no expectation that the children  of  the
    Appellant would leave the UK, and if this was  the  case  then  Section
    117B(6) would not bite, and this being so the Appellant's removal would
    not be disproportionate.  This was a far cry from a case such  as  that
    of MA (Pakistan) where the family was facing removal.  The  expectation
    there was that the children would also have to leave.  That was not the
    case here.

13. In reply, Mr Chohan submitted that there  was  an  implication  in  the
    decision of Judge Coaster (at paragraph 6) that  the  Appellant  risked
    becoming an overstayer, and this appears to have affected  the  way  in
    which  Judge  Powell  determined  the  appeal.   This,   however,   was
    incorrect.  The  Appellant  had  Section  3C  leave  and  never  risked
    becoming  an  overstayer.   In  these  circumstances,  the  bounds   of
    considerations fell in his favour.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

15. First, this is a  case  where  permission  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the Tribunal failed  to  attach  significant
    weight to the child's residence of over seven years  in  the  UK.    In
    fact, the determination fails  to  make  a  reference  to  Azimi-Moayed
    [2013] UKUT 197, which dealt with the "best interests"  of  the  child.
    It was made clear in that case that the Upper Tribunal has identified a
    number of principles to assist in the determination  of  appeals  where
    children are affected by the decisions (see paragraph 30).  It was made
    clear that the starting point in the best interests of children has  to
    be the principle that  the  children  should  be  with  both  of  their
    parents.

16. In circumstances where the Appellant's wife is now a  British  citizen,
    and is settled in this country, and there is no  expectation  that  she
    will leave this  country,  the  children  face  the  dilemma  of  being
    separated from their father.  The Upper Tribunal  also  made  it  clear
    that, "it is generally in  the  interests  of  children  to  have  both
    stability and continuity of social and educational  provision  and  the
    benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of  the  society  to  which
    they belong".

17. Plainly this is a case where the Appellant's daughter is undertaking  A
    levels and is poised to go to university and education provision was  a
    matter that was strongly emphasised before the Tribunal below.  Indeed,
    Judge Powell stated that, "the Appellant's daughter's education  is  an
    important factor" (paragraph 25).  The Tribunal  also  emphasised  that
    "lengthy residence in a country other than the state of origin can lead
    to development of social, cultural and educational ties" such that  "it
    would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of compelling reasons
    to the contrary" such a residence.

18. It is a feature of this case that the Appellant has not been engaged in
    any illegality whatsoever.  Indeed, he has had Section 3C leave and has
    always been lawfully present in this country.  For the last four years,
    as Judge Powell recognised, the Appellant's daughter  has  been  living
    with her father, and that has been from  the  age  of  14,  and  it  is
    doubtless the case that she will suffer the impact of his removal in  a
    significant way.

19. Second, and no less  importantly,  however,  are  the  IDIs  on  family
    migration: Appendix FM, which states  at  paragraph  11.2.4,  that  the
    longer a non-British citizen child has resided in the UK, the more  the
    balance swings in favour of it being unreasonable to expect  the  child
    to leave the UK, and strong reasons are required to refuse a case where
    the child has accrued seven years' continuous  residence.   I  have  no
    doubt in coming to the conclusion that "strong reasons" were not  shown
    by the Secretary of State to refuse  this  case  where  the  child  had
    accrued seven years' continuous residence at the top  end  of  the  age
    group before  she  reaches  the  age  of  majority.   It  is  in  these
    circumstances that the policy in Section 117B has to be applied.   This
    brings me to the third point.

20. Thirdly, in AM (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260, the Tribunal held  that
    what is raised by Section 117B(6) is whether it would be reasonable  to
    expect  a  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The  question   of
    reasonableness was especially tackled in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ
    705, which made it clear that the  court  should  have  regard  to  the
    conduct of the applicant and any other matters relevant to  the  public
    interest when applying the "unduly harsh" concept under Section 117.

21. In EV (Philippines) Clarke LJ (at paragraphs 34 to 37) stated that, "if
    it is overwhelmingly in the child's best interests to remain, the  need
    to maintain immigration control may well not tip the balance"  had  the
    strictures in Azimi-Moayed and in the Home Office's own policy  in  the
    IDI on family migration, been taken into account by the judge below the
    Section 117B evaluation would have  been  quite  different,  not  least
    because the judge would have been forced to consider the fact that  the
    Secretary of State has to show "strong reasons"  for  not  finding  the
    balance of considerations fall in favour of  the  Appellant  where  the
    seven year residence has been completed.  For all  these  reasons,  the
    judge erred in law.

Re-Making the Decision

22. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have decided to make a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may  be
payable.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017

