
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07068/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th November 2018                         |On 31st January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             mr Baljinder kumar
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  Entry Clearance Officer - ukvs sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain (Counsel), Hussain Immigration Law
Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Myers, promulgated on 17th August 2018, following  a  hearing  at
    Bradford on 6th August 2018.  In the determination, the  judge  allowed
    the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born  on  1st  May
    1980.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  22nd
    May 2018, refusing his  application  for  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as the partner of a British  citizen,  namely,  his  sponsoring
    wife, [DL], who was present and settled in the UK.

The Reasons for Refusal

 3. The reasons for refusal by the Respondent were that the  Appellant  had
    entered the UK initially on an illegal basis on 13th  April  2005.   He
    had then remained until 3rd April 2016.  He then left  to  go  back  to
    India on a voluntary basis.  He had been refused leave to remain in the
    UK on suitability grounds as  he  had  failed  to  declare  an  assumed
    different identity.  Accordingly, the  issue  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant  had  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate   the
    intentions of the Immigration Rules.  Although the Appellant may have a
    family life with his sponsoring wife, the ECO was  satisfied  that  the
    decision was proportionate under Article 8 as well.  The ECM upheld the
    decision on 6th October 2017, with the  observation  that  despite  the
    fact that the Appellant had voluntarily departed from the  UK,  he  was
    not able to sufficiently mitigate his unlawful residence in the UK  for
    the preceding ten years, when he lived here without valid leave.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard evidence from the sponsoring  wife,  [DL],  who  stated
    that she and the Appellant married on 12th December 2014,  following  a
    previous failed marriage from which he had two elder children.  She was
    a civilian worker for the Greater Manchester Police and owned  her  own
    home.  In the refusal letter it had been suggested that  the  Appellant
    had used the name of "Baljinder Kumat", as an alias for his  real  name
    of "Baljinder Kumar", and the Appellant denied this, claiming that this
    was a typing error.  It must have been abundantly plain to anyone  with
    any knowledge of Indian names that this was indeed an error.  There  is
    no such name as "Kumat", whereas there is a well-known  Indian  surname
    by the name of "Kumar".  The judge properly held that this was indeed a
    typing error, and no issue arises from this.  (See paragraph 26).

 5. The judge then went on to consider paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration
    Rules,  and  observed  that  the  power  to  refuse   is   couched   in
    discretionary terms  (paragraph  22).   The  judge  observed  that  the
    Respondent had accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage relationship with his  sponsoring  wife.   She  had
    stated that she could not relocate to live with the Appellant in  India
    and the judge found that, on  balance,  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect her to do so because, she is a British citizen who has lived  in
    the UK for most of her life.  Although her two children are now  adults
    they are in a close relationship with her and both are presently living
    with her together with the  son's  wife.   All  her  other  family  and
    friends are in the UK and she would have to give up her job  to  go  to
    live in India".  Moreover, it was not in dispute that "she has had some
    serious health conditions and it would be unreasonable to expect her to
    forgo the benefits of entitlement to NHS care" (paragraph 28).

 6. On the other hand, the judge did accept  that  the  Appellant's  entire
    stay in the UK "has been unlawful and he has shown scant regard for the
    immigration laws of the UK" (paragraph 29).  However, the Appellant met
    the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  because  "he  returned  to   India
    voluntarily" (paragraph 30).

 7. In conclusion, the judge held that "this decision is  finely  balanced,
    but overall, I find that the decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  is
    disproportionate as having found that it is unreasonable to expect  the
    Sponsor to live in India,  it  is  likely  their  separation  would  be
    indefinite because any future application by the Appellant  would  also
    be refused under 320(11) and  so  for  these  reasons  the  appeal  was
    allowed on Article 8 grounds (see paragraphs 31 to 32).

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  have
    allowed the appeal on the basis that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
    would be disproportionate.

 9. On 28th September 2018 permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that, having the judge concluded at paragraph 29,  that  little  weight
    would be given to the Appellant's family life with his wife, and  there
    were aggravating circumstances which would normally justify refusal  of
    entry clearance under paragraph 320(11), the judge concluded  that  the
    Appellant's wife's inability to relocate to India was said to  outweigh
    the public interest in refusal of entry clearance.

10. On 16th October 2018 a Rule 24 response was entered by Mr  T.  Hussain,
    of Counsel, appearing on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   First,  it  was
    submitted that the Secretary of State  had  spent  the  entire  grounds
    arguing that this was a leave to remain application, whereas it was  in
    fact a leave to enter application.  The facts of this  case  were  that
    the Appellant had left the UK and made a lawful  application  to  enter
    the UK.  Second, the Secretary  of  State  argued  that  the  Appellant
    should not be granted entry, but this  argument  was  rejected  by  the
    Tribunal Judge, IJ Myers.  What the Secretary of State  was  now  doing
    was attempting to reargue the point which had  already  been  rejected.
    Third, this was in short nothing more than a challenge  to  the  weight
    that the judge should have given to various aspects  of  the  evidence,
    including the proportionality and public interest, but it was  for  the
    judge who came to  an  ultimately  sustainable  conclusion,  to  decide
    whether or not the Secretary  of  State  could  succeed,  and  she  had
    decided that the Appellant's appeal must be allowed, because the burden
    upon him had been discharged.  The findings of the judge  were  neither
    plainly wrong nor unsustainable in the light of R [2005] EWCA Civ  982,
    at paragraph 90.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me, Mr McVeety, appearing as Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer on behalf of the Respondent, stated that she had  to
    allow the appeal because if she did not, then the Appellant  would  not
    be able  to  enter  the  UK  under  paragraph  320(11)  in  the  future
    (paragraph 31).  The judge had not followed the  correct  approach  for
    consideration of Article 8 cases outside of the  Immigration  Rules  as
    set out in TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA  Civ  1109.   The  judge  did  not
    identify any exceptional circumstances.  This is because these did  not
    exist.  Yet, the Secretary of State's policy was that leave should only
    be granted where exceptional circumstances apply.  By this is it  meant
    that circumstances in which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh
    consequences for the person concerned.  The legality of this policy was
    tested  in  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11.   In  this  case  the  Sponsor's
    circumstances originated mainly from the fact that she  had  lived  all
    her life in the UK, and that this made relocation difficult,  but  this
    was not to say it made it unreasonable.   The  Appellant's  spouse  may
    prefer to remain in the UK, but  choice  had  little  to  do  with  the
    relevant assessment of Article 8 considerations.  In fact, in  Agyarko,
    being a British national, with access to benefits of such  citizenship,
    was rejected by the Court of Appeal, as insurmountable or  exceptional,
    in Agyarko.

12. Secondly, the judge found that the Appellant's  relationship  with  his
    sponsoring wife was formed when both of them were aware that he had  no
    immigration status and consequently little weight should  be  given  to
    family life so developed.  The settled jurisprudence  of  the  European
    Court of Human Rights is  that  only  in  exceptional  cases  would  an
    Article 8 case succeed where an unsettled migrant has commenced  family
    life in the UK at a time when his  immigration  status  is  precarious.
    This was clear from Jeunesse v Netherlands [2016] 60 EHRR 17.

13. For his part, Mr Hussain submitted that the Court of Appeal judgment in
    Agyarko had actually be superseded by  the  Supreme  Court's  decision,
    which, (at paragraph 59  to  60)  makes  it  clear  that  the  test  of
    exceptionality does not import a highly usual  feature  to  the  claim.
    This was a case where the judge had found against the Appellant,  where
    he was culpable in terms of his breach of the immigration laws, but had
    then also found in favour of the claim succeeding, for  reasons  given,
    which included the inability of the sponsoring wife to relocate to  the
    UK, where she had a family life with her  children,  with  one  of  his
    married sons actually living with her.

14. Second, the Sponsor's medical condition was properly set out  (see  the
    Appellant's bundle at page 151 to 156) and the  judge  was  correct  to
    come to the conclusion that the sponsoring wife, as a British  citizen,
    was entitled to the benefits of citizenship in this country,  by  being
    able to access healthcare where she was settled.  Third, the grounds of
    appeal focus upon a situation where the application  is  for  leave  to
    remain, rather than leave to enter, and the grounds  were  misconceived
    to that extant.  The judge had observed that there was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage relationship.  The Sponsor was in need  of  medical
    treatment.  She worked for the Greater Manchester Police.   She  had  a
    home in the UK.   Her  children  lived  with  her.   Her  husband,  the
    Appellant,  had  returned  voluntarily.   The  application   that   the
    Appellant had made from India disclosed all these matters,  which  were
    of concern to the Respondent, so  that  nothing  was  hidden  from  the
    Secretary of State.

15. Third, the assessment of the public interest was well undertaken by the
    judge here, where the end  concluded  that  "this  decision  is  finely
    balanced" (paragraph 31).  In all the circumstances of this case,  this
    was nothing more than a disagreement with the decision of the judge.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by Judge Myers  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law, such that it  falls  to  be  set
    aside (see Section 12(1) of TCEA).  My reasons are as follows.

17. First, the judge properly comes to the conclusion that  the  Respondent
    had correctly exercised discretion in refusing  the  application  under
    paragraph 320(11), "and this  is  relevant  in  making  any  Article  8
    proportionality assessment) (paragraph 27).  The judge then goes on  to
    look at the Appellant's individual  circumstances  (at  paragraph  28),
    observing that he is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his
    sponsoring wife, who is a British citizen, in close  relationship  with
    her adult children, in circumstances where she has  had  "some  serious
    health conditions" herself (paragraph 28).   The  judge  then  balances
    this consideration as against the Appellant's stay  in  the  UK  noting
    that "he has shown scant regard for the immigration laws of the UK" and
    that they had formed a relationship together when they were both  aware
    that the Appellant had no immigration status (paragraph 29).  The judge
    then concluded that the Appellant met the requirements of Appendix  FM,
    and that he returned to India voluntarily.  In this regard,  the  judge
    even held that "the Appellant voluntarily left the UK, albeit  when  he
    had no other option, and  then  sought  to  regularise  his  status  by
    correctly applying for entry clearance" (paragraph 30).   There can  be
    no disagreement in the precise language used here  and  the  manner  in
    which this properly takes  into  account  exactly  what  has  happened.
    Finally, the  judge  then  concludes  that  "this  decision  is  finely
    balanced", but that overall, the decision to refuse entry clearance  is
    disproportionate because "it is unreasonable to expect the  Sponsor  to
    live in India" and that "it is likely that their  separation  would  be
    indefinite because any future application by the Appellant  would  also
    be refused under 320(11)", and this as a finding of fact, was a finding
    that the judge was able to make, on the basis of her assessment of  the
    facts as were represented before her.  Any disagreement with this is  a
    disagreement with the decision, unless it can be said that as a  matter
    of law such a conclusion is wrong.

18. Second, as a matter of law, the conclusion  was  not  wrong.   This  is
    because in Agyarko, the Supreme Court observed (at paragraph 42) how in
    Jeunesse, the Grand Chamber had identified "a number of factors  to  be
    taken into account in assessing the proportionality under Article 8  of
    the removal of non-settled migrants".  It had said that:

         "Relevant factors were said to include the extent to  which  family
         life would effectively be ruptured, the extent of the ties  in  the
         contracting state, whether there were 'insurmountable obstacles' in
         the way of the family living  in  the  country  of  origin  of  the
         national concerned, and whether there were factors  of  immigration
         control ...".

19. However, even  more  relevant  is  the  fact  that  the  Supreme  Court
    explained that:

         "The Secretary of State has not imposed a test of exceptionality in
         the sense that the case should exhibit some highly unusual feature,
         over and above the application of the test of proportionality.   On
         the contrary, she had defined the word  'exceptional',  as  already
         explained, as meaning circumstances in which refusal  would  result
         in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  individual  such  that
         the  refusal  of  the  application  would  not  be   proportionate"
         (paragraph 60).

20. This is precisely how the judge approached the issues before her.   She
    viewed the matter as one of proportionality.   She  did  not  look  for
    "some highly unusual feature".  She then  concluded  that  the  refusal
    "would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  individual"
    concerned,  in  a  manner  that  made  the  decision  disproportionate.
    Another  Tribunal  may  well  have  come  to  a  different  conclusion.
    However, given the way in which the judge in this case  had  approached
    the facts of the appeal before her, such a conclusion was one that  was
    open to the judge to reach.  This Tribunal,  exercising  a  supervisory
    jurisdiction, cannot interfere with that conclusion.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.  The decision shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th January 2019

