
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07439/2019
                                                               HU/07445/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 December 2019                  |On 7 January 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between
                                   1) S K
                                   2) A K
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, Counsel instructed by A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  I
continue the anonymity direction because the Appellants are minor  children.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellants appeal against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Obhi promulgated on 30 July 2019 ("the  Decision")  dismissing
       the Appellants' appeals against the Secretary  of  State's  decision
       dated  4  April  2019  refusing  their  human  rights  claims.   The
       Appellants are nationals of Ghana currently aged five and four years
       respectively.  Their mother, [VA], also a Ghanaian national  has  no
       right to remain in the UK.  Her appeal against refusal  of  a  human
       rights claim (based in large part on the  position  of  the  current
       Appellants) has been dismissed.  The children's father,  [SOK],  who
       is also a Ghanaian national has limited leave to remain based on his
       relationship  as  the  father  of   two   daughters   from   another
       relationship.  Those children are British  citizens.   He  does  not
       live with any of the children.  He has however retained contact with
       his  British  citizen  children  and  restored  contact   with   the
       Appellants in 2018, having separated from their mother in 2015.


    2. The Judge found that the children's best interests  were  served  by
       remaining with [VA] given their young age.  Neither of the  children
       are "qualifying children" for the purposes of  paragraph  276ADE  of
       the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") or Section 117B (6) Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117B").  The  Judge  found
       that [SOK] could go to Ghana to live or to visit the children.  They
       could maintain contact otherwise via other forms  of  communication.
       The First Appellant has sickle cell disease, but  it  was  found  in
       [VA]'s previous appeal that treatment exists for that  condition  in
       Ghana. The impact of removal did not meet the threshold of Article 3
       ECHR.  Article 8 was not to be seen as a way of avoiding  that  high
       threshold in medical cases. Balanced against  the  public  interest,
       the Judge concluded that the Respondent's decision  did  not  breach
       the Appellants' human rights.

    3. The Appellants challenge  the  Decision  on  a  number  of  grounds.
       First,  they  assert  that  the  Judge  has  wrongly   applied   the
       "Devaseelan" guidelines and failed to recognise that there  is  good
       reason to depart from the findings in the previous appeal  as  [SOK]
       has re-established contact with them.  Second, it is  asserted  that
       the Judge has failed to consider the Appellants' case that they  are
       able to meet paragraph R-LTRC.1.1(d) of Appendix FM to the Rules and
       paragraph 305 of the Rules as the children of a parent with  limited
       leave to remain in the UK.  Third, the Appellants  submit  that  the
       Judge has conflated best interests with  reasonableness  of  return,
       has failed to consider whether the children's best interests are  to
       remain in the UK or return to Ghana, wrongly takes into account  the
       parents' immigration history and wrongly applies paragraph 276ADE of
       the Rules and Section 117B (6) to the best interests assessment when
       those are irrelevant to that consideration.    Fourth,  it  is  said
       that if paragraph 276ADE and Section 117B (6) are relevant, then the
       Judge has failed to consider whether there are very powerful reasons
       to require the children to leave the UK. Fifth, the  Appellants  say
       that the Judge has wrongly approached the evidence about  the  First
       Appellant's medical condition  when  applying  the  law  and  having
       failed to consider certain of the evidence.  Sixth, it is said  that
       the finding that the Appellants  can  maintain  contact  with  their
       father and half-siblings through media communication is contrary  to
       case-law.  Seventh, it is said  that  the  finding  that  [SOK]  can
       relocate to Ghana is inconsistent with the Judge's  acceptance  that
       he retains contact with his  British  citizen  daughters,  and  they
       cannot be expected to leave the UK.  Eighth, it  is  said  that  the
       Judge has failed to consider  the  best  interests  of  those  half-
       siblings when considering removal of the Appellants.  Finally, it is
       said that the Appellants' private lives should be accorded more than
       little weight applying Section 117B because they are children.


    4. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer
       on 4 October 2019 as follows:

           "The grounds have no merit at all. They amount to  nothing  more
           than a disagreement with the findings the Judge was entitled  to
           make on the various issues in the case, and a disagreement  with
           the decision."

    5. The Appellants renewed their  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
       Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell on
       7 November 2019 in the following terms:

           "Amongst other things, it was clearly submitted  to  Judge  Obhi
           that paragraph 305 of the Immigration  Rules  applied  to  these
           minor appellants.  That submission is recorded at  [18]  of  the
           judge's decision and appears in writing at [8] of  the  skeleton
           argument which was before the judge.  It was found by the  judge
           that the appellants enjoy a family life (albeit overstated) with
           their father.  They are both under 18.  They were  born  in  the
           United Kingdom.  It has not been suggested, as I understand  it,
           that they have formed an independent family unit.  And they have
           not been away from the United Kingdom for more  than  two  years
           since birth.
           In  these  circumstances,  there  was  an  arguable  case   that
           paragraph 305 of the Rules did indeed apply (although  it  might
           be argued by the respondent that the appellants do not  seek  to
           'join or remain with' their father given the absence of  current
           or intended cohabitation).  It was arguably an error of law  for
           Judge Obhi not to consider the application of the paragraph  and
           any such error was arguably material, given that satisfaction of
           the Rules would have been positively determinative of the appeal
           on Article 8 ECHR grounds.
           I give permission to argue each of the points  in  the  grounds,
           although the issue I have identified above  is  potentially  the
           most significant."

    6. The matter comes before me  to  decide  whether  the  Decision  does
       contain any error of law and, if I so conclude,  either  to  re-make
       the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  re-
       making.


    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION


    7. I begin with ground two which found favour with Judge Blundell  when
       granting permission.  In  order  to  consider  this  ground,  it  is
       necessary to set out the relevant parts of the Rules  which  are  as
       follows. The emphasis applied to the relevant sections of the  Rules
       is mine.


           Part 8 of the Rules: Paragraphs 304-309

                 Children born in the United Kingdom  who  are  not  British
citizens
            304.  This  paragraph  and  paragraphs  305-309  apply  only  to
           dependent children under 18 years of age who are  unmarried  and
           are not civil partners and who were born in the  United  Kingdom
           on or after 1 January 1983 (when  the  British  Nationality  Act
           1981 came into force) but who, because neither of their  parents
           was a British Citizen or settled in the United  Kingdom  at  the
           time of their birth, are not British Citizens and are  therefore
           subject to immigration control.  Such a child requires leave  to
           enter where admission to the United Kingdom is sought, and leave
           to remain where permission is sought for the child to be allowed
           to stay in the United Kingdom. ..

            Requirements for leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom
           as the child of a parent or parents given leave to remain in the
           United Kingdom
            305. The requirements to be met by a child born  in  the  United
           Kingdom who is not a British Citizen who seeks leave to enter or
           remain in the United Kingdom as the child of a parent or parents
           given leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  are  that
           he:
            (i) (a)    is accompanying or seeking to join or remain  with  a
                 parent or parents who have, or are given, leave to enter or
                 remain in the United Kingdom; or
                 (b)   is accompanying or seeking to join or remain  with  a
                 parent or parents one of whom is a British Citizen  or  has
                 the right of abode in the United Kingdom; or
                  (c)  is a child in respect of  whom  the  parental  rights
                 and duties are vested solely in a local authority; and
                       (ii)  is under the age of 18; and
                       (iii) was born in the United Kingdom; and
            (iv) is not leading an independent life,  is  unmarried  and  is
                 not a civil partner, and  has  not  formed  an  independent
                 family unit; and
                       ...
                 Leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
            306. A child born in the United Kingdom who  is  not  a  British
           Citizen and who  requires  leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
           circumstances set out in paragraph 304 may  be  given  leave  to
           enter for the  same  period  as  his  parent  or  parents  where
           paragraph 305(i)(a) applies, provided the Immigration Officer is
           satisfied that each of the requirements of paragraph  305(ii)  -
           (v) is met.  Where leave to remain is sought, the child  may  be
           granted leave to remain for the same period  as  his  parent  or
           parents  where  paragraph  305(i)(a)   applies,   provided   the
           Secretary of State is satisfied that each of the requirements of
           paragraph 305(ii) - (iv) is met.  Where the  parent  or  parents
           have or are given periods of leave of  different  duration,  the
           child may be given leave to whichever period  is  longer  except
           that if the parents are living apart the child should  be  given
           leave for the same period as the  parent  who  has  day  to  day
           responsibility for him.
            307. If a child does not qualify for leave to  enter  or  remain
           because neither of his parents has a current leave, (and neither
           of them is a British Citizen or has the right of abode), he will
           normally be refused leave to enter or remain, even  if  each  of
           the requirements of paragraph 305(ii) - (v) has been  satisfied.
           However, he may be granted leave to enter or remain for a period
           not exceeding 3 months if both of his parents are in the  United
           Kingdom and it appears unlikely that they will be removed in the
           immediate future, and there  is  no  other  person  outside  the
           United Kingdom who could reasonably be expected to care for him.
            ...
            Refusal of leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
            309. Leave to enter the United Kingdom where  the  circumstances
           set out  in  paragraph  304  apply  is  to  be  refused  if  the
           Immigration  Officer  is  not  satisfied  that   each   of   the
           requirements of paragraph 305 is met.  Leave to remain for  such
           a child is to be refused  if  the  Secretary  of  State  is  not
           satisfied that each of the requirements of paragraph 305  (i)  -
           (iv) is met.

            Appendix FM to the Rules

            Family life as a child of a  person  with  limited  leave  as  a
           partner or parent

            This route is for a child whose parent is  applying  under  this
           Appendix for entry clearance or leave, or who has limited leave,
           as a partner or  parent.   For  further  provision  on  a  child
           seeking to enter or remain in the UK for the  purpose  of  their
           family life see Part 8 of these Rules.
            ...
            Section R-LTRC: Requirements for leave to remain as a child
            R-LTRC.1.1.      The requirements to be met for leave to  remain
           as a child are that -
           a) The applicant must be in the UK;
           b) The applicant must have made a valid application for leave to
              remain as a child; and either
           c) (i)      the applicant must not fall for refusal under any of
              the grounds in Section S-LTR: Suitability - leave to  remain;
              and
              (ii)     the applicant  meets  all  of  the  requirements  of
              Section E-LTRC: Eligibility for leave to remain as  a  child;
              and
              (iii) a parent of the applicant has been or is  at  the  same
              time  being  granted  leave  to  remain  under  paragraph  D-
              LTRP.1.1. or D-LTRPT.1.1. or indefinite leave to remain under
              this Appendix (except as an adult dependent relative); or
           d) (i)      the applicant must not fall for refusal under any of
              the grounds in Section S-LTR: Suitability - leave to  remain;
              and
              (ii)     the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-
              LTRC.1.2.-1.6.; and
              (iii) a parent of the applicant has been or is  at  the  same
              time  being  granted  leave  to  remain  under  paragraph  D-
              LTRP.1.2.,  D-ILRP.1.2.,  D-LTRPT.1.2.  or  D-ILRPT.1.2.   or
              indefinite leave to remain under this Appendix (except as  an
              adult dependent relative).


              Section E-LTRC: Eligibility for leave to remain as a child
              E-LTRC.1.1. To qualify for limited leave to remain as a child
              all of the requirements of  paragraphs  E-LTRC.1.2.  to  2.4.
              must  be  met  (except  where  paragraph   R-LTRC.1.1.(d)(ii)
              applies).
              Relationship requirements
              E-LTRC.1.2.    The applicant must be under the age of  18  at
              the date of application or when  first  granted  leave  as  a
              child under this route.
              E-LTRC.1.3.    The applicant must not  be  married  or  in  a
              civil partnership.
              E-LTRC.1.4.     The  applicant  must  not  have   formed   an
              independent family unit.
              E-LTRC.1.5.     The  applicant  must  not   be   leading   an
              independent life.
              E-LTRC.1.6.    One of the applicant's parents (referred to in
              this section as the "applicant's parent") must be in  the  UK
              and have leave to enter or  remain  or  indefinite  leave  to
              remain, or is at the same time being granted leave to  remain
              or indefinite leave to remain, under this Appendix (except as
              an adult dependent relative), and
              a) The applicant's parent's partner under Appendix FM is  also
                 a parent of the applicant; or
              b) The applicant's parent has had and continues to  have  sole
                 responsibility for the child's upbringing or the  applicant
                 normally lives with this parent and not their other parent;
                 or
              c)  There  are  serious  and  compelling   family   or   other
                 considerations  which   make   exclusion   of   the   child
                 undesirable and suitable arrangements have  been  made  for
                 the child's care.

    8. I am of course currently dealing with the issue whether there is  an
       error of law in the Decision.  I can  deal  very  shortly  with  the
       Judge's treatment of the submissions made based on paragraphs 304 to
       307 of the Rules and Appendix FM to the Rules.  Although  the  Judge
       refers to being invited to "consider Immigration Rule 305", she does
       not thereafter consider it or the alternative submission which I  am
       told was made in relation to the Appendix FM provisions.  The  issue
       for me therefore is whether the error is a  material  one.   It  can
       only be material if  the  outcome  would  be  or  is  likely  to  be
       different if these provisions had been considered.


    9. Before I turn to consider the proper interpretation of  these  parts
       of the Rules, it is necessary to say a little more about  the  facts
       of the Appellants' cases.  I noted at [1] above that [VA] with  whom
       the Appellants live had previously made a human rights  claim  which
       was refused and her appeal dismissed.  The decision on that occasion
       was that of First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe promulgated on  2  August
       2017 ("the 2017 Decision").  I will need to say a bit more about the
       2017 Decision later but for now I simply note that  the  Appellants'
       mother made an application for leave to  remain  based  on  domestic
       violence asserted against the children's father  in  September  2015
       which application was refused on 22 December 2015.  She then applied
       for leave to remain based on  her  family  and  private  life  which
       generated the decision under appeal at that time.


   10. The facts as found in  the  2017  Decision  include  that  [VA]  was
       subjected to domestic violence from [SOK] following the birth of the
       First Appellant in September 2014, that  she  left  the  matrimonial
       home and  was  placed  by  Social  Services  in  bed  and  breakfast
       accommodation until she could return to the matrimonial home and she
       had not seen the children's father since.  The Second Appellant  was
       born in September 2015 and there had been no contact from then until
       the date of the hearing in July 2017.   The  evidence  before  Judge
       Obhi was that [SOK] resumed contact  with  the  Appellants  in  July
       2018, therefore about a year prior to the hearing before Judge Obhi.




   11. As I remarked in the course  of  the  hearing,  if  the  Appellants'
       submission regarding these provisions of the Rules is  correct,  the
       effect would be to give the Appellants leave to remain  where  their
       mother (with whom they live day-to-day) has no leave.  Their  mother
       would then be able to  apply  for  leave  to  remain  based  on  the
       Appellants' leave.  That is something of an absurd consequence,  but
       I accept that, if the Appellants are right about the construction of
       the relevant Rules any such absurdity would have to be  ignored  and
       they would be entitled to leave to remain if they are able  to  meet
       those Rules. That would then be relevant to the balance to be struck
       under Article 8 ECHR.


   12. As it is, I have concluded that the  Appellants'  interpretation  of
       the relevant Rules is incorrect for the following reasons.


   13. Dealing first with paragraph 305, there was brief discussion at  the
       hearing whether those provisions could apply at  all  following  the
       introduction of Appendix FM.   I accept Mr Solomon's assertion that,
       by reason of paragraph A280(b), paragraph 305 continues to apply.


   14. However, as Mr Solomon also accepted, paragraph 305 has to  be  read
       in the context of the section read as a whole.

   15. As Judge Blundell noted when  granting  permission  some  importance
       attaches to the words "join or remain with".  Mr Solomon  said  that
       according to the natural  meaning  of  those  words,  there  was  no
       requirement that the Appellants be living  with  their  father.   If
       that were the requirement, then the words  "reside  with"  would  be
       used.  I can accept that the children do not have to be living  with
       a parent in order to qualify.  So much is  evident  from  the  final
       sentence of paragraph 306 (although as I will come to, that does not
       assist the Appellants here).  However, paragraph 305 also has to  be
       read in the context of paragraph 304 which is concerned with a child
       seeking entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain.   It  is
       for that reason that paragraph 305 uses the words  "join  or  remain
       with".

   16. The first point to make about the paragraphs read together  is  that
       there is a requirement for "dependency" inherent in the scheme as  a
       whole,  as  appears  at  paragraph  304.   That  sets  the  context.
       Moreover, looking at the three subsections of paragraph 305 (i),  it
       is also evident  that  the  scheme  envisages  an  ongoing  parental
       relationship between child and parent.   Looking at the scheme as  a
       whole, its purpose appears to be to promote the formation of  family
       unity or continuation of such family unity between a child  and  its
       parent(s).

   17. Looking first at whether those requirements are met in this case, Mr
       Solomon said that the requisite dependency was  established  on  the
       evidence and  that  [SOK]  has  a  parental  relationship  based  on
       contact.  I cannot however accept that submission,  particularly  as
       regards dependency.  Mr Solomon directed my attention to one payment
       of �280 to the children's mother in May 2019 ([AB/62]). There is  no
       evidence that I can see about the reason for that  payment  or  even
       that it was intended to provide any support to  the  Appellants.  As
       Judge Obhi noted at [10] of the Decision, the Appellants' mother  is
       supported financially by the local authority. Mr Solomon  also  drew
       attention to the Appellants' father attending  medical  appointments
       with their mother on two occasions in October 2018 and  April  2019.
       Such contact as  is  disclosed  by  the  evidence  is  however  very
       limited.

   18. It is also necessary to look at Judge Obhi's findings about  [SOK]'s
       relationship with the Appellants.  At  [19]  of  the  Decision,  she
       refers to the Appellants' situation "as they are dependent on  their
       primary caregiver".  Having noted the history of  domestic  violence
       and [SOK]'s lack of contact  with  the  Appellants  until  recently,
       Judge  Obhi   says   the   following   about   the   father/children
       relationship:

            "20. ...[VA's] evidence to the previous Tribunal  is  that  the
           children's father, [SOK] was an unsupportive partner, subjecting
           her to violence and abandoning her to  care  for  the  children,
           resulting in the children having to rely on protection from  the
           local authority, and funding from the local  authority  to  meet
           their basic needs.  I am now told that he is  a  devoted  father
           who is involved in taking the children to school on two or three
           days a week and that he has contact with them  at  weekends  and
           that the children see the children from his relationship.
            21.  In light of the different account given  to  the  previous
           Tribunal, I have to be cautious in accepting what I am not told.
            I accept that [SOK] does have contact with the children at  the
           present time.  This is an Article 8 claim  and  I  am  satisfied
           that  there  is  a  family  life  between  the  mother  and  the
           appellants and between [SOK] and the appellants.  I find however
           that this has been overstated for the purposes of  this  appeal.
           He may well be attending their schools  two  or  three  times  a
           week, and  having  weekend  contact,  but  the  history  of  his
           relationship with the children and their mother is poor, to  the
           extent that  the  local  authority  was  having  to  financially
           support  the  children  as  [SOK]   was   not   exercising   his
           responsibility over them.  It is  significant  that  the  mother
           described  herself  in  the  role  of   a   parent   with   sole
           responsibility."

   19.  Whilst I appreciate that those findings are not made in the context
       of considering dependency or parental relationship, they  are  fatal
       on any view to the establishment of dependency by the Appellants  on
       [SOK]. The  findings  made,  in  essence,  are  that  [VA]  and  the
       Appellants are  financially  dependent  for  support  on  the  local
       authority and that the Appellants are dependent on  [VA]  for  their
       care (as to which see also [29] of the Decision).  Whilst the  Judge
       accepted that [SOK] has some contact, albeit "overstated",  that  is
       confined to taking and picking up from school and some  weekend  and
       holiday contact.  [SOK]'s statement says that the Appellants "shared
       their emotional feelings" and it appears from  what  is  there  said
       would like their parents to reconcile, there  is  no  evidence  that
       this has occurred or is even intended.  There is no evidence of  any
       emotional dependency particularly in circumstances  where,  for  the
       majority of their young lives, the Appellants have  had  no  contact
       with their father at all.


   20. For completeness, as I have already noted, paragraph  306  envisages
       the possibility that the child seeking leave may not be living  with
       both parents but provides that if the parents are living  apart  the
       child should be given leave in line with the parent who has "day  to
       day responsibility".  In this case that is  the  Appellants'  mother
       and she has no leave.

   21. Coming back to the words "join or  remain  with"  in  paragraph  305
       those  must  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  totality  of
       paragraphs 304 to 309.  When that is done it is  evident  that  what
       those words are intended to convey  is  the  proposed  or  continued
       union of a child with the  parent  or  parents  on  whom  he/she  is
       dependent where that parent has the right to be in  the  UK  and  in
       circumstances where therefore the child cannot be expected to  leave
       (see in particular paragraph 307).


   22. On the facts of this case, the evidence before Judge  Obhi  and  her
       findings, those provisions cannot avail the Appellants.   The  First
       Appellant had no contact with his father from the age of  about  six
       months until just before his fourth birthday.  The Second  Appellant
       had no contact at all with her father from birth until  just  before
       her third birthday.  Both children have  only  had  resumed  contact
       with [SOK] for about a  year  as  at  the  date  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal hearing and eighteen months as of now.


   23. Turning then to the provisions of Appendix FM, the Appellants'  case
       is even weaker.  As Mr Solomon accepted,  the  Appellants  can  only
       succeed based on paragraph R-LTRC.1.1.(d)  of  Appendix  FM  because
       they cannot meet all of the eligibility requirements.  He  was  also
       constrained to accept that in relation to  the  reduced  eligibility
       requirements which apply in relation to paragraph R-LTRC.1.1(d), the
       Appellants cannot meet E-LTRC.1.6.(a) or (b).  That is because  [VA]
       is not also the partner of [SOK] (for the purposes of (a))  and  the
       parent with leave (ie [SOK]) does not have sole  responsibility  for
       the children and they do not live with him (which would be  required
       by (b)).

   24. Accordingly, Mr Solomon was forced to argue that there were "serious
       and compelling family or other considerations which  make  exclusion
       of the child undesirable".   I was not taken  to  any  authority  in
       relation to the meaning of those words.   As  discussed  during  the
       hearing, the wording is the same as that of paragraph  297(i)(f)  of
       the Rules.   Mr Solomon was able to tell me that the  relevant  case
       in that context was that of Mundeba  (s.55  and  para  297  (i)(f)))
       [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC) where  the  following  guidance  was  given  in
       relation to the relevant sub-section of paragraph 297:

          "iv) Family considerations require an evaluation of the  child's
          welfare including emotional needs.  'Other  considerations'  come
          in to play where there are other aspects of a child's  life  that
          are serious and compelling for  example  where  an  applicant  is
          living in an unacceptable social and economic  environment.   The
          focus needs to be on the circumstances of the child in the  light
          of his or her age, social backgrounds and  developmental  history
          and will involve inquiry as to whether:-
                 a there is evidence of neglect or abuse;
                 b.  there are unmet needs that should be catered for;
                 c.  there are stable arrangements for the child's  physical
                  care;
                 The assessment involves consideration  as  to  whether  the
                 combination of circumstances are sufficiently  serious  and
                 compelling to require admission."

       Those factors have no bearing on the circumstances in this case.  If
       anything, the factors would  suggest  that  the  children's  welfare
       would be adversely affected by  remaining  with  [SOK]  due  to  the
       history of domestic violence.  The children have been  living  since
       birth with [VA], are supported in the UK by Social Services  due  to
       [SOK]'s abdication of responsibility and there  is  no  evidence  of
       "unmet needs" in relation to the children.  As Judge Obhi put it  at
       [21] of the Decision, "the history of [SOK's] relationship with  the
       children and the mother is poor".


   25.  For those reasons, I conclude that the provisions of the  Rules  on
       which the  Appellants  rely  do  not  avail  them.   Accordingly,  I
       conclude that the error made by Judge Obhi in failing  expressly  to
       consider these provisions is not material.  On her  findings,  those
       provisions of the Rules could not possibly be met.


   26. I turn then to the other grounds which Judge Blundell considered  to
       be weaker.  As a preface to those other grounds, I observe that  the
       Appellants accept that the Devaseelan guidance is of application  in
       this case but, they say, the Judge  failed  to  recognise  that  the
       findings made in the 2017 Decision were only a  starting  point  and
       that there was "very good reason to depart from the finding  in  the
       previous determination because the appellants were previously not  a
       party to the proceedings, their father is now back in  their  lives,
       he was granted leave under the 10-year parent route in  August  2018
       and following the FtT hearing, and the arguments are  not  the  same
       and significantly different" ([2] of the grounds).

   27. I do not accept that the fact that the Appellants were not party  to
       the  2017  proceedings  makes  any  difference  and   certainly   no
       significant difference.  The focus of [VA]'s appeal was the position
       of the children who were at that time and remain her dependents.  As
       such, if she were to be removed, the children  would  also  have  to
       leave the UK.  It is for that reason appropriate to begin  with  the
       findings made about the Appellants in the 2017 Decision.

   28. I begin with the First Appellant's medical  condition.   He  suffers
       from sickle cell anaemia.  The evidence given by [VA] at  that  time
       was that "[h]er son requires full time care and was in  hospital  in
       June of this year.  She said that  the  Ghanaian  hospital  offering
       treatment is seven hours from her 'family home'.  She would find  it
       'very unreasonable' to use public transport for seven hours" ([13]).
        [VA] also gave evidence that, although she has family in Ghana, she
       was estranged from them due to her relationship  with  [SOK].   [VA]
       also gave evidence that she has another son in Ghana  who  was  born
       following a rape.   The Respondent in that appeal relied on evidence
       that sickle cell anaemia "was relatively prevalent in Ghana where 2%
       of babies were born with the condition.  There  as  a  95%  survival
       rate.  There were 107  registered  schemes  providing  basic  health
       care" ([17]). In response, [VA]'s representative asserted  that  the
       only hospital which could provide treatment was in Accra which  made
       it impossible for the First Appellant to be  treated  there  due  to
       distance.

   29. The Judge made the following findings based on the evidence at  that
       time:


            "21. The Appellant has two children both born in this  country.
           It is accepted that they are  not  British  citizens.   She  has
           provided medical evidence of her son's condition  and  I  accept
           that he suffers from sickle cell anaemia for which  he  had  the
           benefit of NHS treatment.  The Appellant says that  one  of  the
           reasons she wants to stay in this country is  so  that  she  can
           earn money to pay what she owes for the treatment.  I  therefore
           assume that there is an outstanding  bill  for  that  treatment.
           The Appellant accepts  that  treatment  is  available  in  Ghana
           although she says that it would be 'very unreasonable' to expect
           her to travel a long distance to gain access to  it.   She  says
           that she could not relocate to Accra because she has  no  family
           there although that is also the  position  in  which  she  finds
           herself in this country."

   30. Subsequently the  Judge  considered  the  health  condition  in  the
       context of Article 8 and said this:


            "29. I have considered  whether  Article  8  might  be  engaged
           because of any effect on the health of the Appellant's son.  The
           Appellant provided his medical records which show  that  he  has
           received treatment in this country.  It has not  been  suggested
           that his health is such that the threshold in N  v  SSHD  (2003]
           EWCA Civ 1396 is met so as to engage Article 3."


       The Judge then self-directed himself in accordance with  GS  and  EO
       (Article 3 - health  cases)  India  [2012]  UKUT  397  (IAC)  -  "GS
       (India)"- as well as Akhalu (Health claim: ECHR Article  8)  Nigeria
       [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC).  Relying in particular on what was said  in
       the latter case, the Judge concluded at [31] of  the  2017  Decision
       that Article 8 was not  engaged  by  the  First  Appellant's  health
       condition.


   31. Judge Obhi had regard to those findings at [19] of the Decision.  In
       terms of further evidence, [VA] stated that the First Appellant  has
       medical appointments every six months, and that he was  to  have  an
       operation, but it had not gone ahead ([15]).  [SOK]  said  that  the
       medical condition was more common in  Africa  ([14]).   There  is  a
       letter dated 13 June  2019  from  Northampton  General  Hospital  at
       [AB/24-25].  That reads as follows so far as relevant to the  issues
       here:


           "Prognosis however is  very  poor  in  underdeveloped  countries
           particularly in Africa.  In Africa there  are  several  problems
           namely the risk of infection and lack of  safe  blood  products.
           Hence for this reason most children die in the  early  years  of
           life.  [SK]  is  at  a  great  risk  if  he  does  not  get  the
           appropriate treatment on time.
            ...
           With appropriate medical interventions and  frequent  follow  up
           [SK[ is leading a near-normal life here in the UK.  For the same
           reason this family will greatly  benefit  from  staying  in  the
           country..."


       The Consultant Paediatrician who  wrote  this  letter  says  nothing
       about his knowledge or experience of treatment available  in  Ghana.
       More importantly, he does not say that treatment  is  not  available
       there or say  anything  which  adds  to  or  counters  the  evidence
       available to the Judge when reaching the 2017 Decision.

   32. I accept that Judge Obhi does not expressly  refer  to  this  letter
       when reaching her findings at [23] of  the  Decision  (although  she
       does refer to a letter from another Consultant  Paediatrician  dated
       10 October 2018).  However, the June 2019 letter does not  undermine
       the Judge's finding at [23] of the Decision  that  "[t]reatment  for
       Sickle  Cell  Disease  is  available  in  Ghana  and  although   the
       appellant's parents may have to pay for treatment, it is available".
        That conclusion is not challenged by  the  Appellants  and  nor  is
       there any challenge made to  the  Judge's  finding  that  the  First
       Appellant's  medical  condition  does  not  reach  the   Article   3
       threshold.  Their point is rather that,  even  though  it  does  not
       reach that threshold, the health condition may still engage  Article
       8 ECHR.


   33. The Appellants rely in their grounds on this point to GS (India)  in
       the Tribunal.  As Mr Lindsay  pointed  out  however  the  Tribunal's
       decision has since been considered by the Court of Appeal and it  is
       therefore more appropriate to consider what that Court  had  to  say
       about Article 8 in health  cases.   This  appears  at  [86]  of  the
       judgment as follows:
           "If the Article 3 claim fails (as I would hold it does here),
           Article 8 cannot prosper without some separate or additional
           factual element which brings the case within the Article 8
           paradigm - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships - or a
           state of affairs having some affinity with the paradigm. That
           approach was, as it seems to me, applied by Moses LJ (with whom
           McFarlane LJ and the Master of the Rolls agreed) in MM
           (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 at paragraph 23:
                 'The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate
                 medical treatment in the country to which a person is to be
                 deported will be relevant to Article 8, is where it is an
                 additional factor to be weighed in the balance, with other
                 factors which by themselves engage Article 8. Suppose, in
                 this case, the appellant had established firm family ties
                 in this country, then the availability of continuing
                 medical treatment here, coupled with his dependence on the
                 family here for support, together establish 'private life'
                 under Article 8. That conclusion would not involve a
                 comparison between medical facilities here and those in
                 Zimbabwe. Such a finding would not offend the principle
                 expressed above that the United Kingdom is under no
                 Convention obligation to provide medical treatment here
                 when it is not available in the country to which the
                 appellant is to be deported.'"


   34. As the Judge rightly observed at [23] of  the  Decision,  therefore,
       "[t]he first appellant is nowhere near the threshold  under  Article
       3, and as PF reminds us  that  the  threshold  is  not  lower  under
       Article 8".  Put another way, an Article 8 claim based on  a  health
       condition is not simply an Article  3  claim  applying  a  different
       threshold.  An applicant must show some other  element  relevant  to
       the engagement of Article 8 which affects  his  private  and  family
       life.  Here, there was no evidence save that  considered  separately
       under the headings of best interests and reasonableness  of  return.
       There is therefore no error in  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
       First Appellant's health condition. Nor is there any  error  in  her
       adoption of the findings in  the  2017  Decision.   She  took  those
       findings as a starting point but considered the further evidence  in
       the context of the legal landscape which now applies and reached her
       own findings at [23] of the Decision.


   35. I therefore turn to the Judge's analysis of the  best  interests  of
       the Appellants.  The Appellants complain that the Judge has  muddled
       the  concept  of  best  interests  with  the  issue  whether  it  is
       reasonable to expect the Appellants to return to  Ghana.   I  accept
       that at [24] to [28] of the Decision, when setting out the law which
       applies, the Judge does  appear  to  conflate  the  issues  to  some
       extent.  However, she does recognise the following points:

               . The welfare of the  children  is  a  primary  consideration
                 ([24]);
               . The best interests of the children have  to  be  considered
                 before deciding whether it is reasonable to expect them  to
                 leave ([26]);
               . The  Appellants  are  not  "qualifying  children"  for  the
                 purposes  of  the  Rules  or  Section  117B(6)  -   it   is
                 nonetheless  appropriate  to   consider   whether   it   is
                 reasonable to expect them to leave ([24] and [25]);
               . The guidance in Zoumbas v Secretary of State for  the  Home
                 Department [2013] UKSC 74 is relevant to the  consideration
                 of best interests  and  those  must  be  determined  before
                 considering proportionality of removal ([26]);
               . When considering best interests, that  assessment  must  be
                 conducted independently of  the  position  of  the  parents
                 ([27]);
               . However, in accordance with the Supreme Court's judgment in
                 KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
                 [2018] UKSC 53, the assessment of the child's situation has
                 to take account of the "real world" situation.

       When those paragraphs are read together, I  am  satisfied  that  the
       Judge  has  understood  the  difference  between  the  two   issues.
       Moreover, thereafter, the  Judge  does  deal  with  the  two  issues
       separately.


   36. First, in relation to the Appellants' best interests, the Judge says
       as follows:


            "29. I make the following findings in relation to the children.
            They are cared for  by  their  mother,  they  have  never  been
           separated from her, and if it is necessary for her to leave  the
           UK then their best interests are served by remaining  with  her.
           Their father has permission to remain in the UK  and  should  he
           seek to extend that permission, he has the  option  of  visiting
           them in Ghana.  He could, if he chose return to live  with  them
           in Ghana.  He states that he is a self-employed  person  running
           his own company, although he has allowed the  State  to  provide
           for his children in the past, he now says that he will  maintain
           them.  There  is  no  reason  why  that  maintenance  cannot  be
           provided to enable his children and their mother  to  return  to
           Ghana and to reestablish themselves there.  Whilst I  appreciate
           that they have half-sisters in the UK, they also  have  a  half-
           brother in Ghana, and possibly other relatives that the  parents
           have not provided information about."


   37. Although the Judge does not make an express finding whether it would
       be in the children's best interests to remain in the UK or return to
       Ghana, the Judge finds  that  the  Appellants'  best  interests  are
       strongly to remain with their mother where she is.   Since,  as  the
       Judge says, [VA] has no right to remain in the UK, it is implicit in
       these findings that  the  Judge  finds  that  the  Appellants'  best
       interests are to return to Ghana with their mother if that is  where
       she is living.


   38. The Judge considers the recently renewed contact with their  father.
       There is nothing in the Appellants' objection to  the  reference  to
       [SOK] returning to live in Ghana.  The evidential position  is  that
       he has limited leave to remain because of  his  daughters  from  his
       relationship with a different partner (which relationship no  longer
       subsists so that he does not live with this family).   It  is  clear
       from the findings that what the Judge is there considering  is  that
       [SOK] might opt not to extend his  leave  after  December  2020  and
       could at that point choose to return to Ghana.  It must of course be
       remembered that [SOK] was  content  to  have  no  contact  with  the
       Appellants for a period of about three years.  In  any  event,  that
       finding is very much an alternative to the finding that the  contact
       between the Appellants and their father can be maintained by  visits
       and indirect contact.  In the circumstances of  this  case  and  the
       limited contact between father and children, there is  no  error  in
       the Judge's finding that such contact could  be  continued  in  that
       way.


   39. The Appellants' half-siblings  are  considered  but,  as  the  Judge
       notes, the Appellants also have a half-sibling  in  Ghana.   In  any
       event, the evidence about contact between the Appellants  and  those
       half-siblings (also formed very recently) is that  "they  are  happy
       together when I take them outside".  There are a few photographs  of
       the children together with their father.  That is the extent of  the
       evidence which does not indicate the extent  if  any  to  which  the
       Appellants have formed a  familial  relationship  with  those  half-
       siblings.

   40. For those  reasons,  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
       consideration of the Appellants' best interests.

   41. Turning then to the Article 8 assessment, there is  nothing  to  the
       point that the Judge ought not to have considered  paragraph  276ADE
       of the Rules or Section 117B (6).  As I have  already  noted,  those
       provisions clearly do not apply. The  children  are  not  qualifying
       children for those purposes.  Even though the Judge did not need  to
       refer to those provisions at all, that cannot be to the detriment of
       the  Appellants;  if  anything,  the  Judge's  approach  is   overly
       generous. Since those provisions do  not  apply,  the  ground  which
       relates to the way in which the Appellants say that they are  to  be
       applied is of no relevance.  There is no error in this regard.

   42. Moreover, when assessing Article 8 outside the Rules, the Judge does
       not apply those provisions.  The Judge's assessment is contained  at
       [30] of the Decision as follows:

           "In summary therefore  applying  the  Razgar  guidelines,  I  am
           satisfied that the appellants have  a  family  life  with  their
           mother, their father and  their  half-sisters  in  the  UK.   In
           relation to their mother  there  is  no  interference  in  their
           family life by the decision  of  the  respondent  as  they  will
           remain together.  In relation to their father  and  their  half-
           sisters there is an interference by this decision, but  applying
           the public interest factors set  out  in  Section  117B  of  the
           Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  including  the
           effective  enforcement  of  a  fair   immigration   policy   and
           protecting the UK's economy and services,  and  carrying  out  a
           balancing exercise, I am  satisfied  that  the  public  interest
           overrides any private  interest  of  the  appellants.   This  is
           because the only interference will be in the  context  of  their
           relationship with their father.   It  is  within  his  power  to
           change that  by  either  carrying  out  visits  to  them  or  by
           returning to live in Ghana.  In relation  to  the  half-sisters,
           these are not such important relationships  that  they  override
           the  appellants'  relationships  with  their   parents.    These
           relationships can be maintained through the internet,  Facebook,
           Skype and FaceTime, and through  visits  during  holidays.   The
           children will be returning to  a  country  in  which  they  have
           extended family to support them and their mother.  Should  [SOK]
           abandon his responsibility towards the  children,  it  would  be
           preferable for their mother to have the support of her  extended
           family, than to be reliant on social services.   For  all  these
           reasons I am satisfied that the decision of  the  respondent  is
           proportionate.  There are no exceptional  circumstances  in  the
           case, [SK]'s SCD is not sufficient to make this case exceptional
           for the reasons which I have given."

   43. There is nothing to the ground that the Judge has  erred  by  giving
       the  Appellants'  private  lives  little  weight  because  they  are
       children.  In the first place, that is not what the  Judge  does  at
       [30].  She deals with the elements of the  Appellants'  private  and
       family lives, weighs those in the balance based on the evidence  and
       balances those factors against the public interest in  Section  117B
       (1).  There is no reference to  Section  117B  (5).  In  any  event,
       however, the point made by the Appellants by reference to  cases  in
       2016 and 2018 is now overtaken by the Court of Appeal's decision  in
       SA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]
       EWCA Civ 53 (handed down in February 2019 and to which no  reference
       was made in the grounds pleaded in August 2019), where Lord  Justice
       Simon said this:


            "31. It is also clear from the  quotation  from  Lord  Wilson's
           judgment  on  the  second  issue  that  there  will  be   cases,
           notwithstanding the limited weight that can be attached  to  the
           private life of those whose immigration  status  is  precarious,
           which have 'particularly strong features of  the  private  life'
           that will outweigh 'the normative guidance' in s.117A(2)(a)  and
           s.117B(5). It is perhaps unhelpful to talk in terms of  children
           being 'blamed' for a developed  private  life  in  this  country
           during  formative  years,  while  their  immigration  status  is
           precarious. There is no question of 'blame'.  However,  once  an
           assessment is made that article 8  is  engaged,  and  a  further
           assessment must be made as to  whether  removal  will  interfere
           with the private life, the weight attached to the  private  life
           is to be weighed in accordance with the statutory criteria."


   44. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that there is no merit to  any
       of the Appellants' grounds.  Judge Obhi was entitled to take as  her
       starting point the 2017 Decision.  She considered the evidence post-
       dating that decision and made findings based on that evidence.   She
       considered the Appellants' best interests based also on the evidence
       which, as to contact with [SOK] and particularly  with  their  half-
       siblings is extremely thin.  She then conducted a balancing exercise
       outside the Rules to assess whether it was reasonable to expect  the
       Appellants to leave the UK with their mother who has day-to-day care
       of them and notwithstanding the limited and  short-standing  contact
       with their father who is likely to remain in the UK with  his  other
       British children.  For  reasons  which  I  have  explained  at  some
       length, although Judge Obhi did not deal with the argument that  the
       Appellants could succeed under the Rules based on the limited  leave
       which their father has derived from his relationship with his  other
       two children, that argument has no merit.  Accordingly, the  failure
       to  deal  with  that  argument  is  not  material.   In  conclusion,
       therefore, there is no  material  error  of  law  disclosed  by  the
       grounds.


    CONCLUSION


   45. For all the above reasons, I am satisfied that the Decision does not
       contain an error of law. Accordingly, I uphold the Decision.


    DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law.  I  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Obhi
    promulgated on 30 July 2019 with the consequence that  the  Appellants'
    appeals stand dismissed
      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 3 January 2020
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
