
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07133/2018
                                                               HU/07135/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2019                       |On 22 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL MONSON


                                   Between

                                1) Alimat [T]
                                2) Ahmed [T]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           EntRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Youseffian, Counsel instructed by Perera & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Housego sitting at Harmondsworth on 13 February 2019) dismissing
    their appeals against the decision of an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
    refuse them entry clearance for  the  purposes  of  settlement  as  the
    dependent children of their mother.  The Judge dismissed their  appeals
    as he was not satisfied that their mother had sole  responsibility  for
    their upbringing; or that there were serious and compelling  family  or
    other considerations which made exclusion of the children  undesirable.
    The Judge was also not satisfied that the appellants had  provided  the
    specified evidence to show that the financial requirement was met.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellants are related to each other as sister and brother.  Alimat
    [T] was born in Nigeria on 27 April 2000, and Ahmed  [T]  was  born  in
    Nigeria on 1 April 2002.  They applied for settlement  on  24  November
    2017.  They said that they  did  not  know  the  whereabouts  of  their
    father.  Their legal guardian in Nigeria was Lukmon Alabi  (a  maternal
    uncle).  They had been living with him for the last four years.   Their
    mother had arrived in the UK on 21 June 2013.

 3. On 5 March 2018 an Entry Clearance Officer issued separate  notices  of
    refusal to each of the appellants.   They  had  provided  letters  from
    Royal Anchor School and Royal Crown Comprehensive School  stating  that
    their mother was financially responsible  for  their  fees,  but  these
    letters  did  not  show  their  mother's  abiding  interest  in   their
    upbringing, welfare and  well-being  over  a  substantial  period.  The
    remittances to Mr Alabi did not equate  to  their  mother  having  sole
    responsibility. There was also no Court documentation to  confirm  that
    their mother had sole custody of them.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellants were legally represented before Judge Housego. There was
    no Presenting Officer. The appellant's solicitors had compiled a  large
    bundle of documents containing witness statements from the  appellants,
    their mother and their mother's spouse.  The bundle  also  contained  a
    letter of support from Strong Tower Hospitals; a letter of support from
    the appellants' uncle and guardian; school letters in respect  of  each
    of the appellants; and a printout of WhatsApp  communications  in  2017
    and 2018 which were indexed as communications between  the  mother  and
    both  her  children.  However,  they  appear  to  relate  entirely   to
    communications between the mother and her daughter.

 5. The Judge received oral evidence from the appellant's mother  and  from
    her husband, Mr [S].   At paragraph [38] of his decision, the Judge set
    out the evidence which he had elicited from Mrs [S] in response to  his
    questions.  He asked her why the application was made when it was made.
     She said it was because her brother Lukmon was having issues with  his
    wife.  His  wife  used  to  hit  him.   They  had  now  separated,  but
    occasionally she came back.  Her brother lived with his three  children
    as well as her own children.  His children were born in 1995, 1998  and
    2002.  They lived in a 5-bedroomed flat which he owned.  He  worked  in
    construction as a Site Manager.  She had come to the UK as  the  spouse
    of Mr [S], leaving the children behind.   She  had  left  the  children
    behind because she did not know the situation in the UK.

 6. Mr [S] agreed in answer to questions from the Judge  that  the  trigger
    for the application was that the children had started to complain  that
    their uncle and aunt were fighting.

 7. In his  closing  submissions  on  behalf  of  the  appellants,  Counsel
    submitted that as the father had disappeared, the  starting  point  was
    that the active parent had sole responsibility.   Whilst  it  could  be
    that responsibility was shared with the uncle, the nub of the test  was
    what important decisions were taken in the child's life  and  by  whom?
    He submitted that Mrs [S] not only paid for but had control  over  what
    the children did.  Modern means of communication  meant  that  she  was
    able to play, and did play, an  active  and  controlling  role  in  the
    children's lives, even though they were thousands of miles away.  There
    was ample evidence of regular contact.

 8. The Judge set out his findings of fact at paragraph [45]  onwards.   He
    found that the appellants had not been the sole responsibility of their
    mother.  Their witness  statements  recorded  that  their  mother  "had
    always consulted with my uncle  which  school  I  should  attend."   At
    paragraph [55], he said that, applying TD (Yemen), the sponsor did  not
    have the sole responsibility for the appellants.  The uncle's role  was
    plainly more than feeding and housing the appellants.

 9. The Judge concluded at paragraph [56] that the Immigration  Rules  were
    not met at the date of decision, as  the  sponsor  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility for the appellants.  She had left them in  the  care  of
    her brother.  Also, at the time of the application, the sponsor did not
    demonstrate in  accordance  with  Appendix  FM-SE  that  the  financial
    requirement was met.

10. On the topic of whether there were serious  and  compelling  family  or
    other  considerations  which  made  the  exclusion  of   the   children
    undesirable, the Judge held at  paragraph  [48]  that  there  had  been
    domestic discord in the uncle's house, but the aunt had left the  house
    in February or March 2018, and there  was  no  relationship  difficulty
    between the uncle and the appellants.

11. Having found that the appellants  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM, the Judge went on to consider an Article 8  claim  outside
    the Rules at paragraphs [58] onwards. The children were  able  to  have
    frequent contact with their mother by various forms  of  modern  media.
    There was no difficulty for her to travel to Nigeria, and she had  done
    so.  There was no evidence that the children were being damaged by  the
    physical absence of their mother.   The  first  appellant  was  now  an
    adult, and the second appellant would be an adult shortly.   The  Judge
    continued in paragraph [62]: "One would naturally expect family ties to
    loosen as adult children develop their own independent lives, and going
    to University is part of that process.  The s55 duty does not extend to
    the  first  appellant.   The  second   appellant   [is]   in   suitable
    accommodation and cared for by his uncle, insofar as he needs any care.
     He is not deprived of companionship.  He has lived without his  mother
    since he was about 11 years old, and he is now within  weeks  of  being
    18.  The domestic  discord  of  which  they  speak  is  gone  with  the
    departure of the uncle's wife.  The decision is not wrong by reason  of
    s55."

The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission to Appeal

12. On 17 April 2019 Judge Wilson gave his reasons for refusing permission.
     Contrary to what was stated in the grounds, in a careful  and  focused
    decision, the Judge has  set  out  and  applied  the  correct  law  and
    evidence.  The Judge was entitled to place weight upon what was said in
    the witness statement.  It suggested that the  uncle  was  involved  in
    important  decision-making  for  the  appellants,  and  the  Judge  was
    entitled to place weight upon that statement.

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. Following a renewed application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, on 4 June 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the Judge did not evaluate  the  role  of  the
         uncle and the role of the mother in order to reach his finding that
         the mother did not  have  sole  responsibility.   It  is  therefore
         arguable that the Judge failed to apply  the  Guidance  of  TD,  as
         contended in Ground 2.  This is arguably material  to  the  Judge's
         assessment of proportionality in relation to Article 8."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Whitwell informed me that Ground  1  was  conceded.   Ground  1
    relates to the financial requirement.

15. Mr Youseffian, who did not appear below,  developed  the  case  pleaded
    under Ground 2, which was that the  Judge  had  erred  in  law  in  his
    assessment of sole responsibility.   He  put  the  case  in  two  ways:
    either the Judge had  not  taken  into  account  all  of  the  relevant
    evidence, or his conclusion was inadequately reasoned.  In  the  course
    of oral argument, he accepted that it was open to  the  Judge  to  find
    that the uncle's role was plainly more than just  feeding  and  housing
    the appellants, but he submitted that it was not clear  how  the  Judge
    had reached this finding.

16. On behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer, Mr Whitwell submitted that it
    was reasonable for the Judge not to take the father's  absence  as  the
    starting point, in the light of the  way  the  case  had  been  put  by
    Counsel at the hearing.  He submitted that the letter of  support  from
    the uncle supported the Judge's finding that the mother  did  not  have
    sole responsibility.  Although the Judge's reasoning on  the  issue  of
    sole responsibility was very thin, it was sufficient.

17. I asked the Representatives what should happen in  the  event  that  an
    error of law was made out.  They were in agreement that I should remake
    the decision on the evidence as it stood.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

Ground 1

18. At paragraph [51], the Judge held that at the time of  application  the
    appellants were not able to show that  the  financial  requirement  was
    met, but they were now able to do so.  At the date of application there
    were documents missing from a  sequence,  "but  evidential  flexibility
    would not have assisted as the sponsor's husband was not  able  to  get
    copies of the missing documents from his employer."

19. Mr Whitwell accepts that what the Judge  said  at  paragraph  [51]  was
    factually incorrect, in that the two missing payslips had been provided
    in a supplementary bundle and so were before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Although all the relevant requirements of Appendix FM-SE were not shown
    to be met at the date of application, they  were  shown  to  be  met  -
    retrospectively - at the date  of  the  hearing.   So  this  ground  of
    objection raised by the Entry Clearance  Officer  fell  away,  and  the
    Judge was wrong to hold otherwise.

Ground 2

20. The far more controversial issue is whether Ground 2 is made  out.   In
    the end, the factor which tips the argument in the  appellants'  favour
    is that Mr Whitwell was unable to defend the Judge's reasoning  process
    solely be reference to the evidence that was rehearsed by the Judge  in
    his decision.  Mr Whitwell had to  look  beyond  the  decision  to  the
    letter of support from the uncle, to which the Judge makes no reference
    at all.  It was incumbent on the Judge to explain to the appellants why
    they had  lost.   I  do  not  consider  that  his  decision  adequately
    discharged this function in circumstances  where  the  appellants  were
    relying on various different sources of evidence to make out  the  case
    that their mother had had sole responsibility for their upbringing. For
    the above reasons, the Judge's finding on  sole  responsibility  cannot
    stand and must be remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

21. In remaking the decision, it is important to recognise that  the  error
    of law challenge does not extend to the Judge's finding that there were
    not serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which  made
    exclusion of the children undesirable. However, this is  academic.  For
    if the appellants succeed on the issue  of  sole  responsibility,  they
    will qualify for entry clearance under Appendix FM.

22. As pleaded in Ground 2, ultimately the issue of sole responsibility  is
    a  fact-rich  issue,  to  be  determined  by  reference  to   all   the
    circumstances of the particular case.  Where one parent has disappeared
    from the child's life and so  relinquished  or  abdicated  his  or  her
    responsibility for the child, the starting point must be that it is the
    remaining active parent who  has  sole  responsibility.   There  is  no
    challenge to the mother's evidence that the father of the children  has
    long been absent from their lives, and so I am prepared to accept  that
    she had sole responsibility for them at the time that she left them  in
    the care of her brother in order to join her husband in the UK.

23. The issue is whether thereafter the brother  exercised  only  delegated
    responsibility for the children's day-to-day  care,  as  distinct  from
    sharing responsibility with Mrs [S] for their care and upbringing.

24. The clear thrust of the evidence from Mr and Mrs [S] is  that  she  has
    always retained sole responsibility  for  their  upbringing.   However,
    this is not demonstrated by the evidence emanating from the  children's
    doctor or their schools. This evidence corroborates her involvement  in
    their health and education, but does not preclude the uncle  from  also
    playing a significant role as their legal guardian. More significantly,
    the letter of support from  the  uncle  is  more  consistent  with  him
    sharing responsibility for the appellants' upbringing than it  is  with
    him simply acting under the direction of his sister.

25. In his letter of support dated 9 January 2019, Mr Alabi said:

         "My sister's children have lived with me and my  wife  since  2013.
         Although I love them dearly, unfortunately I can no longer care for
         them as before.  I am facing marital problems with my wife  as  she
         is causing great tension in my household.  The problems between  my
         wife and I is making it very difficult to continue to care  for  my
         niece and nephew.

         I am not in the right frame of mind most of  the  time  and  cannot
         give the children the love and attention they require.  My wife and
         I need our space to work  on  our  marriage.   Although  my  sister
         supports me every way I think it is time for  her  to  be  reunited
         with her children in the UK.

         I know the children would have a much better life than what  I  can
         give them in  the  UK.   They  are  also  unhappy  living  in  this
         household because my wife and I are always arguing.  I ask that you
         allow my niece and nephew to join their mother in the UK as that is
         where they belong."

26. Judge Housego elicited the evidence that the aunt had in fact left  the
    household in February or March 2018, and so marital discord was not  an
    ongoing problem at the time that this letter was written.   I  am  also
    unable to find any evidence of unhappiness  on  the  first  appellant's
    part in the disclosed WhatsApp exchanges which she  has  had  with  her
    mother.  On the contrary, she presents as a very happy young person who
    does not have any domestic issues, either at her uncle's home or at the
    university where she resides during term-time.

27. But the main consideration for present purposes is that the uncle  does
    not present as acting under his sister's direction.  On  the  contrary,
    as highlighted by Mr Whitwell, he presents  as  sharing  responsibility
    for the children's upbringing in line with  his  designation  as  their
    legal guardian in the Entry Clearance  applications.   Aside  from  the
    decision to leave them in the care of their uncle, the  most  important
    decision in the children's lives thus far  has  been  the  decision  to
    attempt to reunite the children with their mother  and  step-father  in
    the UK.  In his letter of support, Mr Alabi presents  as  having  taken
    this decision himself, in the children's  best  interests.   While  the
    surrounding evidence indicates that this was a joint  decision  between
    him and his sister, it is nonetheless indicative of  Mr  Alabi  sharing
    responsibility for the children's care and upbringing, and  not  simply
    acting as their day to day carer under the direction of his sister.

28. Similarly, the fact that Mrs [S] is said to  have  consulted  Mr  Alabi
    about their education is also indicative of brother and  sister  having
    joint responsibility for the appellants' care and upbringing.

29. Another relevant consideration is that  Mr  Alabi  says  he  loves  the
    appellants dearly, and that he has been bringing  them  up  since  2013
    alongside his own children, who are of similar age to  the  appellants.
    Against this background, it is unlikely that he has not  been  as  much
    involved with the care and upbringing of the appellants as he has  been
    with his own children.

30. Accordingly, having considered the evidence in the round, I  find  that
    the appellants have not discharged the burden  of  proving  that  their
    mother has had sole responsibility for their upbringing since  2013  or
    that she has sole responsibility now.  For that reason, and that reason
    alone, the appellants do not qualify for entry clearance under Appendix
    FM.

31. There is  no  error  of  law  challenge  to  the  Judge's  findings  on
    proportionality, and I do not consider that these findings  require  to
    be revisited.  The Judge accepted that the appellants and their  mother
    had family life for the purpose of Article 8 ECHR, and that Questions 1
    and 2 if the Razgar test should be answered in the appellants'  favour.
    Question 3 and 4 of the Razgar test must be answered in favour  of  the
    respondent.  The fact that Grounds 1 and 2 have been made  out  has  no
    bearing  on  the  sustainability   of   the   Judge's   proportionality
    assessment.  The Judge accepted that the  financial  requirements  were
    met as at the date of the hearing. He found that the  refusal  decision
    was proportionate as the  appellants  did  not  meet  the  relationship
    requirements of Appendix FM. I have reached the same conclusion, and so
    the maintenance of the refusal decision is proportionate.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted:  these appeals are dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 13 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed these appeals on remaking, there can be no fee award.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

Signed                              Date 13 July 2019
