
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/07395/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 7 September 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               RAM KAJI GURUNG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 25 March 2019.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge B Lloyd, promulgated on 15 January 2010.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 4 February 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 17 May 2020.

     vi) The UT's directions, issued on 19 June 2020.

    vii) The respondent's response, dated 25 June 2020, conceding  error  of
         law, and asking for "a fresh oral hearing before the FtT".

 2. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and stands only as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

 3. The nature of the case is such that it is appropriate under section  12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for a fresh hearing.

 4. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Lloyd.

 5. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

 6. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.

        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman             Date: 28 August 2020



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.





