
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07546/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2019                      |On 23 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Karnik, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This decision refers to the circumstances of a young child,  S  and
         for that reason I have maintained the anonymity order.  S was  born
         in the United Kingdom ('UK') in October 2013, when he was diagnosed
         with sickle cell anaemia.

      2. In this decision, I remake the substantive decision on whether  the
         appeal brought by  the  respondent  ('HM')  should  be  allowed  or
         dismissed on human rights grounds.  In a decision promulgated on 10
         May 2019, I gave reasons for setting aside a decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal ('FTT') sent  on  16  November  2018,  allowing  HM's
         appeal.

Background history

      3. HM arrived in the UK clandestinely in 2006.  Shortly after this  he
         was sentenced to six months imprisonment having been  convicted  of
         handling stolen goods and  obtaining  services  by  deception.  His
         claim for asylum was refused and his appeal dismissed.  This led to
         a signed deportation order dated 30 April  2008.   On  28  November
         2011 HM  was  sentenced  to  21  months  imprisonment  having  been
         convicted of 19 counts of making false  representations.   HM  made
         further representations to remain in the UK but the  FTT  dismissed
         his appeal against a decision to revoke the 2008 deportation  order
         on 6 January 2014.

      4. In further representations over the course  of  2016  and  2017  HM
         again applied to revoke the  deportation  order,  placing  reliance
         upon his family life.  In a decision dated 12 March 2018, the  SSHD
         accepted that HM has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
         partner and their son, S (British citizens).  The SSHD also appears
         to have accepted that HM has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
         with two  of  S's  elder  siblings,  from  his  partner's  previous
         relationship, albeit he does not have parental  responsibility  for
         them.  The SSHD however was of the view that it would not be unduly
         harsh for these family members  to  remain  in  the  UK  upon  HM's
         deportation and refused to revoke a deportation order against HM.

Hearing

      5. At the beginning of the hearing before me  Mr  Karnik  submitted  a
         comprehensive skeleton argument.  He then  applied  for  additional
         time to obtain clearer evidence regarding S's  hospital  admissions
         and absences from school.  Mr Bates did not object to this and  the
         hearing was therefore put back to 2pm.  Upon the resumption of  the
         hearing, Mr Karnik placed reliance  upon  the  following  evidence:
         three witness statements from HM; two witness statements  from  his
         partner; a 204-page  consolidated  bundle  containing  inter  alia,
         updated medical evidence (unavailable to the FTT) from the  medical
         professionals  involved  in  S's  care;  a   supplementary   bundle
         containing inter alia, a letter dated 15  July  2019  containing  a
         summary  of  hospital  involvement  with  S  from  Ms  Watson,  S's
         paediatric social worker at Royal  Manchester  Children's  Hospital
         and a table of school absences.

      6. HM and his partner were both briefly cross-examined by Mr Bates.  I
         then heard submissions from each representative, which I address in
         more detail below.  Both representatives agreed that the  principal
         disputed issue is whether or not the high threshold required by the
         "unduly harsh" test is met for the purposes of Exception  2  in  s.
         117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ('the
         2002 Act'), or alternatively  whether  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances for the purposes of s. 117C(6).

      7.  After  hearing  submissions  from  both  parties,  I  reserved  my
         decision.

Legal framework

      8. HM is a foreign criminal who has applied to revoke the  deportation
         order made against him.  In these circumstances, paragraphs 390 and
         390A of the Immigration Rules apply.  This requires a consideration
         of paragraphs 399 and 399A of the  Immigration  Rules.   These  are
         reflected within section 117C of the  2002  Act,  which  states  as
         follows:

             "Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

          1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

          2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

          3) In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

          4) Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

          5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

          6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2."

      9. There is  no  dispute  that  S  and  his  two  older  siblings  are
         qualifying "children" and as such the  relevant  test  is  that  of
         "undue harshness" as set out in Exception 2 above.   It  is  to  be
         noted however that  the  question  whether  "the  effect"  of  HM's
         deportation would be "unduly harsh" is broken down into  two  parts
         in paragraph 399, so that it applies where:

             "(a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported; and

             (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the
             UK without the person who is to be deported."

     10. In the instant case it is only the second limb of 399  set  out  at
         (b)  above,  as  reflected  in  section  117C(5),   that   requires
         consideration, as far as  the  children  are  concerned.   This  is
         because the SSHD has conceded that it would be unduly harsh  for  S
         and his siblings to live in whichever country HM  is  deported  to.
         HM has a pending statelessness application before the  SSHD.   This
         is immaterial to the present case, because of the SSHD's concession
         in relation to paragraph 399(a).

     11. The correct approach to 399(b) and section 117C(5) of the 2002  Act
         has recently been considered by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v
         SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  In the only judgment Lord Carnwath said  this
         at [23]:

             "One is looking for a degree of harshness  going  beyond  what
             would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
             deportation of a parent. What it does not require in  my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity of  the
             parent's offence, other than is inherent  in  the  distinction
             drawn by the section itself by  reference  to  the  length  of
             sentence."

     12. Lord Carnwath also approved of the  guidance  given  regarding  the
         term unduly harsh in MK Sierra Leone v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223  (IAC).
         In that case the then President said this.

             "We are mindful that  'unduly  harsh'  does  not  equate  with
             uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely  difficult.
             Rather, it  poses  a  considerably  more  elevated  threshold.
             'Harsh' in this context, denotes something severe,  or  bleak.
             It is the antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.  Furthermore,
             the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated
             standard still higher."

     13. It is therefore now clear from KO that the  assessment  of  "unduly
         harsh" does not require  a  balancing  of  the  relative  level  of
         severity of the parent's offence.   The assessment solely  requires
         a careful  consideration  of  whether  the  elevated  threshold  is
         reached from the point of view of ether the child or  partner.   If
         that threshold is met then deportation would be a breach of Article
         8 of the ECHR and no further analysis is required.

     14. In BL (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  357  the  Court  of  Appeal
         concluded that the Tribunal did not undertake a sufficient  inquiry
         into whether there was any other family member who could be able to
         care for his children and  emphasised  the  need  to  consider  the
         extent to which social services would be able to assist in reducing
         the  adverse  impact  of  the  children  losing  their  father   to
         deportation at [53].

             "What the UT did in the course of their detailed and no doubt
             conscientious decision was to accept KS's son's evidence that
             KS could not manage her money and drank more that was good for
             her and made the inference that without BL the family would
             descend into poverty and require the support of social
             services. As against this, however, KS had looked after the
             family while BL was in prison or immigration detention and the
             UT had not made any findings that the family had then
             descended into poverty or required the support of social
             services, or that if that were to happen, there would not be
             adequate support services for these children. The UT were
             entitled to work on the basis that the social services would
             perform their duties under the law and, contrary to the
             submission of Mr Rudd, the UT was not bound in these
             circumstances to regard the role of the social services as
             irrelevant. The Secretary of State had made the point in the
             decision letter that there was no satisfactory evidence that
             KS had not coped with the children's upbringing in BL's
             absence and so the UT were aware that this point was in issue.
             KS's son's evidence was an insufficient evidential basis for
             the UT's conclusion on this point. His evidence was in reality
             uncorroborated and self-serving hearsay on this issue."

Discussion

     15. S's best interests clearly support the continued presence of HM  in
         his life in the UK.  S's best interests are  to  be  treated  as  a
         primary consideration.  HM's deportation would  deprive  S  of  the
         daily contact he has with the only father-figure in his  life.    I
         accept that HM has close relationships  with  all  members  of  the
         family, S's partner and three minor  children.   Having  considered
         the medical evidence from a variety of  sources  and  having  heard
         from HM and his partner I accept that HM has an exceptionally close
         relationship with S.  In the last few years S has been particularly
         dependent his father and has become increasingly dependent upon his
         almost constant care  and  support  for  reasons  relating  to  his
         medical condition, in addition to the love that is  normally  found
         to exist between a parent and child.  I note that in the  past  and
         dating back to 2010, there have been concerns regarding HM's mental
         health and ability to look after himself far  less  others.   I  am
         satisfied that these concerns no longer exist, hence the supporting
         letters regarding HM's caring responsibilities for his son from the
         professionals involved in S.  I also note that HM's  last  criminal
         conviction pre-dates S's birth.  I accept that since that  time  HM
         has devoted himself to family life and caring for S.

     16. S's best interests are in no way determinative and as KO  (Nigeria)
         makes clear the  onus  is  upon  HM  to  establish  that  the  high
         threshold required by the "unduly harsh" test is met.   Although  S
         has three older siblings including a 20 year old, they are  all  in
         full-time education, and I accept they play a minimal parenting and
         caring role in S's life.    HM and his partner each have  no  other
         family members in the UK.  I accept that  since  starting  to  live
         with the family full-time (and with the exception  of  the  periods
         when he was in immigration  detention)  HM  has  been  S's  primary
         carer, as his mother works full-time as  a  security  guard.   More
         significantly, I accept the evidence that S's medical condition has
         made him particularly dependent upon his parents, and in particular
         HM such that S will face a degree of  harshness  that  goes  beyond
         that  which  would  be  involved  for  any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent, for the reasons I set out below:

          i) In a letter  dated  23  May  2019,  Dr  Kausar,  a  Consultant
             Paediatric Haematologist described  HM  as  playing  a  "vital
             role" in the management of S's condition.   Ms  Mcdonald,  the
             Paediatric Haemoglobinopathy Homecare  Practitioner  described
             HM as playing an "integral part" of all aspects of  S's  daily
             care in her letter dated 17 May 2019.  This role is varied and
             extensive given that  the  condition  has  acute  and  chronic
             phases impacting on all aspects of S's life.   This  includes:
             the day to day management of S's condition  including  dealing
             with daily fatigue; preventative care and supervision to avoid
             episodes developing or worsening;  substantial  care  at  home
             during crises;  coaxing  to  encourage  movement,  positivity,
             eating and school attendance when  in  pain;  reassurance  and
             care when invasive procedures must  be  conducted  during  in-
             patient hospital stays.  S's regular hospital attendances  are
             detailed in chronological  order  from  2016  in  Ms  Watson's
             recent summary, as prepared and emailed  on  the  day  of  the
             hearing.  In the particular experience of  S,  these  are  not
             hypothetical  matters  but  real  and  practical  issues  that
             require a huge investment of time and emotional  support  from
             all involved in S's care and upbringing.  That  care  must  be
             proactive as well as reactive.  The care and support  required
             on a day to day basis even when S is not in  crisis  requiring
             hospitalisation is almost constant: at home  there  is  almost
             constant preventative care as well as intensive care when S is
             in pre-crisis or crisis short of the need for hospitalisation;
             S goes to school but as his father explained he is often  late
             and often has to be collected early for  reasons  relating  to
             his medical condition.

         ii) Sickle-cell is  unpredictable  and  crises  can  be  extremely
             painful and debilitating.  This is  evidenced  in  S's  recent
             history: although he has bouts of stability I accept  that  he
             has regular episodes  which  are  unpredictable,  serious  and
             severe.  As Ms Watson explained in her letter a child in  pain
             requires much more than pain  relief  and  medical  or  social
             care.  He requires "cuddles" and  close  vigilance,  emotional
             and physical support. This assists in relieving  pain  in  the
             short-term as well as reducing the risk of a deterioration  in
             symptoms. HM has played the primary role in the  provision  of
             this type of less tangible and difficult  to  define  type  of
             care and support. This  type  of  care  and  support  is  very
             difficult to replace.

        iii) HM and his partner jointly provide the physical and  emotional
             support required by S but HM's role  is  greater  because  his
             partner has worked full-time at all material times.   However,
             HM and his partner  have  overlapping  parental  roles.   This
             means that when one is  required  to  focus  solely  upon  S's
             needs, the other can manage the day to day care for the  other
             minor children in the family unit.  Mr  Bates  submitted  that
             S's mother would be able  to  cope  as  S's  sole  carer,  and
             submitted that she could give up  her  employment  to  do  so.
             Given the nature and extent of the challenges presented by S's
             medical condition in combination with the demands of the other
             children, it would be  very  difficult  for  HM's  partner  to
             simply replace S's father, merely by giving up her employment.
              I accept the evidence that  the  constant  demands  of  S  in
             combination with other family responsibilities would be nearly
             impossible for one parent on her  own,  without  other  family
             assistance.  In doing so I acknowledge that the  family  would
             have the support of S's medical team and social  services.   I
             have considered this submission carefully but  do  not  accept
             that this will reduce the effect  of  HM's  deportation  to  a
             level that goes below undue  harshness.   This  is  because  I
             accept the parents' evidence that they each play  vital  roles
             in caring for and supporting S.  These responsibilities,  when
             combined with looking after the two other  minor  children  of
             the family are deep-rooted and extensive.  As such,  I  accept
             their evidence that they could not  cope  with  S  effectively
             without each other.  They are a team and have always worked as
             a team.  I also accept Mr Karnik's submission that sickle cell
             is not a condition in which a paid carer can help  out  for  a
             few hours a day. The independent supporting evidence from  the
             professionals  supports  the  proposition  that  the   parents
             maintain  self-care  management  throughout  the  day,   which
             promotes wellness and has a mitigating effect.   In  addition,
             these parents are aware of S's specific warning signs and  are
             best placed to mitigate pain and deterioration of symptoms  by
             providing comfort, "cuddles" and  reassurance  throughout  the
             day and when waking at night, in a manner that would  be  more
             difficult for a paid carer to achieve.  Indeed,  HM  explained
             that S sometimes says to him "don't let me die, I'm feeling so
             much pain".  I accept HM's evidence that  sometimes  the  only
             real and effective relief from the pain is to be  cuddled  and
             massaged by his father or mother. I also accept HM's  evidence
             that S continues to sleep in his parents' bed for this  reason
             and HM is often required to collect S from school or keep  him
             at home for  reasons  relating  to  his  condition.   This  is
             consistent with S's school  attendance  for  2018-2019.   This
             record 58 absences out of  370  sessions,  and  40  lates.   I
             accept HM's evidence that S is often late because of the  time
             that it takes to get him ready for school.

         iv) S's mother and  social  services  cannot  substitute  for  the
             intimate, intensive emotional support that HM has  provided  S
             both when he is having a crisis and at other times in order to
             prevent a crisis.  This is not because either are unwilling to
             do as much as they can to assist S.   S's  mother  is  clearly
             devoted  to  him  and  social  services  must  perform   their
             statutory  duties  toward  children  in  need.   However,  the
             difficulties faced by S are constant - he is a child  in  pain
             and discomfort for significant periods.  It is very  difficult
             to see how social services could practically offer services to
             replace the comprehensive love, attention and  support  S  has
             received from his father both when he is having a  crisis  and
             at other times. I therefore accept Mr Karnik's submission that
             HM's deportation will mean that S will lose the care,  comfort
             and pain relief his father brings, and this in turn  increases
             the likelihood of  more  frequent  and  intense  crises,  with
             concomitant hospitalisations.

     17. Mr Bates drew my attention to a four-month period in 2016  when  HM
         was detained.  He invited me to find that S's parents  were  unable
         to articulate the particular difficulties S faced at the time, when
         his mother was required to manage his condition on her  own.   This
         must be considered in context.  There is independent evidence  from
         Ms McDonald contained in her letter dated 25 July 2016, that around
         the time that HM was last taken into detention, S "has become  very
         unsettled and irritable" and his  mother  struggled  to  cope  with
         looking after his medical needs.  S was under three  years  old  at
         the time.  The history of S's episodes and hospital admissions have
         worsened since 2016.  It is clear from the chronology  provided  by
         Ms Watson that S  did  not  require  any  in-patient  admission  to
         hospital in 2016, but has been admitted to hospital and required to
         stay for a number of days in each year from 2017 to 2019.  S is now
         nearly six years old.   He  is  much  more  aware  of  and  overtly
         dependent upon the stability and security provided jointly  by  the
         only two significant individuals in his life - both of his parents.
          I therefore do not accept that because there was an absence of any
         significant difficulties for  S  in  2016,  it  follows  that  this
         continues to be the case.

     18. The nature and extent of S's pain and suffering  is  such  that  it
         would be very difficult to replace or mitigate the gap left by  his
         father, even on the assumption that his mother gives up  employment
         and the family would continue to be supported by the medical  team,
         the homecare practitioner and social services.   Having  considered
         all the relevant evidence and submissions, I am satisfied  that  it
         is not merely desirable for HM to remain in the UK to  be  with  S,
         rather the effect of HM's deportation on S  would  reach  the  high
         threshold required for it to be "unduly  harsh".   I  am  therefore
         satisfied that Exception 2 in section 117C(5) is met in relation to
         S, and HM's appeal  must  therefore  be  allowed  on  human  rights
         grounds.

     19.  I  do  not  need  to  address  the  submissions  based  upon  HM's
         relationship with his partner or step-children, or  the  submission
         based upon section 117C(6) of the 2002 Act,  in  the  light  of  my
         findings regarding Exception 2 above.

Notice of decision

     20. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed UTJ Plimmer                               Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     17 July 2019

