
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07675/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On July 18, 2019                       |On August 07, 2019                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                MR ABDUL AZIZ
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Azmi, Counsel, instructed by Samad & Co
                    Immigration
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a Bangladeshi national, entered the United Kingdom with
    his parents and sister, as a visitor, on 25 August 2012 when he was
    almost 20 years of age. His parents returned to Bangladesh in November
    2012 leaving the appellant and his sister in the United Kingdom.


 2. On 21 December 2012 the appellant applied for leave to remain arguing
    that returning him to Bangladesh would breach his article 3 and 8 ECHR
    human rights. The respondent refused this application on 15 March 2018.

 3. The appellant appealed the decision on 27 March 2018 under section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and his
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nixon (hereinafter
    referred to as the "FTT Judge") on 25 October 2018 who in a decision,
    promulgated on 2 November 2018, dismissed the appellant's appeal on all
    grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision on 15 November 2018 arguing the
    FTT Judge had erred:

      a) In the approach to the appellant's role within the Bangladeshi
         National Party and the fact there was an arrest warrant outstanding
         in Bangladesh, and he remained of interest to the Bangladeshi
         authorities; and
      b) The FTT Judge's approach to article 3 ECHR was flawed.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Scott Baker on 31 December 2018 who, in granting permission, found it
    was arguable that having accepted the appellant was an opposition
    activist with an outstanding arrest warrant, the FTT Judge erred by
    finding he would not be at risk on return.

 6. The respondent was unrepresented when the appeal came  before  the  FTT
    Judge who not only accepted the documents, presented by the  appellant,
    at face value and further found that it was reasonably likely there was
    an arrest warrant outstanding for the appellant, the appellant did  not
    hold a significant post within the BNP and the  prison  conditions  did
    not breach  the  article  3  threshold.  The  FTT  Judge  rejected  the
    appellant's claim that he would be at risk because his father, who  had
    links to the BNP, had returned to Bangladesh and  had  not  experienced
    any such problems.

 7. In deciding whether there was an error in law, the central question  to
    consider was whether the FTT Judge was wrong  to  conclude  the  arrest
    warrant was not politically motivated.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr Azmi relied on the grounds of appeal and some of the  findings  made
    by the FTT Judge. There was ample evidence before the FTT Judge of  the
    appellant's connection to politics and that his  involvement  would  be
    well known were he to be questioned on return. He referred the Tribunal
    to evidence the FTT Judge had accepted namely three  letters  at  pages
    17, 27, 29, two arrest warrants at pages 21 and  77  and  documents  at
    pages 31-76 list the appellant as one of those suspected  of  offences.
    The FTT Judge erred by finding the authorities were not  interested  in
    the appellant. The FTT Judge also erred by accepting prison  conditions
    could reach the article 3  threshold  but  not  in  the  case  of  this
    appellant as such a finding was contrary to the evidence in the  bundle
    of prison conditions.

10. Ms Aboni submitted the FTT Judge had directed himself appropriately and
    made findings open on the evidence. The  FTT  Judge  had  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence at face value and found they supported  his  claim
    but concluded the appellant did  not  have  a  significant  profile  on
    return and placed weight on fact father had not been arrested. Ms Aboni
    further submitted it was significant the appellant  had  never  claimed
    asylum and this undermined his claim to face persecution.

11. Mr Azmi submitted the issue for this  appeal  was  whether  the  prison
    conditions breached article 3 ECHR and the FTT Judge erred  by  failing
    to detail the factors that led to the finding made there had  been  and
    no real consideration of the bundle of papers submitted.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

12. The appellant had applied for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds
    and in particular that returning him to  Bangladesh  would  breach  his
    Article 3 rights. The  respondent  was  unrepresented  at  the  hearing
    before the FTT Judge and after hearing evidence from the appellant  and
    his  sister  the  FTT  Judge  made  a  number  of  findings  about  the
    appellant's claim.

13. Those findings are relied on by Mr Azmi as the basis for there being an
    error in law and in his submissions to me he argued the key  issue  was
    whether prison  conditions  would  breach  the  appellant's  article  3
    rights.

14. The FTT Judge considered  prison  conditions  based  on  the  following
    findings:

      a) The appellant did not  hold  a  significant  post  within  the  BNP
         despite being an organising  secretary  between  January  2011  and
         December 2015. There was no documentary evidence to  show  what  he
         actually did for the party.

      b) There was a  warrant  for  his  arrest  and  the  proceedings  were
         outstanding.

      c) The appellant's father, who was said to be a prominent  member  and
         supporter  of  the  BNP,  was  living  in  Bangladesh  without  any
         difficulties although it should be recognised that he never claimed
         to have been as active as the appellant. The appellant's claim that
         he and his family had experienced problems prior to coming  to  the
         United Kingdom was inconsistent with the fact the  father  returned
         and experienced no problems.

      d) Accepting there was an arrest  warrant  outstanding  there  was  no
         evidence that he would face treatment contrary to  article  3  ECHR
         even if prison conditions could be harsh. Reliance was placed on SH
         (prison conditions) Bangladesh CG [2008] UKAIT 00076 in  which  the
         Tribunal said that

          i)  Prison  conditions  in  Bangladesh,  at  least  for  ordinary
             prisoners, do not violate Article 3 ECHR; and

         ii) This does not mean that an  individual  who  faces  prison  on
             return to Bangladesh can never succeed in showing a  violation
             of Article 3 in the particular circumstances of his case.  The
             individual  facts  of  each  case  should  be  considered   to
             determine whether detention will cause a particular individual
             in his particular circumstances to suffer  treatment  contrary
             to Article 3

15. Mr Azmi submitted  that  based  on  the  information  known  about  the
    appellant then he would face a risk of serious harm that  would  breach
    article 3 ECHR.

16. In considering this claim it is important to remember the FTT Judge was
    not dealing with a fear of persecution but was concerned whether prison
    conditions for this appellant would breach  article  3  ECHR.  The  FTT
    Judge took the documents on face value and had to therefore assess  the
    appellant's claim on the basis there was an arrest warrant for him  and
    that he was suspected of political activity against the government.

17. The fact the arrest warrant made reference to political  issues  was  a
    factor the FTT Judge had to consider because the Tribunal in SH made it
    clear detainees of this kind may face  treatment  different  from  that
    meted out to ordinary prisoners. Taking into account that the FTT Judge
    accepted he was linked to the BNP and there was an arrest  warrant  for
    his arrest the FTT Judge  was  required  to  consider  whether  it  was
    detention awaiting trial or detention in service  of  a  sentence,  the
    likely length of detention, the likely type of detention facility,  and
    the individual's age and state of health.  His  findings  at  paragraph
    [19] of the decision do not engage with these factors and  the  finding
    article 3 would not be breached failed to engage with these factors and
    accordingly there is an error in law.

18. The findings on the documents and appellant's role  were  made  without
    any submissions from the respondent. Mr Azmi conceded that if there was
    an error in law then those earlier findings could  not  stand.  A  full
    finding of fact is required, and I therefore remit this matter back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal under Section 12 of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.


    NOTICE OF DECISION

19. There was an error in law and I set aside the decision and I remit  the
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing  before  a
    Judge other than FTT Judge Nixon.

Signed                              Date 23/07/2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
