
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07378/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 March 2019                     |On 12 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  ATIF [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McGinley, of Gray & Co. Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Eritrea.  His wife, [ST], is  recognised
    in the United Kingdom as a refugee.  On 6 August  2017  the  respondent
    refused to grant the appellant entry clearance for  settlement  as  the
    spouse of a refugee.  The appellant appealed; Judge  D  C  Clapham  SSC
    dismissed his  appeal.   He  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  this
    Tribunal.

 2. The crucial provision of the Immigration Rules for the purposes of  the
    present appeal is not set out by the judge.  It is in paragraph 352A of
    the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended).  It
    permits the  admission  of  the  spouse  of  a  refugee  under  certain
    conditions, including the following:

         "(ii)    the marriage  ...did  not  take  place  after  the  person
         granted refugee status left the country of  their  former  habitual
         residence in order to seek asylum ...; and


         (iii)    the relationship existed before the person granted refugee
         status left the country of their former habitual residence in order
         to seek asylum."


    The following paragraphs of the Rules set out administrative provisions
    and then go on to make similar conditions and provisions in relation to
    the child of a refugee.

 3. The facts were in dispute before the judge.  It  is  not  easy  to  see
    where in his decision he makes findings of fact on the evidence  before
    him, but it appears they are not now seriously in dispute.  Ms [ST]  is
    an Eritrean national and was born in 1988.  She fled Eritrea owing to a
    fear of persecution on 1 May 2002.  She went to Sudan.

 4. She did not claim asylum in Sudan (which is and  was  at  all  relevant
    times a party to the Refugee Convention) nor, so far as we  are  aware,
    did she seek to regularise her presence there in any  other  way.   She
    married another Eritrean national in 2007.  She has a stepson and a son
    from that relationship.  We have not heard much about them: they appear
    to  be  still  in  Sudan;  they  do  not  feature  in  the  appellant's
    application and we do not know whether he regards them  as  related  to
    him.  Her first husband died in 2008.

 5. She met the appellant in 2011 and married him in May  2012.  On  2  May
    2014, her second wedding anniversary, she left her  husband  and  other
    family members  and  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  not
    suggested that her travel from Sudan was other than voluntary, although
    her entry to the United Kingdom  appears  to  have  been  unlawful  and
    undocumented.  She has not claimed to have had any difficulties in  the
    twelve years during which she lived and worked in  Sudan;  and  indeed,
    she returned to Sudan in 2016 for a holiday to visit her children.   In
    the United Kingdom she claimed,  and  was  granted,  status  under  the
    Refugee Convention.  The grant appears to have been on 8 May 2015.

 6. Meanwhile,  the  appellant  was  having  difficulties  in  Sudan.   His
    presence there also was  illegal,  and  after  his  wife  left  he  was
    detected by the authorities and detained.  He bribed  his  way  out  of
    prison and went to Egypt, where  he  still  is.   He  appears  to  have
    arrived there some time in 2016.  On 4 December 2016 he  made  a  claim
    for asylum: that claim was made to the UNHCR, which looks after  asylum
    claims made in Egypt.  We have not been told about the progress of that
    claim.  Ms [ST] visited Egypt for a holiday for two weeks  in  December
    2017 and stayed with him in Cairo.  The genuineness of the relationship
    between her and the appellant is said to be evidenced by that visit, by
    transfers of money, and by numerous communications.  We are content for
    present purposes to assume that the relationship is genuine.

 7. The appellant had made a previous application for  entry  clearance  as
    the spouse of Ms [ST], which was  refused  on  26  January  2017.   The
    present application was made on 20 March 2017.  It was refused  because
    the respondent was not, on the evidence,  satisfied  that  the  parties
    were related as claimed.  In his decision Judge  Clapham  records  that
    the grounds for refusal were amended before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    but he does not say what the amendment was.  Given the terms of a  note
    on the file, and Mr McGinley's  consequent  application  to  amend  the
    applicant's grounds, however, we can assume with some  confidence  that
    the respondent had added a ground of refusal based  on  paragraph  352A
    (ii) and (iii).  The grounds before Judge Clapham (which  are  not  set
    out or referred to in his  decision)  appear  to  have  been  that  the
    relationship was genuine, that it met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    352A, and that, if it did not, it was disproportionate and a breach  of
    article 8 to refuse the appellant admission.

 8.  After  hearing  evidence  from  Ms  [ST]  and  another  witness,   and
    submissions from the Presenting Officer and Mr McGinley (all  of  which
    are  set  out  at  length  in  his  decision)  Judge  Clapham  referred
    implicitly to paragraph 352A and said this:

         "53. ... I think that it must be perfectly clear that if someone in
             the course of flight to the United Kingdom meets and marries a
             spouse, then that is a post-flight marriage and therefore  the
             relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules would not apply.

         54.  In terms of the Home Office policy document  shown  at  bundle
             number 7, it is clear that the policy intention is to allow  a
             spouse or partner of someone granted refugee status to reunite
             with their partner in the United Kingdom,  provided  that  the
             person seeking the reunion formed  part  of  the  family  unit
             before the sponsor fled the country of origin.

         55.  I have come (reluctantly) to the conclusion that  the  way  in
             which the Immigration Rules has been framed does not cover the
             situation of this particular couple.  I  fully  appreciate  Mr
             McGinley's argument that the person granted asylum had a  well
             founded fear of persecution in Eritrea and therefore left  for
             Sudan  where  she  lived  for  a  considerable   period.    Mr
             McGinley's argument is that Sudan then became the  country  of
             habitual residence.  However, the  country  that  the  sponsor
             left in order to seek asylum must be treated as Eritrea rather
             than Sudan, and for that reason I consider that I am forced to
             agree with Mr Young that this is a post-flight marriage."

 9. He went on to decide that Ms [ST]'s first husband did  indeed  die  and
    that the marriage to the appellant was valid.  He did not, so far as we
    can see,  express  any  view  on  the  evidence  said  to  support  the
    genuineness of the continuing relationship.   The  consequence  of  the
    view he had reached  at  paragraphs  53-55  of  his  decision  was  the
    dismissal of the appeal.

10. Mr McGinley's grounds of appeal, on the basis of which  permission  was
    granted, are that the judge erred  in  law  in  failing  to  take  into
    account and follow a decision of the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,  AA
    [2004] UKIAT 00031; and that in any event the appeal should  have  been
    allowed under article 8 as the circumstances were exceptional.

11. In AA, the facts were not readily distinguishable  from  those  of  the
    present case.  The wife was a Somali national who had fled to  Ethiopia
    where she had married the husband, also a Somali national.    The  wife
    had then entered the United Kingdom and obtained status as  a  refugee;
    the husband had gone to  South  Africa,  from  where  he  sought  entry
    clearance to join his wife.  The Tribunal cited the Final Act of the UN
    Conference on the Status of Refugees and Stateless  Persons,  which  is
    the origin of the family unity provisions, and looked at the history of
    the provisions found in paragraph 352A.   It concluded that  "in  order
    to seek asylum" meant "in order to make a claim for asylum" and that  a
    person might form a habitual residence in a third country  between  the
    country of persecution and the country in which asylum was sought.   It
    therefore allowed the appeal as the marriage had taken place before the
    wife left Ethiopia in order to claim asylum in the United Kingdom.

12. So far as concerns  the  first  ground,  it  is  wholly  unarguable  as
    pleaded.   The  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  was  (unlike  the  Upper
    Tribunal) not a Superior Court of Record, and  (save  in  the  case  of
    "starred  decisions"  and  country  guidance)  had  no  power  to  bind
    Immigration Adjudicators or even the Tribunal itself  in  other  cases.
    In the absence  of  particular  arrangements  such  as  those  for  the
    continuing force of starred decisions and country guidance decisions, a
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal is not bound to  follow  decisions  of
    the Immigration Appeal Tribunal, or of its  successor  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal.

13. This is even more obviously the case when the decision in question  was
    not cited.  We have examined the judge's full note of  the  proceedings
    before him, and it is clear that although Mr McGinley seems to have had
    many months to prepare his case, he did not refer to any decided cases.
     To criticise the judge for failing to refer to a  case  that  was  not
    binding on him and was not cited is more than ungracious, and is itself
    an error of law.  A judge is not required to refer to, follow or regard
    himself as bound by, a decision that is not in law binding upon him.

14. Before us, Mr McGinley's submissions did not go very much further  than
    the assertion that Judge Clapham should have  followed  AA,  presumably
    having discovered it for himself after the hearing.  That would  itself
    have been an error, unless he  had  reconvened  to  hear  the  parties'
    submissions on it.

15. The question, however, for Judge Clapham as for the Tribunal in AA, was
    the meaning of paragraph 352A.  It would have been open to Mr  McGinley
    to have relied on the  arguments  found  in  the  determination  in  AA
    (though he did not) and to urge Judge Clapham  to  decide  the  present
    case in the same way for those reasons: he did  not  do  that,  either.
    Further, he did not set out any of those arguments before us.

16. Nevertheless, and  despite  Mr  McGinley's  apparent  unwillingness  to
    wrestle on behalf of his client  with  what  appears  to  be  the  only
    decision on this provision, we have read AA.  After all,  if  we  would
    have reached the same decision as did the Tribunal in AA, the appellant
    would be entitled to entry clearance.

17. The decision in AA is by  a  Tribunal  which  by  its  constitution  is
    entitled to the greatest respect: Mr Warr and Mr P Lane (as  they  then
    were).  It is also to be noted that it does not  appear  to  have  been
    appealed; on the other hand it is not clear that very much  notice  has
    been taken of it, and although the Home Office Guidance in force at the
    date of the present application appears to  treat  "country  of  former
    habitual residence" in paragraph 352A as synonymous  with  "country  of
    origin" we have heard of no challenge to that policy.

18. It is evident that  the  phrase  "left  the  country  of  their  former
    habitual residence in order to seek asylum" is  not  absolutely  clear.
    If it were, there would have been no debate about it either in AA or in
    the present case.  There is a tension between the notion of  leaving  a
    country of "former habitual residence" on the one hand and the doing so
    "in order to seek asylum" on the other.  The Tribunal in AA provided an
    interpretation which is certainly viable (although  not  mandatory)  if
    the context of the provision takes a place  subsidiary  to  the  words.
    But, as Lord Steyn remarked in R v SSHD ex parte Daly [2001] 2  AC  532
    at [28], "In law, context is everything".  When context is  taken  into
    account, it seems to us that a number of considerations tend to suggest
    a conclusion opposite to that reached in AA.

19. The first is the context provided by refugee law.  "Country  of  former
    habitual residence" is  a  phrase  familiar  to  all  refugee  lawyers,
    because it  appears  in  the  central  part  of  the  definition  of  a
    Convention refugee in article  1A(2)  of  the  Convention.   It  is  an
    alternative reference point for the fear of persecution, in the case of
    a person who because he is stateless can have  no  fear  related  to  a
    country of nationality.  For any  refugee  lawyer  the  phrase  carries
    connotations of a country where persecution is  feared  and  return  to
    which is feared.  It seems to us in the highest  degree  unlikely  that
    its use in paragraph  352A,  in  the  Part  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    relating  to  asylum,  was  not  intended  to  carry  the  meaning  and
    implications of its use in the Convention itself.

20. We cannot see why the draftsman should have chosen the phrase unless  a
    reference to the Convention was intended.   "Country  of  their  former
    habitual residence" contains in its six  words  two  or  perhaps  three
    tendentious notions, each of which might be  properly  the  subject  of
    dispute as a matter of evidence and as a matter of law in an individual
    case.  What is residence?  How does  it  differ  from  other  forms  of
    sojourn?   Does the evidence show that  the  refugee's  stay  bore  the
    marks of "residence"?   What  is  meant  by  'habitual'?   Is  there  a
    psychological element as well as some sort  of  temporal  element?   Is
    residence "habitual" if it is involuntary, for example because a person
    is in detention, or on bail conditions, or has no travel documents,  or
    cannot afford to travel?  Does "habitual"  import  some  notion  of  an
    extended stay?  Even "country" may cause difficulties if the phrase  is
    divorced from the Convention with its assumption that the word is to be
    understood in line with other international instruments.  Surely if the
    draftsman meant merely "a place where the refugee lived" he would  have
    said that.

21. Further, still within general refugee law, it is clear  that  a  person
    who meets the  definition  in  art  1  (taking  into  account  all  the
    reservations and so on found in sub-articles 1B-1F) is a refugee.  Such
    a person may not have been recognised as a refugee, but he is one:  the
    "conferring" of refugee status is merely a declaratory act.   Thus,  Ms
    [ST], and the wife in AA, were already refugees immediately upon  their
    leaving the countries in which they  feared  persecution,  Eritrea  and
    Somalia respectively.  At that point there was  no  further  scope  for
    them to "seek asylum": they already had it.  It is not easy to see that
    the wording of paragraph 352A, or anything related  to  its  operation,
    justifies the insertion of a notion of making a formal  application  to
    be allowed to remain as a refugee in a safe country other than the  one
    in which the applicant already is.

22. The second context is that provided  by  European  law.   There  is  no
    direct link between the Immigration Rules and European  law,  but  both
    are attempts to apply the international obligations  arising  from  the
    Refugee Convention and associated instruments.  It seems to us that the
    assumption made by the relevant  Directives  and  Regulations  is  that
    family unity is restricted to those who were members of the  family  in
    the place of persecution or feared persecution.  Thus, article 2(h)  of
    the Qualification Directive, 2004/83/EC, defines  the  family  members,
    who are entitled to benefits  as  such,  as  those  with  a  particular
    relationship to the applicant "in so far as the family already  existed
    in the country of origin".  Article 23, under the heading  "maintaining
    family unity" gives family members as so defined the same  benefits  as
    the refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian protection; and paragraph  5
    allows Member States to extend benefits to "other close  relatives  who
    lived together as part of the family at the time of leaving the country
    of origin and who are dependent".  There is no suggestion  that  family
    acquired after leaving the country of origin  should  obtain  the  same
    benefits.  "Family members" are  defined  similarly  in  the  Reception
    Directive, 2003/9/EC.

23. Regulation 604/2013/EU, Dublin III, also defines family members in this
    way.  Although for the purposes  of  status  determination  any  family
    member may (subject to written request) form the starting-point for the
    identification of the responsible Member State, there is no  suggestion
    here either that after-acquired family should have the same benefits as
    those who were family members at the time of  leaving  the  country  of
    origin.

24. Of course it is open to  a  Member  State  to  treat  individuals  more
    generously than the Directives require, but we see no real signs of  an
    intention to do so.   In  the  circumstances  it  appears  to  us  that
    paragraphs 352A ff should be interpreted in a  way  that  is  consonant
    with relevant European legislation.

25. The third context is that of the Rules itself.  A person who  can  rely
    on the family provisions of paragraphs 352A ff of the Immigration Rules
    does not have to meet the financial and  other  requirements  that  the
    Rules impose on family immigrants generally.   There is  thus  a  clear
    benefit being offered to the family members of refugees, provided  that
    the family members meet the requirements of these paragraphs.   But  it
    does not, with respect, seem very likely that it was intended to  offer
    those  benefits  to  people  who  themselves  have  no  connexion  with
    persecution, who may have no link with any country of persecution,  and
    who have formed a family link with a refugee at a time when the refugee
    was not at risk of persecution  but  was  simply  making  an  unhurried
    choice about where to settle after obtaining safety.  To give a benefit
    to such a person might be seen as an  encouragement  of  forum-shopping
    and an endorsement of the benefits of doing so.  What  is  particularly
    odd if the interpretation in AA is  correct  is  that  the  longer  the
    refugee delays before making a claim, the more likely it  is  that  his
    residence in the safe country will be regarded as  'habitual'  and  the
    greater the chance of family members' success under paragraph 352A  ff;
    conversely, the refugee who claims promptly after leaving  the  country
    of persecution can be the conduit of benefit only to family members  in
    the country of persecution itself.

26. For these reasons we think this is a case  where  context  is  a  vital
    factor in interpretation.  It is therefore not open to  a  Tribunal  to
    interpret the phrase "country of former habitual residence" by  looking
    only at what is conveyed by the ordinary meaning  of  the  words.   The
    phrase does not appear with the restrictions on  its  application  that
    are in article 1A(2), but there is no obvious objection  to  its  being
    understood as meaning a  country  of  persecution,  identified  without
    specific regard to  the  question  of  anybody's  nationality.  Context
    requires that it be read as meaning "country of origin", that is to say
    the country in which persecution is feared; and that it is the  leaving
    of that country, in order to seek  asylum  somewhere,  whether  in  the
    first country or a later one, and whether by  formal  claim  or  by  de
    facto safety, that forms the terminus ad quem for  the  acquisition  of
    relatives capable of falling within paragraphs 352A ff.

27. We have trodden this path with caution, because, as we have  indicated,
    Mr McGinley raised no full argument before us, and so Mrs  O'Brien  had
    no chance to respond.  But for the reasons we have  given  we  are  not
    persuaded by Mr McGinley that the judge erred  in  law  by  taking  the
    approach he did.  We therefore reject ground 1 at  all  the  levels  at
    which we have been able to examine it.

28. Ground 2, the article 8 claim outside the Rules is, as presented, quite
    hopeless.   As the appellant is not entitled to enter as the spouse  of
    a refugee, he must expect to meet the  financial  requirements  of  the
    Rules for spouses.  Nothing in the  material  before  the  Tribunal  at
    either level, or before the Secretary of State, begins to show that  it
    would be disproportionate to  exclude  him  if  he  cannot  meet  those
    requirements.   If  he   can   meet   them,   it   is   obviously   not
    disproportionate to expect him to make the appropriate application.

29. The appeal is dismissed.



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 4 June 2019
