
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration   and   Asylum   Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: HU/07716/2019

                                                        HU/07722/2019
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House by video              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|conference 25 November 2020 (V)            |On 15 December 2020           |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                            BIKRAM OKHRABU LIMBU
                                                             First Appellant
                                SANDHYA LIMBU
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (SHEFFIELD)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr D. Balroop, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellants appealed the  respondent's  decisions  dated  02  April
      2019 and 11 March 2019 to refuse human rights claims in the context of
      their applications for entry clearance as Gurkha family members.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor ("the judge") dismissed  the  appeal
      in a decision promulgated on 06 May 2020.  The  judge  summarised  the
      entry clearance officer's reasons for refusal [3-16].  He  noted  that
      the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellants  met   the
      requirements of the  immigration  rules  or  the  respondent's  policy
      relating to Gurkha dependents. The respondent was not  satisfied  that
      they had shown that their  parents  still  provided  them  with  real,
      committed or effective support. In relation to the first appellant the
      respondent's enquiries indicated that there was evidence to show  that
      he left  Nepal  to  work  in  Malaysia  in  2014.  Under  the  heading
      "Applicable Law" the  judge  set  out  basic  principles  relating  to
      Article 8 with reference to the decisions in Huang v SSHD [2007] 1 FLR
      2021, MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 10 and  Agyarko  v  SSHD  [2017]
      UKSC 11  [22-28]. He noted the submissions  made  by  the  appellants'
      representative with reference to the 'historic  injustice'  identified
      in R (Gurung) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8 but  did  not  refer  to  other
      authorities that were  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  family  life
      between adult relatives. The judge went on to  set  out  the  evidence
      contained in the appellants' unsigned witness statements and the  oral
      evidence given by their father at the hearing [29-50].

3.    The judge concluded that the appellants did not meet the  requirements
      of the  immigration  rules  for  adult  dependent  relatives  nor  the
      respondent's policy relating to settlement of adult dependent children
      of former Gurkhas. The judge noted that there  was  some  evidence  of
      financial remittances to the appellants but concluded that  there  was
      limited evidence to show that "the Appellants have  been  continuously
      supported by the sponsor" since he came to the United Kingdom [55].

4.    The judge considered the explanation given by the first appellant  and
      his father relating to the respondent's assertion that he  left  Nepal
      to work in Malaysia. He found contradictions in their  evidence  [56].
      He recorded that the appellant said that he did  not  go  to  Malaysia
      because the agent asked for more money and when he  did  not  pay  the
      agent kept his passport. The sponsor said that  his  son  changed  his
      mind about going to Malaysia after the agent  had  asked  for  further
      commission. He refused to return the passport. On the face of it these
      explanations were similar so it is difficult to see how their evidence
      could be found to be inconsistent. The  judge's  subsequent  reasoning
      indicates that it was the plausibility of the sponsor's evidence  that
      he seemed to have doubts about. He said that if the account were  true
      it was surprising that the first appellant did not report the theft to
      the police. The judge noted that this  was  the  document  that  might
      indicate whether the appellant went to Malaysia or not. He also  noted
      that no evidence had been obtained  from  the  Nepali  authorities  to
      confirm whether the first appellant left Nepal in 2014  or  not  [57].
      The judge concluded that the first appellant and his  father  had  not
      provided a credible explanation  for  the  lack  of  passport  or  any
      evidence to show that he had  not  left  Nepal  in  2014  to  work  in
      Malaysia as asserted by the respondent. For these reasons he concluded
      that the first appellant failed to disclose relevant information in an
      earlier entry clearance application [58].

5.    The judge went on to find that there was no evidence to show that  the
      appellants could not find work to support themselves in  Nepal.  There
      was some evidence to suggest that the first appellant might have  done
      some seasonal work. He concluded  that  it  was  improbable  that  the
      appellants had not worked [59]. The judge  went  on  to  consider  the
      decision in Rai v ECO, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320.  He  noted  that
      the test was whether the appellants' parents provide 'real,  committed
      and effective support.' In the same paragraph he went on to find [60]:

           "In this respect, I find that given my conclusions regarding the
           issue  relating  to  the  First  Appellant's  work  permit   for
           Malaysia, and the fact that  his  father  informed  me  in  oral
           evidence that the First Appellant has  been  working  in  Nepal,
           that this  significantly  undermines  the  suggestion  that  the
           Appellants are in fact dependent upon their parents  to  provide
           them with real, committed or effective support."

6.    The judge said that he took into account the fact that the  appellants
      lived in a family unit with their parents before they came to the  UK.
      He appeared to accept that their parents had visited them in Nepal and
      that they continued to live in the  family  home.  He  concluded  that
      "this, of itself, is not evidence of  real,  committed  and  effective
      support". He took into account the fact  that  they  had  been  living
      apart from their parents for six years at the date of the hearing. Nor
      did the evidence of financial  remittances  show  real,  committed  or
      effective support in a way "that  has  preserved  their  family  life"
      [61]. The judge went on to say:

           "63. Even if I am wrong in the above respect, and their  Article
           8  rights  are  engaged,  I  do  not  agree  with  Mr  Balroop's
           submission that the appeal ought to be allowed in order to right
           the historic  injustice  as  referred  to  in  the  decision  of
           Ghising. In this respect, I find  that  there  is  very  limited
           evidence of the Appellants' life  in  Nepal  and  that  whatever
           limited funds that are being forwarded to them, this  cannot  be
           accepted as amounting to real, committed or  effective  support.
           My findings in this respect are reinforced by the fact that  the
           sponsor eventually told me in his oral evidence that  the  First
           Appellant has been working. Until that matter was clarified both
           the Appellants and sponsor would wish me to have  believed  that
           neither Appellant was working or capable of work  and  therefore
           self-sufficient. I find that claim is undermined  by  virtue  of
           the fact that the First Appellant was able to secure  a  working
           visa for another country and that he is  working,  at  the  very
           least, in seasonal work in Nepal., Where I find  that  I  cannot
           rely upon the evidence of the First Appellant and  the  sponsor,
           then I am obliged to conclude that I  do  not  accept  that  the
           First Appellant, in particular, is dependent upon his parents in
           the way that is claimed. Moreover, I find  there  is  almost  no
           evidence pertaining to the life of the Second Appellant and what
           she is doing in Nepal. I find it difficult to imagine  that  she
           will be doing absolutely nothing, apart  from  speaking  to  her
           parents and looking after her brother. In  any  event,  whatever
           family life that now subsists is entirely  limited.  Based  upon
           the evidence,  I  find  that  the  refusal  of  the  Appellants'
           application is both  reasonable  and  proportionate  and  cannot
           amount to a breach of their Article 8 rights."

7.    The appellants  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
      following grounds:

        i) The judge failed to  consider  the  nature  of  the  information
           contained in the Document Verification Report  (DVR)  adequately
           when assessing whether the  first  appellant  should  have  been
           refused on grounds of 'Suitability'.

       ii) The judge erred in his application  of  the  relevant  test  for
           'family life' in a case of this  kind,  which  did  not  require
           dependency. The fact that the judge  accepted  that  there  were
           financial  remittances,  that  the  appellants  lived   in   the
           sponsors' house and continued to be in  regular  contact  should
           have been sufficient to find that there was real, committed  and
           effective support.

      iii) The judge failed  to  give  adequate  weight  to  the  'historic
           injustice' relating to Gurkha settlement when proportionality.

Decision and reasons

8.    The parties discussed the case before the hearing and agreed that  the
      First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of  errors  of  law.
      Even though the judge referred to the  test  of  real,  committed  and
      effective support Ms Everett accepted that he may have approached  the
      assessment of family life incorrectly in the context  of  the  way  in
      which the case law had developed in Gurkha cases. Mr Balroop said that
      the  judge  incorrectly  considered  whether   the   appellants   were
      dependent. Having accepted that they received  financial  support  and
      lived in their parents' house that should have been sufficient to find
      that  Article  8(1)  was  engaged.  The  judge  mischaracterised   the
      information in the DVR, which was not proof that the  first  appellant
      left Nepal. Although not pleaded, he also  submitted  that  the  judge
      erred in placing too much emphasis on his  findings  relating  to  the
      first   appellant   without   considering   the   second   appellant's
      circumstances adequately.

9.    It is not necessary for  me  to  go  into  detailed  analysis  of  the
      decision when there is some agreement that it involved the  making  of
      errors of law. I also had concerns about the way in  which  the  judge
      approached the assessment of family  life.  The  line  of  authorities
      relating to the assessment of Gurkha cases including  Ghising,  Gurung
      and Rai, make clear that such  cases  must  be  put  in  their  proper
      context. The judge accepted  that  the  appellants  lived  with  their
      parents in the same household until they came to the UK in  2014.  The
      appellants' parents were taking up long withheld rights of settlement.
      At the time no application was made for the appellants to settle  with
      their parents in the UK because they  were  over  18  years  old.  The
      respondent had not yet introduced the policy for adult Gurkha children
      contained in Annex K (June 2015), but both appellants would  have  met
      the age requirements at the time. The  appellants  applied  for  entry
      clearance  in  2016,  2018  and  2019  with  the  clear  intention  of
      continuing  their  family  life  with  their  parents.  When  properly
      analysed, the period of six years separation was not as a result of  a
      natural  progression  to  independent  living  on  the  part  of   the
      appellants, but largely as a result of difficult choices made by their
      parents and repeated refusal of entry clearance. In the meantime,  the
      judge appeared to accept that they remained in  the  family  home  and
      received financial remittances from their parents.

10.   Although the judge referred  to  the  test  of  'real,  committed  and
      effective support' his other findings suggested that the test may have
      been applied incorrectly. Having accepted that the appellants received
      financial remittances, lived in the family home,  that  their  parents
      visited them in Nepal,  and  they  kept  in  regular  contact,  it  is
      difficult to discern why he did not conclude that this was  sufficient
      to amount to real, committed and effective support. The judge referred
      to the ability of the appellants to find work and the  fact  that  the
      first appellant conducted some seasonal work. This indicates  that  he
      considered issues that were not relevant to the  question  of  whether
      their parents continued to provide the appellants with real, committed
      and effective support. There was no requirement for the appellants  to
      be wholly dependent upon their parents for support or for there to  be
      exceptional circumstances still requiring support for adult  children.
      Nor did the support provided need to arise from  necessity.  The  fact
      that they could work and live  independently  mattered  not  if  there
      continued to  be  family  ties  resulting  from  real,  committed  and
      effective support.

11.   Some of the findings made  by  the  judge  as  to  whether  the  first
      appellant  went  to  work  in  Malaysia,  and   thereby   made   false
      representations in the application form, were open  to  him  to  make.
      However,  there  is  force  in  the  submission  that  he   may   have
      mischaracterised the evidence contained in the DVR and failed to  take
      into account relevant considerations. At highest, the DVR was said  to
      record information held by the Nepal Government Department for Foreign
      Employment. Although the DVR asserted that the  check  indicated  that
      the first appellant travelled to Malaysia, the details of  the  record
      arguably did not show actual travel. No information  was  provided  to
      explain what the record held by the Nepal  Government  Department  for
      Foreign Employment was  i.e.  whether  it  is  necessary  to  register
      potential foreign employment when offered or  obtain  permission  from
      the government before leaving the  country.  The  attached  print  out
      stated that it was "For Malaysia labour approval". The  record  stated
      the name of the company the first appellant was offered work with, his
      passport number, the  country,  profession,  salary,  contract  period
      (three years), and the decision date. However, it is  not  clear  what
      the 'decision' was. In  the  absence  of  any  information  about  the
      relevant procedures, the face of the document appears to show a record
      of the appellant having been offered employment abroad, which may have
      required some form of approval by  the  Nepali  government  before  he
      could take up foreign employment. What the record does not  appear  to
      do is to show a date of travel. Given  this  lack  of  clarify  it  is
      difficult to see how the DVR could amount  to  proof  that  the  first
      appellant actually left the country.

12.   The judge appeared to place weight  on  the  DVR  as  proof  that  the
      appellant had left the country, when it is at least arguable  that  it
      was not. The document required some analysis,  but  none  was  carried
      out. Nor did the judge consider the fact that, even  if  the  document
      indicated that the appellant might have left Nepal to work in Malaysia
      in 2014, the contract was only for three years. The judge appeared  to
      place weight on the fact that the first appellant  failed  to  produce
      evidence to show that he did not  leave  Nepal  or  to  show  that  he
      reported his passport as stolen, but the burden of proof  was  on  the
      respondent to show that a false representation was made and  that  the
      'Suitability' criteria applied.

13.   Although it was not pleaded in the grounds, I also accept  that  there
      is some force in the submission that the judge relied on the  findings
      made  in  relation  to  the  first  appellant  to  reject  the  second
      appellant's  claim   without   much   analysis   of   her   individual
      circumstances [60].

14.   For the reasons given above, I conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision involved the making of an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  The
      decision is set aside.

15.   After discussing the matter with the parties,  I  was  persuaded  that
      this case is suitable for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal  because
      the credibility issues made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  are
      unsustainable and would need to be made again as part  of  a  holistic
      assessment. The appellant has produced further  evidence  relating  to
      the issue of whether he ever left Nepal after being offered employment
      in  Malaysia,  which  will  need  to  be  considered.  The   lack   of
      consideration  of  the  second  appellant's  circumstances  will  also
      require further findings. Although the usual course of action would be
      for the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision even if further findings
      of fact need to  be  made,  in  this  case,  none  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's findings are  sufficiently  sustainable  to  be  preserved.
      Wholesale findings are  likely  to  be  required.  The  case  will  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   M. Canavan          Date 07 December 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan



____________________________________________________________________________
                                    ____

NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email
