
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07681/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2020                  |On 12 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                       EDNALIVA FERNANDES DE OLIVEIRA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Morgan ('the Judge') promulgated on the  24  September
       2019 in  which  he  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
       respondent's refusal of her application for leave to remain in the UK
       on human rights grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal on 19 March 2020.
    3. The Upper Tribunal, pursuant  to  the  published  Covid-19  protocol,
       issued directions indicating a  provisional  view  that  it  will  be
       appropriate in the  circumstances  of  this  case  to  determine  the
       question of whether the Judge had erred in law in a  manner  material
       to the decision  on  the  papers,  providing  the  parties  with  the
       opportunity to comment upon this proposal and  to  make  any  further
       additional submissions they wished the Tribunal to consider.
    4. The parties have responded within time.
    5. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal Procedure
       Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing   with   a   case   fairly
       and   justly   includes:   dealing  with   it   in   ways  that   are
       proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the   case,   the  complexity
       of   the   issues,   etc;   avoiding   unnecessary   formality    and
       seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,   so   far   as
       practicable,  that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the
       proceedings; using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       effectively; and avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper
       consideration of the issues.
    6. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.
    7. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:

           34.-


           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
                make any decision without a hearing.


           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
                by a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to
                consider any matter, and the form of any such hearing.


           (3)    In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper
                Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a decision which
                disposes of proceedings.


           (4)    Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper
                Tribunal to-


                (a)    strike out a party's case, pursuant to rule 8(1)(b)
                    or 8(2);


                (b)    consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


                (c)    determine an application for permission to bring
                    judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


                (d)    make a consent order disposing of proceedings,
                    pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.

    8. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to  exercise  the
       discretion provided in Rule 34 by enabling the error of law  question
       to be determined on the papers.  Nothing on the facts,  law,  or  the
       pleadings makes consideration of the issues  on  the  papers  not  in
       accordance with overriding objectives at this stage.

Error of law

    9. The Judge notes at [2]  that  it  was  conceded  by  the  appellant's
       representative  that  the  appellant's  medical  condition  was   not
       sufficient to enable her to satisfy the article 3 ECHR threshold, but
       that  the  appellant  did  rely  upon  very  serious   obstacles   to
       reintegration on return to Brazil and claimed there were  exceptional
       and compassionate  circumstances  making  the  respondent's  decision
       disproportionate.
   10. At [4] the Judge notes that both representatives  accepted  that  the
       appeal would turn on an assessment of  the  medical  evidence  before
       him.
   11. At [10] the Judge writes:

           "10.    The  respondent  submitted  that  the  medical  evidence
                provided by the appellant does not enable a finding that the
                appellant would  face  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
                integration should she return to Brazil,  as  per  paragraph
                276 ADE(1)(vi). The respondent submits that the appellant is
                a visitor who has overstayed following  the  expiry  of  her
                visit Visa and has benefited from the treatment  offered  by
                the national health service. Whilst the treatment in  Brazil
                may not be of  such  a  high  standard  as  that  which  the
                appellant  received  in  the  United  Kingdom   nevertheless
                treatment is available and there was no evidence provided by
                the  appellant  that  she  would   face   very   significant
                obstacles.  I  am  persuaded  by  these   submissions.   The
                appellant was  in  her  30s  when  she  entered  the  United
                Kingdom. She has now resided in the United Kingdom for  over
                10 years. She is understandably  well  integrated  into  the
                United Kingdom and has a substantial  private  life  however
                there was no evidence before me that would enable or justify
                a finding that she would face very significant obstacles  to
                her integration should return to Brazil. I find for the sake
                of completeness that in light of the evidence before me that
                he would not."

   12. The Judge thereafter considered the matter  outside  the  Immigration
       Rules finding the  appellant's  inability  to  satisfy  the  Rules  a
       significant  factor  weighing  against  her  in  the  proportionality
       exercise. The Judge sets  out  core  findings  in  relation  to  this
       element between [14 - 17] in the following terms:

           "14.   I have given considerable weight to the  public  interest
                question.  I  note  that  the   maintenance   of   effective
                immigration control is in the public interest. In respect of
                the interests of  the  economic  well-being  of  the  United
                Kingdom there was no suggestion that the  appellant  is  not
                financially independent however this  is  a  neutral  factor
                weighed in the balancing exercise.


           15.    I note that little weight should be given  to  a  private
                life that is established by person at a time when the person
                is in the United Kingdom unlawfully. This is a  factor  that
                does weigh heavily against the appellant who has remained in
                the United Kingdom unlawfully for almost the entirety of her
                stay.


           16.    I find that although some of the 117 factors do not weigh
                against the appellant  the  public  policy  requirements  of
                immigration  control  do  weigh  against  appellant  in  the
                balancing exercise because the appellant is able to  satisfy
                the private life requirements required  of  the  immigration
                rules.


           17.    In summary I find that the appellant does not satisfy the
                requirements  of  the  long  residence  and   private   life
                paragraphs of immigration rules.  I  therefore  dismiss  the
                appeal on human rights grounds."

   13. The terms of the grant of permission to appeal are as follows:

           "2.    The grounds assert that the Judge erred as  follows.  The
                Judge failed to apply  the  correct  test  under  Article  8
                outside the Rules. The Judge failed  to  take  into  account
                medical issues in his  assessment  outside  the  Rules.  The
                Judge erred in treating the Appellants inability to meet the
                Rules as a weighty factor against her.


           3.      Whilst  it  is  possible  that  the  Judge  undertook  a
                proportionality assessment in which he or she considered all
                of the relevant factors, it is at least  arguable  that  his
                assessment began and finished with the  Appellant's  ability
                to meet the Immigration Rules (see in this regard the  final
                paragraph of the decision). This is arguable for of law.


           4.     Whilst the last ground in particular appears particularly
                weak, I grant permission  for  all  of  the  grounds  to  be
                argued."

   14. The respondent in her reply to  directions  asserts  in  response  to
       Ground 1, in which it is claimed the Judge  failed  to  identify  and
       apply a proportionality  assessment  outside  the  Rules,  the  Judge
       identified the issue of proportionality is as set out in the  refusal
       letter. The Judge noted the acknowledgement by the parties  that  the
       appeal would turn on an assessment of the medical evidence which  was
       not found to come close to the Article 3 threshold.
   15. It is submitted the Judge considered the  relevant  authorities  when
       assessing  the  proportionality  and  was  clearly  minded   of   the
       requirement to consider the facts of the case and weigh them  against
       the public interest.
   16. In relation to Ground 2, the respondent argues that whilst  there  is
       no express reconsideration of the medical evidence in the  Article  8
       assessment it is clear the Judge had regard to it.
   17. In relation to Ground 3, asserting the Judge erred  in  finding  that
       failure  to  meet  the  Rules  weighed  against  the  appellant,  the
       respondent asserts that no material legal error is made out.
   18. The appellant's position is  that  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the
       relevant test when assessing the proportionality of the decision. The
       appellant asserts the Judge failed to undertake a balancing  exercise
       in which weight is given to the  appellant's  private  interests  and
       that the Judge's finding flows from an erroneous assessment that  the
       appellant had not met the Rules and the impact on the  rights  to  be
       attributed to her.
   19. The appellant asserts  there  is  no  express  consideration  of  the
       medical evidence in the article 8 assessment which formed part of the
       appellant's private life which the appellant claims would render  her
       removal disproportionate.  The  appellant  argues  that  her  complex
       medical history and the need for future surgery could  form  part  of
       the assessment which the Judge was considering when weighing  up  the
       proportionality of the decision.
   20. The appellant asserts the Judge erred in  finding  that  because  the
       appellant could not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
       this will automatically result in that factor being  weighed  against
       her as part of the proportionality assessment. The appellant  asserts
       the Judge erred in treating the Rules as the starting and endpoint of
       the assessment.
   21. The Judge noted in the decision the agreement of the  advocates  that
       the core issue in the  appeal  related  to  the  appellant's  medical
       condition. The Judge's finding that the appellant had not established
       entitlement for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules,  as  she
       had not shown she could meet  the  very  significant  obstacles  test
       under paragraph 276  ADE(1)(vi),  has  not  been  challenged  in  the
       application for permission to appeal and  does  not,  in  any  event,
       disclose arguable legal error.
   22. Outside the Rules, the Judge accepted that the appellant had formed a
       private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  had  demonstrated  that
       exclusion would result  in  consequences  of  sufficient  gravity  to
       engage the operation of article 8.  The  Judge  identified  that  the
       issue was the proportionality of the decision. The core  findings  in
       relation to that aspect are set out above.
   23. The Judge concluded  that  there  was  nothing  beyond  the  evidence
       adduced in support of the insurmountable obstacles  argument,  or  in
       the appellant's case generally, sufficient to warrant a finding  that
       was any different from that which had been previously  reached,  i.e.
       that the appeal must fail.
   24. It is not made out that  the  Judge  having  considered  the  medical
       evidence in relation to the Rules then  completely  ignored  it  when
       considering the proportionality of the decision. Whilst the structure
       and content of the decision could be improved upon to  enable  reader
       to understand the Judges thinking with greater clarity, avoiding  the
       suggestion matters had not been considered properly which  forms  the
       basis  of  this  challenge,  a  careful  reading  of  the   evidence,
       submissions, and decision does not establish that the Judge has  made
       a material error of law.
   25. The Judge was entitled to take into  account  the  inability  of  the
       appellant to succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules.  That  has  been
       confirmed in  decisions  such  as  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11  and  TZ
       (Pakistan) and PG (India) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109.
   26. The respondent refers to [32] of TZ (Pakistan) in which the Court  of
       Appeal found:

           "32.   In the circumstances that an FtT does not need to make an
                evaluation  about  surmountable  obstacles,   the   question
                arises: how does that  tribunal  or  a  subsequent  tribunal
                relying  on  the  same  facts  approach  the   question   of
                exceptional circumstances  outside  the  Rules?  Again,  the
                answer is to be found in  Agyarko  at  [47]  and  [48].   By
                reference to Hesham Ali at [44 to 46], [50] and  [53],  Lord
                Reed made  it  clear  that  in  striking  a  proportionality
                balance (i.e.  when  undertaking  an  article  8  evaluation
                outside the Rules) a tribunal must  take  the  Secretary  of
                State's policy into account and attach  considerable  weight
                to it 'at a general level'.


           33.    This means that a tribunal undertaking and evaluation  of
                exceptional circumstances outside the Rules must  take  into
                account as a factor the strengths of the  public  policy  in
                immigration control as reflected by the Secretary of State's
                test within the Rules. The critical issue will generally  be
                whether the strength of the  public  policy  in  immigration
                control in the case before it is outweighed by the  strength
                of  the  article  8  claim  so  that  there  is  a  positive
                obligation on the state to permit the applicant to remain in
                the UK. The framework or approach in R (Razgar) v  Secretary
                of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27, [2004] 1 AC
                368 at [17] is  not  to  be  taken  to  avoid  the  need  to
                undertake this critical balance."

   27. The Judge found that little weight could be given to the private life
       formed by the appellant in the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  section
       117B of the Immigration Act 2002, as it was a private life  that  had
       been formed during the time the appellant's presence  in  the  United
       Kingdom has been precarious, and since the expiration  of  her  visit
       Visa, arguably unlawful.  The evidence relied upon by  the  appellant
       was clearly taken into account with the required  degree  of  anxious
       scrutiny by the Judge who was not required to  set  out  findings  in
       relation to each and every aspect of that evidence.
   28. The appellant in her witness  statement  refers  extensively  to  her
       medical circumstances in the United Kingdom claiming that she  should
       be allowed to remain in the UK  for  all  her  follow-up  checks  and
       possible risks relating to her pacemaker, claims to be  unwilling  to
       return  to  Brazil  as  she  requires  the  most  effective   medical
       attention, is critical  of  the  hospitals  in  Brazil,  and  clearly
       believes that her choice of wishing to remain in  the  UK  should  be
       determinative. This despite the treatment which she has  received  in
       the UK at considerable costs being something she may  not  have  been
       legally entitled to in the absence of any form of lawful leave.
   29. The appellant in her witness statement from [42] sets out details  of
       her private life  in  the  United  Kingdom,  which  was  accepted  as
       existing by the Judge, but does not set out any  convincing  argument
       as to why any interference with that  private  life  would  make  the
       respondent's decision not proportionate, such as to  make  the  Judge
       finding that it is erroneous.
   30. In relation article 8 ECHR and health issues, it was not  established
       that if removed to Brazil any the  deterioration  in  the  appellants
       health as a result of not  having  access  to  her  current  treating
       physician and facilities in the United Kingdom  meant  the  right  to
       respect for her private life required that she be  granted  leave  to
       remain in the UK.
   31. In GS (India); EO (Ghana); GM (India); PL (Jamaica); BA  (Ghana)  and
       KK (DRC) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40  it was held that if the Article 3
       claim failed, Article 8 could not prosper without  some  separate  or
       additional factual element which brought the case within the  Article
       8 paradigm: the core value protected being the quality of  life,  not
       its continuance. That meant that a specific case must be  made  under
       Article 8. The rigour of the D exception for the purpose of Article 3
       in such cases as these applied with no less force when the claim  was
       put under Article 8.  Although the UK courts have declined  to  state
       that Article 8 could never be engaged by the health  consequences  of
       removal from the  UK,  the  circumstances  would  have  to  be  truly
       exceptional before such a breach could be established (paras 45, 85 -
       87 and 106 - 111). At paragraph 111, Underhill LJ said  this  "First,
       the absence or inadequacy of medical treatment, even  life-preserving
       treatment, in the country of return, cannot be relied on at all as  a
       factor engaging Article 8: if that is all there is,  the  claim  must
       fail. Secondly, where Article 8 is engaged by other factors, the fact
       that the claimant is receiving  medical  treatment  in  this  country
       which may not be available in the country of return may be  a  factor
       in the proportionality exercise; but that factor cannot be treated as
       by itself giving rise to a breach since that would contravene the 'no
       obligation to treat' principle."
   32. In MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]
       EWCA Civ 279 the Court of Appeal noted that the courts  had  declined
       to  say  that  Article  8  could  never  by  engaged  by  the  health
       consequences of removal but they had never found such  a  breach  and
       had not been able to postulate circumstances in which such  a  breach
       was likely to be established. The only cases  where  the  absence  of
       adequate medical treatment in the country to which a person was to be
       deported would  be  relevant  to  Article  8  was  where  it  was  an
       additional factor to be weighed in the  balance  with  other  factors
       that engaged Article 8 (paras 17 - 23).
   33. In SL (St Lucia) [2018] EWCA Civ 1894 the Court of  Appeal  commented
       that the focus and structure of Article 8 is different  from  Article
       3.  They were unpersuaded that  Paposhvili  had  any  impact  on  the
       approach to Article 8 claims.  An absence of medical treatment in the
       country of return would not of itself engage  Article  8.   The  only
       relevance would be where that was an  additional  factor  with  other
       factors which themselves engaged Article 8.  Razgar was  referred  to
       for the  proposition  that  only  the  most  compelling  humanitarian
       considerations  were  likely  to  prevail  over  legitimate  aims  of
       immigration control. The approach set out in  MM  (Zimbabwe)  and  GS
       (India) was unaltered by Paposhvili.
   34. See also Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  PF  (Nigeria)
       [2019] EWCA Civ 1139 which helpfully summarises all the recent cases.
   35. The issue in this case, as it is in all proportionality  assessments,
       is whether an examination of the facts establishes  circumstances  of
       sufficient strength and weight to outweigh the public interest in the
       right of the Secretary of  State  to  have  an  effective  policy  of
       immigration control. The conclusion of the Judge that the  respondent
       had established that the decision was proportionate on the basis that
       the public interest had  not  been  outweighed,  which  is  the  only
       conclusion that can be reached by the Judge dismissing the appeal  on
       all grounds, and which can be  inferred  if  not  expressed  in  such
       terms, has not been shown to be a finding outside the range of  those
       available to the Judge on the evidence.
   36. Whilst the appellant wishes to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  the
       grounds fail to  establish  arguable  legal  error  material  to  the
       decision to dismiss  the  appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper
       Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.

Decision

   37. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   38. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10 November 2020

