
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/07467/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30 November 2017                        |  On 11 January 2018             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                              Mr LIBIYA BIRARA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Mughal of Montague Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 18 August 2017  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge James which refused the Article  8  appeal  of  the
    appellant.

 2. The background to this matter is that the appellant came to the UK from
    the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) in 2000. He  married  a  British
    national and they had a child together in 2005. The appellant  returned
    to DRC on 2 December 2007. He obtained entry clearance as a spouse  and
    returned to the UK on 16 January 2008. He had leave as a  spouse  until
    14 December 2009. The relationship with his wife broke down but  on  21
    May 2010 he was granted discretionary leave to remain on the  basis  of
    his family life with his child.  That  leave  continued  until  21  May
    2013.  The appellant then obtained further grants of  leave  to  remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules from 26 March 2014 until 30 June  2015
    in order for him to progress family proceedings concerning contact with
    his child.

 3. On 9 December 2015 the appellant made a further application  for  leave
    to remain on family and private life  grounds.   That  application  was
    refused on 3 March 2016 and the appeal against the refusal came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge James on 17 July 2017.  At  the  hearing,  no
    evidence was heard although the appellant and his sister  were  present
    and the judge heard only submissions from the legal representatives.

 4. The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal was that he  wished
    to remain in the United Kingdom in order to continue  his  relationship
    with his biological child.  It was not disputed, however, that an order
    of the Family Court permitted him  indirect  contact  only  by  way  of
    letters or cards or a small gift on only four occasions per  year;  see
    [10] of the decision.

 5. The appellant also brought his case on the basis that he had  become  a
    father figure to his nephews and nieces who were the  children  of  his
    biological brother  who  had  died  in  October  2015.   The  appellant
    maintained that he had moved in with this family  after  his  brother's
    death and taken up an important  role  in  the  children's  lives.   He
    provided letters from his deceased brother's  wife  and  three  of  her
    children in support of that claim.

 6. Concerning the  children  of  the  appellant's  deceased  brother,  the
    respondent maintained on page 5 of 8 of the refusal letter that:

         "... there is no official evidence to prove that  their  dependency
         on you goes beyond that of normal uncle, niece and nephew ties.  If
         you were to leave the UK it is not accepted that their  mother  ...
         and the children will be left without any support in the UK as they
         will have extended family members, friends, schools and the NHS for
         assistance should it be required."

 7. The appeal was refused, the First-tier Tribunal finding  amongst  other
    matters that the evidence of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
    brother's family was not credible.

 8. The first ground submits that a procedural error arose in the  approach
    the judge took to the evidence concerning the family of the appellant's
    brother. It is argued  for  the  appellant  that  at  the  hearing  the
    respondent made a concession that the evidence concerning the brother's
    family was not challenged. It had only been agreed  for  the  appellant
    that the appeal  could  proceed  on  submissions  where  that  was  so.
    Evidence from the appellant and his sister who attended was not  called
    because Counsel for the appellant understood  the  evidence  concerning
    the brother's children was not challenged. No application was made  for
    an adjournment for the sister-in-law and her children to attend to give
    oral evidence for the same reason. The evidence of a genuine and strong
    family life between the applicant and his brother's family should  have
    been accepted by the judge but was not; see [12-15].

 9. I was provided with the judge's response to this ground, her record  of
    proceedings, the Home Office Presenting Officer's (HOPO)  note  of  the
    hearing and a statement from Counsel for the appellant  at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.

10. The judge's response to the written ground states in paragraph 2:

         "During discussions with  the  parties  prior  to  the  substantive
         hearing commencing, the HOPO confirmed she did  not  challenge  the
         DNA report submitted.   However  the  HOPO  confirmed  she  was  to
         challenge a number of claims made in the  documents  submitted  and
         did not accept the assertions made therein.  She also relied on the
         reasons for refusal."

    The judge goes on to give her view that there  was  no  application  to
    adjourn or "intimation" of such  an  application.  On  page  2  of  her
    response she recollected "raising the  issue  of  lack  of  documentary
    evidence  adduced  by  the  Appellant   of   family   life   with   his
    nephews/nieces generally".  She goes on to indicate  again  on  page  2
    that no adjournment application was made and  no  "further  concessions
    made by the HOPO, other than the agreement not  to  challenge  the  DNA
    report findings" and that both "legal  representatives  confirmed  they
    were content for the matter  to  proceed  with  the  hearing  based  on
    submissions only".

11. The judge's record of proceedings sets out in the second box on page 2,
    referring to what appear to be preliminary discussions, that  the  HOPO
    did not challenge the DNA evidence but that "[o]ther points  challenged
    re docs".

12. The record of proceedings then sets out the submissions  made  for  the
    appellant concerning his brother's family which include:

         "Note evidence was unchallenged today and therefore summarise  what
         establishes for art 8 ..."

    and

         "... I would say on evidence unchallenged meets that definition"

13. These statements in the judge's record of proceedings appear to  me  to
    indicate that, rightly or wrongly, Counsel for the  appellant  made  it
    clear in her oral submissions that it was her position that the  appeal
    was being heard on the basis that the evidence on the brothers'  family
    was not challenged.

14. The record of proceedings sets out the HOPO's submissions  on  page  3,
    which read, unamended,:

         "NO witness statement for SIL [sister-in-law].  He  has  his  SITER
         here but no SIL and nieces and nephews not here - even  though  one
         is an adult.  So much for this emotional bond.  He is the uncle but
         he is not the father and they do have a mother.  So removal of  the
         appellant not detrimental affect to them."

15. The judge's record of proceedings then goes on to record a response  to
    this challenge to the evidence on the  brother's  family  made  by  the
    appellant's Counsel:

         "In my submission not adjourn as evidence not been challenged,  and
         clear evidence sort of bond he has  with  his  nieces  and  like  a
         father them. Supported by the letters in particular of the children
         - confirm that. K of respondent's bundle.

         Precariousness - children themselves make the same references, Been
         very supportive, and played NB role. Clear from letter."

16. Notwithstanding the submissions by the HOPO that the claim of a  strong
    relationship was  not  made  out,  it  appears  that  Counsel  for  the
    appellant maintained her position that a concession had  been  made  to
    the effect that the evidence on the brother's family was  not  open  to
    challenge in this way.

17. The Home Office Presenting Officer's note of the hearing  indicates  in
    the third paragraph, again unamended:

         "- rep said she wont ask for adj request if app is  not  called  to
         give evidence hopo opposed adj request but was  happy  to  continue
         without  evidence  being  called  -  but  highlighted  to  IJ  that
         credibility was not accepted of app and subs made with evidence  we
         have in bundle"

    The note goes on to indicate that  she  queried  the  evidence  on  the
    brother's family where none of them had attended.

18. I was also provided with a letter dated 23 November 2017 from the  Home
    Office Specialist Appeals Team which stated  that  when  the  HOPO,  Ms
    Syed, was contacted about the hearing she confirmed "that she  did  not
    concede credibility at the hearing" and  relied  on  her  note  of  the
    hearing to that effect.

19. The appellant's representative's note of the hearing is entitled "Draft
    agreed summary note" but it was clarified at the hearing before me that
    it had not been agreed by the respondent.

20. The note states that at the outset of the hearing day Counsel  for  the
    appellant indicated to the judge that  there  was  the  possibility  of
    seeking an adjournment for the sister-in-law and nephews to attend  the
    hearing. This would appear to be consistent with the HOPO's  note;  see
    [17] above.

21. In paragraph 6 of her note, Counsel then records  a  conversation  with
    the HOPO prior to the hearing after she  provided  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's sister who was present:

         "Ms Syed then confirmed that she would not challenge  the  contents
         of the letter (and also indicated that she would not challenge much
         of the evidence submitted in any event)".

22. Paragraph 8 of Counsel's note reads as follows:

         "Mr (sic) Syed then indicated that she would not ask any  questions
         in cross-examination,  and  the  matter  could  be  dealt  with  on
         submissions.  Counsel for the Appellant stated that, on  the  basis
         that  this  was  the  case,  and  that  the   evidence   was   thus
         unchallenged, she would not apply for an adjournment".

23. In paragraph 10 the note refers to Counsel's submission at the  hearing
    that the evidence on the brother's family was "unchallenged"  and  that
    "the judge should accept that he plays a  parental  role  for  all  the
    children."

24.   Counsel's  note  goes  on  to  record  in  paragraph  11  the  HOPO's
    submission, thus:

         "Miss Syed, in her  submissions  confirmed  that  the  relationship
         between the Appellant  and  his  nephews  and  nieces  was  not  in
         dispute. ... She noted that none  of  the  Appellant's  nieces  and
         nephews present.  She submitted that there was nothing  exceptional
         in the case.  She submitted that, although the Appellant  had  been
         there for his nephews since the loss of his brother, in  any  event
         the children had a mother, and if the Appellant left  the  UK  this
         would not have a detrimental effect on them, and  the  relationship
         could continue from overseas".

25. The note goes on to indicate in paragraph 12 that Counsel responded:

         "... arguing that it would  not  be  proper  of  Ms  Syed  to  make
         submissions about the non-attendance of the other  family  members,
         given she had indicated that she would not challenge the evidence".

    This response from Counsel, albeit recorded  somewhat  differently,  is
    consistent with the judge's record  of  proceedings  set  out  in  [15]
    above.

26. My reading of these different records of what was said at  the  hearing
    leads to the following conclusions. Counsel for the appellant proceeded
    on the basis that the evidence regarding the brother's family  was  not
    challenged by the respondent. That was  her  genuine  understanding  of
    what had been agreed. That was not an unreasonable position  where  the
    matter  proceeded  on  submissions  only  even  though  witnesses  were
    present. She made it clear that she was proceeding on that basis in her
    initial submission; see  [12]  above.  When  the  HOPO  did  go  on  to
    challenge the strength of the evidence on the brother's family  in  her
    submission, Counsel's response indicated that she remained of the  view
    that this was not a correct approach where that evidence "had not  been
    challenged"  and  that  there  was  therefore  still  no  need  for  an
    adjournment; see [15] and [25] above.

27. Certainly, the judge and the HOPO also appear to have had a genuine and
    not unreasonable view that the evidence on the brother's family had not
    been conceded, regardless of the hearing proceeding  on  the  basis  of
    submissions only. Counsel's initial submission and clear  objection  to
    the HOPO's challenge to the evidence that made it clear that there was,
    at the least, a lack of clarity as to the basis  on  which  the  appeal
    should be decided, however. Counsel might have taken  this  further  in
    her response but in my judgment an  analysis  of  the  records  of  the
    hearing show that as of Counsel's closing submission and the end of the
    hearing, the correct approach to the evidence on the  brother's  family
    had not been settled clearly.

28. Without criticism attracting to any of those at  the  hearing  who  all
    appear  to  have  acted  in  good  faith,   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    uncertainty as to the basis on which the evidence was to be  approached
    and which led to adverse  findings  on  material  which  the  appellant
    considered unchallenged and  might  otherwise  have  addressed,  either
    himself or by way of an adjournment request for others to  be  present,
    is a procedural error of sufficient materiality requiring the appeal to
    set aside and remade de novo.

29. It is not necessary to address the other grounds of appeal which go  to
    the merits of the decision where the procedural irregularity  challenge
    has been made out.

Notice of Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does disclose a  material
    error on a point of law and is set aside to be re-made  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

31. The appeal will be re-made at Hatton  Cross  hearing  centre  before  a
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal James.


Signed: [pic]                   Date: 8 January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


