
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07196/2016
     HU/07200/2016



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th October 2018                          |On 6th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                     OCI
                                     OEI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nathan (instructed by Quality Solicitors Orion)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellants,  with
    permission, in relation to a Decision and Reasons of Judge Lodge of the
    First-tier Tribunal, promulgated on 11th  December  2017,  following  a
    hearing on 1st December 2017.

 2. The Appellants are a mother  and  her  eldest  daughter.  However,  the
    appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  before  me  rests  on  the
    situation of the Appellants two minor children who  are  dependents  in
    the appeal.

 3. Permission was granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  who  felt
    it was arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to  analyse  adequately  the
    situation concerning the child who was undertaking GCSEs in  June  2018
    (child 1). He did not believe there was force in the criticism  of  the
    Judge's analysis of the situation of the child with autism  (child  2).
    He also  believed  the  adverse  credibility  findings  concerning  the
    inability of the Appellants to  describe  their  husband/father's  true
    position in Nigeria to be unimpeachable.

 4. Before me Mr Nathan relied upon all of the grounds.

 5. The first ground argued that while the  Judge  noted  with  respect  to
    child 2 that he was not at a critical stage in his education,  he  made
    no reference to child 1's education when in fact he was due to take his
    GCSEs in June 2018. The  grounds,  and  Mr  Nathan,  argued  that  both
    children, being in years 10 and 11, were at a critical stage  in  their
    education.

 6. The second ground argued the Judge erred in his finding that there were
    adequate educational facilities in Nigeria for child 2 who has learning
    disabilities, now diagnosed as autism, for which he attends  a  special
    school in the UK.

 7. The third ground is more generic  criticising  the  Judges  comment  at
    paragraph 26 that it is "somewhat bizarre" for the first  Appellant  to
    have only one surviving close relative. The Judge  is  also  criticised
    for failing to accept the destruction of the family home by  the  state
    government, when  had  that  been  raised,  evidence  could  have  been
    provided. The Judge's finding about the sources of  the  loan  for  her
    daughter's tuition fees is also criticised as is the comment  that  the
    family have been a  burden  on  public  funds  because,  prior  to  the
    Secretary of State's refusal to grant her further leave, the family was
    supported by the first  Appellant's  earnings  as  a  law  lecturer  at
    Leicester University.

 8. The background to this case is that the  Appellants  are  nationals  of
    Nigeria who made an application  for  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8
    grounds. The second Appellant was born in September 1997,  child  1  in
    December 2001 and child 2 in June 2003.

 9. The first Appellant was  granted  entry  clearance  as  a  student  and
    entered the  UK  on  22  November  2011  with  leave  until  July  2014
    (subsequently extended until 2015).

10. The children entered the United Kingdom to join her  as  dependents  in
    2012.

11. Prior to the expiry of her leave the Appellants sought leave to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.  It  is  that  decision  which  was  the
    subject of this appeal.

12. Child 1 has attended school in the UK. Child 2  has  been  attending  a
    special school in the UK. He  was  initially  diagnosed  with  impaired
    communication and learning difficulties and at the date of the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal there were indications that he had signs
    of autism. He has since been diagnosed as autistic.

13. Mr Nathan's submissions were that the Judge ought to have  factored  in
    that both children were at a critical stage in their education, whereas
    he disregarded child 1's situation.  Further,  the  Judge  should  have
    attached greater weight to the 2015 report from child  2's  headteacher
    indicating that he had made outstanding progress since he had  been  at
    the school and that a  move  would  be  detrimental.  The  2017  report
    indicated that he had moved into key  stage  IV,  which  are  the  GCSE
    years, and if moved he would  not  continue  to  make  progress  and  a
    failure to be able to access the specialist training and education that
    he is currently receiving would  be  detrimental  to  his  future  life
    chances.

14. He argued that while schools in Nigeria may be good schools  there  are
    no good special schools and to send child 2 back he "would be damned".

15. On the Secretary of State's behalf Mr Lindsay argued that there was  no
    evidence of any private life in the UK save for education and the Judge
    had found that they would have access to the best there is  in  Nigeria
    because they had available funds. That finding was not  challenged.  He
    also  referred  to  the  significant  negative   credibility   findings
    regarding the first Appellant and that there was a  significant  public
    interest in not permitting those who have sought to deceive to remain.

16. Turning to the Decision and Reasons of Judge  Lodge;  he  set  out  the
    basis of the claim and noted that it was accepted that  the  Appellants
    could not meet the Immigration Rules and so the only issue was  whether
    removal would be disproportionate having regard to  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR particularly with regard to the best interests of the children.

17. Whilst the case  before  me  and  the  grounds  argue  that  inadequate
    consideration was given to the situation of child 1 it is  quite  clear
    from paragraph 19 of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  that  counsel
    who represented the Appellants before the  First-tier  Tribunal  relied
    only on  the  best  interests  of  child  2  and  his  claimed  "unique
    position". He said: -

         "Mr O'Callaghan added that 276 ADE  (1)  (vi)  was  an  issue  with
         regard to the first Appellant but only  in  the  context  of  their
         being very significant obstacles to the family returning because of
         child 2's unique position. That is  to  say  if  child  2  succeeds
         (outside the Rules) the family can rely on 276 ADE (1) (6). He  did
         not add, but it must follow, that if it is reasonable for  child  2
         to return the appeals of the Appellants must fail.

18. If the position of child 2 was all that  was  relied  upon  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal then the Judge cannot be criticised for  addressing
    the only issue put to him.  Counsel clearly believed,  correctly,  that
    child 2 was the only issue that could possibly succeed in the appeal.

19. The Judge said at paragraph 21 that the first Appellant came to the  UK
    to complete a PhD  that  she  had  started  in  Nigeria  in  2008.  The
    Secretary of State submitted to the First-tier Tribunal that the  first
    Appellant's primary intention in coming to the UK was to take advantage
    of the education available for her children and  particularly  the  son
    with  special  educational  needs.  There  was  a   document   in   the
    Respondent's bundle indicating that child 2 should be been enrolled  in
    a special school in Nigeria where  his  problems  could  be  adequately
    addressed. That same document indicated that an alternative would be to
    take him to the UK or USA where there are several special schools.

20. There was another document recommending that child 2 go to  the  UK  to
    access medical and educational opportunities. The Judge  did  not  find
    that accessing education for child 2 was the only purpose in coming  to
    the UK but he did find that it was one of the drivers.  In  particular,
    he noted that the Appellant had started her PhD  by  distance  learning
    and he was therefore unable to understand why she could not complete it
    that way, particularly as the cost of coming to the UK must  have  been
    considerable in terms of university fees.

21. The first Appellant is married and her husband came to the UK  in  2012
    but then returned, presumably because of  his  employment  in  Nigeria.
    There was vague reference by the first Appellant to some  problem  with
    her husband but she  did  say  they  were  still  married.  The  second
    Appellant, the eldest daughter, said in her evidence that  she  was  in
    regular contact with her father and the  Judge  found  that  the  first
    Appellant and her husband remained in a subsisting relationship.

22. The first Appellant had given evidence that their home, in the  grounds
    of the University, where  she  and  her  husband  had  lived  had  been
    demolished by the government. However, she was unable to give any  real
    detail about this and the Judge found  that  she  had  been  less  than
    truthful in this evidence. In any event he said  that  that  house  had
    been rented property and her husband had another house so that  if  the
    family were removed he was satisfied there was a home that  they  could
    return to.

23. The Judge did find it odd that the Appellant only  had  her  mother  in
    Nigeria and that neither she nor her husband had any  other  relatives.
    Although this finding may attract  some  criticism  it  is  in  no  way
    determinative of the appeal.

24. Both  Appellants  gave  vague  evidence  about  the  first  Appellant's
    husband's employment at the  University.   The  Judge  simply  did  not
    accept that neither the first Appellant nor her  eldest  daughter  knew
    what his position was. The Judge did note that  the  husband  had  been
    provided with accommodation and that he supported his family in the  UK
    for five years and had paid large sums of money for  tuition  fees.  He
    found himself satisfied that the husband  was  in  a  well  remunerated
    position at the University of Benin and there  would  be  no  financial
    difficulties if the family were to return.

25. He rejected the first Appellant's claim that  she  had  had  to  borrow
    money to pay for her daughter's tuition  and  accommodation  and  found
    himself satisfied that the husband had financially supported the family
    and paid for the eldest child's education.

26. The Judge then specifically turned to the  situation  of  child  2  and
    found that, although he was clearly progressing  well  in  his  current
    environment and school, he was not prepared to accept that leaving that
    school would severely  impact  his  educational  attainment  or  mental
    health. He noted that his mother had had no hesitation in  leaving  him
    in Nigeria in 2011 for a period of nearly a year and he noted that  the
    change from living in Nigeria to the UK had no detrimental impact  upon
    him. The Judge found that common sense indicated that he was  safe  and
    happy in the bosom of his family and that must be the  main  anchor  in
    his life. With regard to his educational  attainment  the  Judge  found
    that would depend  on  whether  he  could  access  comparable  help  in
    Nigeria.

27. The Judge then looked at the availability of such education in  Nigeria
    and noted that prior to arriving  in  the  UK  child  2  was  receiving
    specialist care in Nigeria and noted a recommendation that he attend  a
    special school in Nigeria which was properly equipped to treat children
    with his difficulties.

28. Additionally, the Judge noted information provided by the  Home  Office
    confirming the availability of special education in Nigeria.

29. The Judge noted that, given the comfortable financial situation of this
    family, child 2 would be able to access the best education there is  in
    Nigeria.

30. In the wider context the Judge noted that child 2 will be returning  as
    part of the family unit to be reunited with his father and  grandmother
    in Nigeria. He would be returning to a country of which he is a citizen
    with all the rights of that citizenship and would have  his  family  to
    help them to adjust to life there. There would be no financial problems
    for the family and he could access any and every facility both  private
    and public.

31. Overall the Judge found that it had not been established that it was in
    child 2's best interests that he remain in the UK.

32. It also clearly factored  into  the  Judge's  reasoning  that  although
    wealthy, the family in accessing special education in the UK for  child
    2 in particular, had been a burden on public funds. Even if  the  first
    Appellant's husband paid for his eldest daughter's university education
    and for his wife's, quite  clearly  the  younger  children  were  being
    educated at public expense.

33. At the time the  First-tier  Tribunal  heard  this  appeal,  given  the
    landscape of case law at that time, another Judge hearing the case  may
    have decided it differently. That is not to say that this Judge made an
    error of law. His findings are all fully  reasoned  and  based  on  the
    evidence. It is true that the Judge made reasoned findings that this is
    a wealthy family, the adult Appellants had  not  been  truthful  as  to
    their  situation  in  Nigeria  as  to  their   accommodation   or   the
    relationship between the first Appellant and  her  husband  or  to  the
    reason for the children coming to  the  UK.  The  Judge  made  reasoned
    findings based on the evidence as to the availability of  education  in
    Nigeria and I cannot fault those reasons.

34. In any event, the landscape has changed somewhat following the decision
    of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC  53.  That  case  made
    clear that when considering whether it is reasonable to expect a  child
    to leave the UK relevant to paragraph 276 ADE the  reasonableness  test
    is entirely child focused and any adverse behaviour by a parent  cannot
    be taken into account. However, that case also made clear  that  in  an
    assessment of the best interests of children  and  what  is  reasonable
    must take place in the real world. If neither parent  has  a  right  to
    remain in the  UK  than  that  is  the  background  against  which  the
    assessment is conducted and the ultimate  question  is  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect the child to  follow  the  parent  with  no  right
    remain to the country of origin. Adding the Supreme  Court's  reasoning
    into the reasoning of the Judge the First-tier Tribunal, I  find  there
    can be no question of a finding that it would  not  be  reasonable  for
    either of the two minor children to return to Nigeria with their mother
    who must leave as she has no right remain to  be  reunited  with  their
    father and grandmother.

35. Furthermore, it is not unimportant that neither child was a  qualifying
    child for the purposes of s.117B and that their private life such as it
    is has been built up while their status was precarious.

Notice of Decision

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision is not tainted by material error  of
    law. Accordingly, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]
Signed                              Date 5th November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
