
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/07350/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |                 Decision & Reasons     |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|on 12 October 2017                 |                 on 23 October 2017     |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                  AHSAN ZIA
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Vatish, Counsel, instructed by Law Lane
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal  Flynn  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  6  December  2016,
        dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
        of 23 September 2015 refusing his human rights (article 8) claim.



   Factual Background


     2. The Appellant is a male national of  Pakistan,  date  of  birth  22
        October 1974. Despite a brief immigration chronology  appearing  in
        the Reasons for Refusal Letter and the  judge's  determination  and
        although a manuscript chronology was provided by Ms  Vatish  on  my
        request  at  the  error  of  law  hearing,  the  Appellant's   full
        immigration history remains unclear. He entered the United  Kingdom
        on 1 January 2012 with entry clearance  to  study  valid  until  30
        January 2015. According to the manuscript chronology the  Appellant
        applied to the Respondent to study at Northam  College  on  the  27
        September 2013. In support of this application he submitted a TOEIC
        English language certificate obtained  via  ETS  following  a  test
        taken on 20 March 2013 at Cauldon College. The college at which the
        Appellant was studying lost its licence on 11 November 2013 and the
        Appellant's leave was curtailed so that  it  expired  on  14  March
        2014. It does not appear that the Appellant made  any  further  in-
        time application (I note  however  that  a  letter  from  Law  Lane
        solicitors dated 22 April 2014 stated that the Appellant  submitted
        an application for leave to remain as a student on 27 March 2013, a
        claim repeated by the judge in her determination,  and  that  on  3
        March 2015 he received a letter from the Home Office  stating  that
        the application was still under consideration, and that on 9  March
        2015 the Appellant was served with a notice indicating that he  was
        liable  to  removal  because  he  submitted  a  fraudulent  English
        language certificate).


     3. On 23 April 2015, the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  based
        on family and private life considerations. By this stage he was the
        partner of Ms AZ,  a  Pakistani  national  who,  according  to  the
        manuscript chronology, entered the UK on 15 March 2009 as a visitor
        accompanied by her 2 children, Y (DOB September 2001) and S  (  DOB
        May 2005). Ms AZ made an application for asylum  on  15  June  2009
        with both children as dependents. Although  her  asylum  claim  was
        refused she and her two children were granted  Discretionary  Leave
        to Remain (DL) outside the immigration rules on 20 May 2014,  valid
        until 23 October 2016. It is not clear what prompted the  grant  of
        DL  to  Ms  AZ  and  her  children.  According  to  the  manuscript
        chronology the Appellant and Ms AZ underwent a  religious  marriage
        ceremony on 27 September 2014.


     4. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
        remain on 23 September 2015. ETS records confirmed that  there  was
        considerable evidence that the Appellant used a proxy test taker in
        respect of the TOEIC test obtained on 20 March 2013  and  which  he
        used in his application dated 27  September  2013.  The  Respondent
        consequently refused the application under paragraph  S-LTR.1.6  of
        Appendix FM of  the  immigration  rules  (because  the  Appellant's
        presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good as a result
        of his conduct, character, associations, or other  reasons,  making
        it undesirable to allow him to remain in the  UK).  The  Respondent
        additionally held that Ms AZ did not meet the definition of partner
        contained  in  Appendix  FM.  Nor  could  the  Appellant  meet  the
        definition of parent in respect of  Ms  AZ's  two  children.  After
        concluding that the Appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
        paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules relating to private life,
        the  Respondent  considered  whether  there  were  any  exceptional
        circumstances outside the immigration rules which, consistent  with
        the right to respect for private and  family  life  in  article  8,
        might warrant a grant of  leave  to  remain.  Although  noting  the
        Appellant's claimed relationship with Y and S, the  Respondent  was
        satisfied that returning  the  Appellant  to  Pakistan  would  have
        minimal effect on the children who could continue to live with  and
        be cared for by the mother.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. The judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant  and  Ms  AZ.  The
        Appellant explained how and why chose to undertake his  TOEIC  test
        at Cauldon College, and described what happened when  he  took  the
        test. The judge heard evidence about the Appellant's studies in the
        UK and that his partner gave birth to their child  on  15  December
        2015. The Appellant said he could not return  to  Pakistan  because
        his partner was still studying  in  the  UK  and  wanted  a  better
        future. He stated that his stepchildren were aged  15  and  11  and
        that it would be impossible for them to adjust to life in Pakistan.
        He stated in re-examination that his stepchildren had been  in  the
        UK for about 7 years.


     6. In her oral evidence Ms AZ explained that her leave to  remain  had
        expired and she had submitted a new application to the Home  Office
        which had not yet been decided. She claimed she was  granted  leave
        to remain on human rights grounds because of her children. They had
        been 7 and 4 or 5 years old when they  came  to  the  UK.  She  was
        previously married in Pakistan but had divorced  and  the  children
        had no contact with their biological father. She claimed they could
        not return to Pakistan because her ex-husband had threatened  them.
        Her two oldest children were used to life in the UK and were  happy
        at school. Neither child had been back to Pakistan  since  arriving
        in the UK. She did not believe the  Appellant  would  use  a  proxy
        tester.


     7. The judge first considered the allegation that a proxy  tester  had
        been used to obtain the Appellants TOEIC test. At  [47]  the  judge
        indicated that she was following  the  guidance  on  the  Court  of
        Appeal in Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA  Civ  615  and  of  the
        Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden  of  Proof)
        [2016]  UKUT  229  (IAC).  The  judge  correctly  stated  that  the
        Respondent had to discharge the burden of proof to the normal civil
        standard to show that the Appellant had used deception  in  seeking
        to rely on an English language test obtained via a proxy tester. At
        [48] the judge stated,


         In SM the Upper Tribunal concluded that the ETS SELT Source Data
         extract and the test centre Look Up Tool, together with the witness
         statements from Ms Collings and Mr Millington, was sufficient to
         discharge the evidential burden and that it would then be for an
         Appellant to demonstrate on a balance of probabilities that they
         had not used deception. The Respondent provided these documents and
         I am accordingly satisfied that she has discharge the evidential
         burden of proof. The burden of proof has accordingly shifted to the
         Appellant to show that he did not used deception when he submitted
         the ETS certificate.


     8. From [51] to [54] the judge considered the evidence provided by the
        Appellant  and  concluded,  with  supporting  reasons,   that   the
        Appellant had submitted a false document. At [55] the judge stated,


         Looking at the evidence in the round,  I  find  the  Appellant  has
         failed to  demonstrate  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  he
         genuinely undertook the TOEIC English test in March 2013.  I  agree
         with the Respondent's conclusion that she has  provided  sufficient
         evidence to show that the Appellant submitted a false document.


     9. The judge went on to consider article 8 outside of the  immigration
        rules. At [57] she found there were strong  grounds  for  doing  so
        because the Appellant had established family life with his partner,
        their child and his stepchildren. The judge referred to  s.117B  of
        the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  attached  little
        weight to the  Appellant's  private  life  and  noted  his  use  of
        deception in a previous application. At [66] the  judge  noted  the
        submission made by the Appellant's representative that the children
        had lived in the UK for more than 7 years, but  stated  that  there
        was no evidence to confirm that. Other than a letter from  each  of
        the children they provided no further  evidence.  Whilst  accepting
        that the children had a  relationship  with  their  stepfather  the
        judge was not satisfied that it would  have  a  serious  and  long-
        lasting negative impact on them if he was unable to continue living
        with them. The judge concluded that the interference with article 8
        was neither unjustified  nor  disproportionate  and  dismissed  the
        appeal on human rights grounds.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

    10. The grounds essentially contend that the judge misdirected  herself
        in respect of the applicable legal burden of proof when  concluding
        that the Appellant had used a proxy tester, and  that  it  had  not
        been in dispute that the Appellant's stepchildren lived in  the  UK
        more than 7 years and, as such, the judge was required to  consider
        whether it was reasonable to expect them to leave the  UK  pursuant
        to s.117B(6).


    11. Permission was granted on the basis that the  judge  may  not  have
        fully appreciated the shifting burden in ETS cases. However, as the
        judge stated at paragraph 66 of her  decision  that  there  was  no
        evidence to confirm that each of the partners children had lived in
        the UK for more than 7 years, permission was not granted on the 2nd
        ground.


    12. At the outset of the error of law hearing I  indicated  my  concern
        that, if the partner's oldest two children had in fact  resided  in
        the UK for 7 years prior to the date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        hearing, the judge may have  made  a  mistake  of  fact  which  was
        potentially capable of amounting to an error  of  law.  I  put  the
        matter back to enable Mr Bramble to obtain information relating  to
        the immigration history of the partner's two children.


    13. At the resumption of the hearing Ms Vatish  provided  newly  issued
        Pakistan passports  in  respect  of  Ms  AZ,  Y  and  S,  biometric
        residence cards confirming that all  3  had  been  granted  further
        leave to remain until 2020, and photocopies of  previous  Pakistani
        passports relating to Ms AZ, Y and  S,  issued  in  June  2008  and
        expiring in June 2013, containing visitor visas issued to  them  on
        11 February 2009  and  valid  until  11  August  2009.  Mr  Bramble
        additionally confirmed after his enquiries that Ms AZ  had  claimed
        asylum on 16 June 2009, and that she and the children were  granted
        discretionary leave on 20 May 2014.


    14. In light of this further information I indicated to the parties  my
        preliminary  view  that  there  was  a  'Robinson  obvious'   issue
        (Robinson [1998]  QB  929)  relating  to  the  judge's  failure  to
        consider,  in  the  context  of  s.117B(6)  of   the   Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, whether it would be reasonable for
        Y and S to leave the UK in light of what appears  to  have  been  a
        mistake of fact as  to  their  length  of  residence.  I  drew  the
        parties' attention to the authority of E & R v Secretary  of  State
        for the Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ  49  which  identifies  the
        circumstances in which a mistake of fact may amount to a mistake of
        law.


    15. I heard submissions from Mr Bramble inviting me to find that  there
        was no  'Robinson  obvious'  point  and  that  there  had  been  no
        application to amend the grounds of appeal. Having  considered  his
        submissions I expressed my satisfaction that the judge's mistake of
        fact may amount to a material error of law, that in  light  of  the
        accepted facts this constituted a  'Robinson  obvious'  point,  and
        that I would therefore proceed to hear submissions  in  respect  of
        this further ground. Mr Bramble did not seek an adjournment of  the
        hearing and he did not indicate that he was in any  way  prejudiced
        in continuing with the hearing. I heard  further  submissions  from
        both Ms Vatish and Mr Bramble. Having  satisfied  myself  that  the
        judge did materially misdirect herself in law as to the  applicable
        burden of proof in respect of the ETS proxy  tester  allegation,  I
        indicated that I would allow the appeal and that the  matter  would
        be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for an  entirely  fresh
        hearing.

Discussion

    16. In E & R the Court of Appeal concluded that an  error  of  law  may
        arise in  circumstances  where  an  important  part  of  a  judge's
        reasoning was based on ignorance or mistake as to the facts.  Their
        Lordships identified four factors relevant to  determining  whether
        an error of fact could amount to an error of law. There had  to  be
        an erroneous impression created by a mistake as to, or in ignorance
        of,  a  relevant  fact,  including  the  availability  of  reliable
        evidence in  respect  of  a  material  matter.  The  fact  must  be
        'established', in the sense that, if attention had  been  drawn  to
        the point, the correct position could have been shown by  objective
        and uncontentious evidence. The Appellant (or  his  advisors)  must
        not have been responsible for the mistake.  And  the  mistake  must
        have played a material (although not necessarily decisive) part  in
        the Tribunal's reasoning. The  Court  stated  that  it  is  in  the
        interests of all parties that decisions should be made on the  best
        available information.


    17. Having cumulative regard to the evidence given by the Appellant and
        his partner at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, the representations
        made by  his  solicitors  to  the  Respondent  in  support  of  his
        application, the photocopies of the Pakistan passports provided  by
        Ms AZ and the original new passports and  residence  cards  at  the
        hearing, and the information provided by Mr Bramble, I am  entirely
        satisfied that Ms AZ and her 2 children entered the United  Kingdom
        in March 2009 and that the children have resided  in  this  country
        ever since. The First-tier Tribunal hearing occurred on 28  October
        2016. By that time both children had resided in the UK for  over  7
        years.  Although  noting  that  submissions  were   made   on   the
        Appellant's behalf that the children had lived in the UK  for  more
        than 7  years,  the  judge  found  the  submission  to  be  without
        evidential support.


    18. The judge cannot  be  criticised  for  concluding  that  there  was
        insufficient evidence before her to confirm the  children's  length
        of residence. The fact remains however that the judge was  mistaken
        in respect of the  length  of  the  children's  residence  and,  by
        implication,  the  availability   of   evidence   confirming   that
        residence. I am satisfied that the children's  residence  for  more
        than 7 years is an established fact. Although the written and  oral
        submissions before the judge stated that the children  had  resided
        in the UK for more than 7  years,  and  although  copies  of  their
        residence permits issued in May 2014 were before the judge,  it  is
        surprising that the Appellant's  representatives  did  not  provide
        documentary evidence confirming the children's entry to the UK,  or
        the application made to the Home Office by their mother (with  them
        as dependents). In the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal  the
        Appellant's legal representatives presumed that this was  an  issue
        beyond contention. They were perhaps overly  presumptive  in  their
        belief. There is some basis however for this presumption given that
        the Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal hearing  did  not
        appear to make any submissions to the contrary. It was, moreover, a
        point that could very easily have been confirmed by the  Presenting
        Officer at the First-tier hearing after making short enquiries, and
        indeed a point in respect  of  which  that  the  judge  could  have
        directed  both  parties  to  supply  documentary  evidence.  Having
        carefully weighed these matters I am satisfied that the mistake was
        not caused by the Appellant or his representatives.


    19. I must finally consider whether  the  mistake  played  a  material,
        although not decisive, part of the judge's reasoning.  The  judge's
        reasoning in respect of the relationship between the Appellant  and
        his partner's two children is short and devoid of detail. This  may
        however  be  due  to  the  limited  evidence  of  the  relationship
        presented by the  Appellant's  representatives.  Nevertheless,  the
        judge, on the erroneous assumption that there was no evidence  that
        the children had resided in the UK for at least 7  years,  did  not
        then consider whether, having established a  parental  relationship
        with  qualifying  children,  it  was  unreasonable  to  expect  the
        children to leave the UK. I am satisfied this amounts to a material
        error of law.


    20. I am additionally, and  quite  independently,  satisfied  that  the
        judge misdirected herself by placing the burden of proving  that  a
        proxy tester was used on the Appellant rather than the  Respondent,
        and that this also  amounts  to  a  material  legal  error.  It  is
        apparent from both [48] and [55], replicated above at paragraphs  7
        and 8 above, that the judge  believed  once  there  was  sufficient
        evidence to discharge  the  evidential  burden,  the  legal  burden
        thereafter shifted to the Appellant to demonstrate, on the  balance
        of  probabilities,  that  he  had  not  used  deception.  This   is
        incorrect. Once the initial evidential burden has been  discharged,
        the Appellant then has the evidential burden of raising an innocent
        explanation. The  legal  burden  remains  at  all  times  with  the
        Respondent (see, for example, Qadir v Secretary of  State  for  the
        Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1167  at  [18]  and  [19]).  The
        Appellant does not have to prove, on the balance of  probabilities,
        that he did not use a proxy in his English language test.  Although
        the judge gave rational reasons for rejecting the Appellant's claim
        that he didn't use a proxy tester, it is inescapably clear that the
        judge wrongly assigned the legal burden of proof to  the  Appellant
        and that this materially  undermined  the  sustainability  of  this
        aspect of the judge's conclusion.


    21. For all these reasons, I consider  it  appropriate  to  remit  this
        matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  considered  de  novo
        before a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Flynn.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains a material legal error.
The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete  fresh
hearing, before a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Flynn.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 19 October 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
