
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07984/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 July 2017                              |On 25 July 2017               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Rubilla [m]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan of Counsel instructed by Immigration
Chambers
     (Ilford)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R
    Scott promulgated on 30 November 2016.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the Appellant and Ms [M] is the Respondent, for the sake of consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I  shall  hereafter
    refer to Ms [M] as the Appellant and the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department as the Respondent.


3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on [ ] 1981.   She  entered
    the United Kingdom on 28 May 2005 pursuant to a student visa conferring
    leave  until  31  October  2007.   On  15  October  2007  she  made  an
    application for variation of leave to remain as a student, which in due
    course was granted until 31 December 2008.  On  23  December  2008  the
    Appellant made an application as the  dependent  spouse  of  a  Tier  1
    Migrant.  That application was refused on 3 February 2009.  On 27 March
    2009 the Appellant applied again in the capacity as a student  and  was
    granted leave to remain until 31 March 2010.  A further application  as
    a Tier 4 Student was granted conferring leave until 30 August 2011.  On
    30 August 2011 the Appellant made a further application  as  a  Tier  4
    Migrant which was refused with a right of appeal on 27 September  2011.
    The Appellant exercised  her  right  of  appeal  and  succeeded  before
    Immigration  Judge  Fletcher-Hill  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  18
    November 2011 (reference IA/29107/2011).  In consequence of  succeeding
    on her appeal, which was  allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  with
    reference to paragraph  245ZX(c)  of  the  Rules  but  dismissed  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR, the Appellant was granted a  further  period  of
    leave to remain until 30 January 2015.  It may be seen that this  leave
    took her to within approximately four months of the  tenth  anniversary
    of her first entry to the UK.


4.   On 30 January 2015 the Appellant applied for leave  to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  On 1 May 2015 the Appellant made an application
    to vary her application for leave outside the Rules to seek  indefinite
    leave to remain on the basis that she had completed ten  years'  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom, with particular reference to paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant's application was refused
    for reasons set out in a combined  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter  and
    notice of immigration decision dated 2 October 2015 ('the RFRL').


5.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC. Her appeal  was  allowed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge R Scott for reasons as set  out  in  his  Decision.
    The Respondent then sought permission to appeal which  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 31 May 2017.


6.   Before considering the particular issues that require deciding by  this
    Tribunal, it is instructive to have regard to particular aspects of the
    Respondent's decision and the  history  of  the  Appellant's  case  and
    appeal.


7.   The Respondent's decision to refuse  the  Appellant's  application  was
    primarily based on the invocation of paragraphs 322(2)  and  322(5)  of
    the Immigration Rules. The application was also refused under paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules because the  Respondent  determined  that
    there had been a break in the Appellant's continuity  of  residence  by
    reference to the period between the rejection of an  application  on  3
    February 2009 and the submission of a further application on  27  March
    2009.


8.    Paragraphs  322(2)  and  (5)  were  invoked  because  the   Respondent
    concluded that the Appellant's "presence in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because [her] conduct  made  it  undesirable  to  allow
    [her] to remain in the UK".  This decision was reached  with  reference
    to  an  allegation  that  the  Appellant  had  practised  deception  by
    submitting in the context of a previous application a TOEIC certificate
    from Educational Testing Service ('ETS') which  had  been  obtained  by
    making use of a proxy sitter.  The relevant passages of the RFRL are in
    material part in these terms:

         "In support of the reconsideration of  your  application  dated  30
         August 2011 you submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate  from  Educational
         Testing Service ('ETS').


         ETS has a record of your speaking test.  Using  voice  verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check of your test  and  confirmed
         to the Secretary of State for the Home Department  that  there  was
         significant  evidence  to  conclude  that  your   certificate   was
         fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a  proxy  test  taker.   Your
         scores from the test taken on 3 July 2013 at Stanfords College have
         now been cancelled  by  ETS.   On  the  basis  of  the  information
         provided to her by  ETS,  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department is satisfied  that  your  certificate  was  fraudulently
         obtained and that you used deception  in  your  application  of  30
         August 2011."


9.   It may readily be seen from that passage that there is a dissonance  in
    the chronology.  The Respondent identifies, or alleges, the  use  of  a
    test taken on 3 July 2013 in the context of an application made  on  30
    August 2011.  For reasons that are  unclear  to  me,  it  appears  that
    nobody had noticed this chronological dissonance until I raised  it  at
    the commencement of proceedings this morning and sought  clarification.
    It was in the context of seeking clarification  that  the  decision  of
    Immigration Judge  Fletcher-Hill  was  produced  identifying  that  the
    Appellant had been successful in her appeal in November 2011.  In  such
    circumstances, on the face of it, it is not apparent that the Appellant
    ever submitted the 3 July  2013  Stanfords  College  ETS  test  to  the
    Respondent.  Certainly, it could not have been submitted in the context
    of the application  of  30  August  2011  or  in  the  context  of  the
    subsequent successful appeal.  Moreover, it is  not  suggested  by  the
    Respondent that  it  was  submitted  in  the  context  of  the  current
    application initiated on 30 January 2015 and  varied  on  1  May  2015.
    There were no apparently intervening applications. Mr Whitwell was  not
    able to assist from the file papers  available  to  him.  In  all  such
    circumstances, in the premises it  would  seem  that  the  Respondent's
    decision is at the very least not supported by any  evidence  that  the
    Appellant submitted a false document  in  the  context  of  a  previous
    application for variation of leave (cf  paragraph  322(2)),  and  quite
    possibly fundamentally flawed in fact.


10.  There is a second element of the Appellant's case  that  requires  some
    preliminary comment.  The Appellant is a mother.  She has two children,
    both born in the United Kingdom.  Her eldest child was born on [ ] 2007
    and her second child was born on [ ] 2015.  I have been told today that
    the Appellant is divorced from the father of her children - who was the
    gentleman in respect of whom she applied as a dependent spouse  in  the
    Tier 1  application  made  in  December  2008.   I  do  note  from  the
    Appellant's application that she refers to herself  as  'Miss'  in  the
    application form (at B1), and also identified her  relationship  status
    as being 'Divorced or dissolved civil partnership'  (B10).   I  briefly
    interject that it is to be noted at paragraph  21  of  the  Appellant's
    witness statement of 5 October 2016 that she refers  to  "my  husband's
    case", which is described as pending with the Home Office.  In  context
    it would appear that that must be  a  reference  to  her  ex-husband  -
    unless there are other matters to be clarified in this regard.  Be that
    as it may, it has been confirmed to me  today,  so  far  as  Mr  Chohan
    understands it, that the Appellant's ex-partner is  a  person  with  no
    current status in the UK but has an application pending.


11.  As regards the Appellant's older child, it may  be  seen  that  he  has
    been present in the United Kingdom (where he was  born)  in  excess  of
    seven years, and indeed in November of this year he will reach the  age
    of 10, at which  point  he  will  be  eligible  to  apply  for  British
    citizenship.


12.  The fact of the Appellant being a single mother with the  care  of  two
    children did not feature in her application.   It  has  been  suggested
    that this was because the long residence application pursuant  to  276B
    which she was pursuing, did not require any information to be  provided
    in respect of the circumstances of her children.  That may well be  the
    case, however it does not explain why no mention of  the  children  was
    made in the Appellant's grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The existence of the children was introduced into this case as late  as
    the filing of the Appellant's bundle before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The  Appellant's  witness  statement  makes  reference  to  the  family
    circumstances in brief terms at  paragraph  21,  and  there  were  also
    documents provided by way of the children's birth certificates and some
    school documents in respect of the older child.


13.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  hitherto  not  raised
    circumstance of the Appellant's children by way of a preliminary issue:
    see paragraph 23 of his Decision.  The Judge noted that  the  Appellant
    made a preliminary application at the hearing to  submit  new  evidence
    regarding her family situation, and that this was information that  had
    not been disclosed to the decision-maker at any earlier  stage  in  the
    proceedings.  The Respondent's representative  is  recorded  as  having
    objected to the admission of such materials at such a late stage in the
    proceedings, noting that the Appellant had had ample  time  to  provide
    the information and that it would  be  contrary  to  the  interests  of
    justice for her now to be permitted to do so at such a late stage.  The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge ruled that he refused the application because
    the Appellant had given no  reasonable  explanation  why  she  had  not
    disclosed the information earlier in the proceedings and the Respondent
    should not be prejudiced by its late provision.  In those circumstances
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge in due course went  on  to  consider  the
    human rights aspects of the case without reference to the circumstances
    of the children.


14.  Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge appears to have dealt with  this
    issue by way of consideration of the fairness or otherwise of admitting
    late evidence, in fact it was an issue that should properly  have  been
    considered by reference to section 85(5) and (6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Indeed, it is suggested to  me  today
    by Mr Whitwell that the  Presenting  Officer  had  actually  sought  to
    withhold consent rather than merely objecting to the late admission  of
    evidence: to that end I have been provided with  a  copy  of  a  letter
    dated 26 October 2016, that is  to  say  the  day  after  the  hearing,
    written and signed by the  Presenting  Officer  and  addressed  to  the
    Appellant's  representatives,   indicating   the   circumstances,   the
    provisions of section 85(5) and (6), and  stating  in  terms  that  the
    Secretary of State did not consent to a new  matter  being  raised.  Mr
    Whitwell has indicated that it  continues  to  be  the  case  that  the
    Respondent withholds the requisite consent.


15.  Whether or not the Presenting Officer formally put the  matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal by reference to section 85, plainly  her  objection
    to the admission of late evidence was in substance the  withholding  of
    the consent necessary to overcome the jurisdictional prohibition on the
    Tribunal by reason  of  section  85(5).  I  acknowledge  that  in  such
    circumstances it is no part  of  the  role  of  either  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, or in turn this Tribunal on a statutory appeal, to review  or
    reach a different  in respect of 'consent' once it is established as  a
    precedent fact that a matter  is  indeed  a  'new  matter'  within  the
    meaning of section 85(6).


16.  Whether or not the Judge properly addressed this  question,  any  error
    in this regard is not material because it remains the case that in  any
    event, as I say, he proceeded  to  consider  the  human  rights  issues
    without reference to the circumstances of the Appellant's children.


17.  I turn then to consideration of the Judge's substantive decision.


18.   The  judge  addressed  the  Respondent's  allegation  of  a  break  of
    continuity of lawful residence at paragraph  33  of  his  decision.  He
    reached the conclusion that the Appellant had  offered  an  explanation
    for why there had been a breakdown in communication during the relevant
    hiatus between refusal  and  new  application  with  reference  to  the
    Respondent failing to take due regard of notification of  a  change  of
    address, and in consequence "that no breach of the continuous period of
    residence has  occurred".   This  aspect  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's  decision  has  not  been  the  subject   of   any   challenge.
    Nonetheless, and without deciding the matter, for my own part I express
    a reservation that the fact that an explanation may be available for  a
    break in a period of leave does not inevitably alter the fact that even
    so the continuity has been broken.


19.  The Judge then gave consideration to the issue in respect  of  the  ETS
    certificate. In light of SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence  -  Burden
    of Proof) [2016] UKUT (IAC) and the evidence that  had  been  filed  on
    behalf of the Respondent, the Judge  considered  that  the  burden  had
    shifted to the Appellant to  provide  'an  innocent  explanation':  see
    paragraphs 39 and  40.  The  Judge  addressed  this  in  particular  at
    paragraphs 41 and 42, which are in these terms:

         "41. She claims that she had no reason to  cheat  by  submitting  a
             false test in  2013.   This  is  because  she  was  fluent  in
             English, having taken her journalism degree in  Pakistan  part
             taught in English and having passed both a Pearson  ESOL  test
             and a Life in the UK test in April 2015.  She did not  require
             an interpreter at the hearing, but it is not for  a  judge  to
             make any finding of fluency on that basis or  any  other.   In
             any event, the TOEIC test was in 2013, over  three  years  ago
             and her English may have improved since then.   Further,  even
             if  she  were  then  fluent  in  English,  there   are   other
             motivations why someone might cheat, such as lack of  time  to
             prepare, or lack of confidence in passing.  It is not relevant
             that she did not use  the  test  certificate  in  her  current
             application, under appeal here.  The  Respondent  is  entitled
             under the Rules  to  take  account  of  false  information  or
             documents submitted in past applications.


         42.  However I find that the Appellant gave a sound  and  plausible
             account of sitting the test, sufficient to  suggest  that  she
             did in fact attend and sit the test  herself.   She  explained
             her journey to the test centre, and the  process  for  sitting
             the test, and what was involved and what time it took.  I find
             her to be credible.  The  Respondent  challenges  her  on  her
             report that there were 10-15 people doing the test  with  her,
             as Annexe B says there were 33 who  sat  the  test  that  day.
             However I do not think this undermines her credibility  as  it
             is not implausible for someone to honestly  fail  to  remember
             this from three years ago, when  she  has  sat  several  other
             tests since.  It is also of course possible that not all those
             who sat the test that day sat it in the same room."


20.  It may be seen that the determinative aspect of the Judge's  reasoning,
    given that for the main part he rejected the Appellant's  arguments  in
    this regard, was essentially the plausibility and  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account of attending the test centre with reference to  her
    journey there and the procedures at the test centre.  In  my  judgement
    that reasoning fails to reconcile  itself  with  the  contents  of  the
    substantial  supporting  evidence  filed  by  the  Respondent,  and  in
    particular paragraph 17 of the witness statement  of  Rebecca  Collings
    dated 23 June 2014.  In that witness statement  Ms  Collings  describes
    circumstances at some test centres in the following terms:

      "Registered  candidates  standing  aside  from  the  secure   computer
         terminals, allowing other people  ('fake  sitters')  with  superior
         English language skills to take the oral and written parts  of  the
         exam on their behalf.  The fake sitters were organised by the  very
         staff who were supposed to ensure the proper conduct of the exam."


21.  This describes a scenario where the applicant attends the test  centre,
    and indeed approaches the secure computer terminal at which his or  her
    test is to be conducted, but then, as it were, 'steps aside'  to  allow
    the proxy sitter space to take over and complete the test.  Inevitably,
    such an applicant has attended the test centre and inevitably  such  an
    applicant will be privy to, and witness to, the procedures of the test.
     It follows therefore that an ability to recall the journey to  a  test
    centre and  the  procedures  at  the  test  centre  is  not  inevitably
    determinative of the  credibility  of  an  Appellant's  claim  to  have
    genuinely sat their test.  It seems to me that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has failed to engage  with  the  substance  of  the  Respondent's
    evidence and to attempt to reconcile the evidence with the  Appellant's
    account.  This is the primary focus  of  the  Respondent's  grounds  of
    challenge and to that extent I find that they have substance.


22.  The Judge, having set out the reasoning at paragraphs 41  and  42  went
    on to state at paragraph 43 his conclusion that he was  "not  satisfied
    that the Respondent has proved [her] allegations against the  Appellant
    to the required standard",  and  "has  not  proved  dishonesty  on  the
    Appellant's part", before  adding  "It  follows  that  the  Appellant's
    appeal succeeds".  Indeed, it may be seen  at  paragraph  46  that  the
    appeal was "allowed under the Immigration Rules".


23.  I pause to interject that although I consider the Judge  erred  in  his
    approach to the  evidence  in  failing  to  reconcile  the  Appellant's
    account with the evidence to the  effect  that  attendance  at  a  test
    centre was not inconsistent with use of a proxy  sitter  and  therefore
    familiarity as to journey and  process  was  not  a  signifier  of  'an
    innocent explanation', such an error is arguably immaterial  if  it  be
    the case that in the premises the Respondent is unable to identify that
    the Appellant ever made us of the ETS test results in  the  context  of
    any particular application.


24.  Be that as it may, the Judge having found in the Appellant's favour  in
    respect of the Rules, went on to consider in the alternative the  human
    rights aspect of the Appellant's appeal, setting  out  his  reasons  at
    paragraphs  44  and  45.   The  Judge  concluded,  notwithstanding  the
    favourable outcome in respect of the Immigration Rules  (i.e.  that  he
    was satisfied that the Appellant had completed  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence and had not engaged in any dishonesty in  relation  to
    any earlier applications), that the Appellant had not established  that
    the  impact  of  the   Respondent's   decision   would   constitute   a
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's  Article  8  rights.
    (I pause to observe yet again that this was without  reference  to  the
    circumstances of the Appellant's  children.)   Accordingly,  the  Judge
    concluded that whilst the appeal  was  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, the appeal was "dismissed on human  rights  grounds"  (paragraph
    47).


25.  The fundamental difficulty with all of  this  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was in error as to his jurisdiction.  It  is  abundantly
    clear from the RFRL that the decision under appeal was subject  to  the
    appeal regime introduced  by  way  of  amendment  to  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by virtue of the Immigration Act  2014,
    such that the Appellant's ground of appeal was limited  to  the  ground
    that the decision was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
    1998: see sections 82(1)(b) and 84(2).  Accordingly,  it  mattered  not
    whether the Appellant could succeed under the Immigration Rules.   What
    was required was for her to establish a case with reference to the ECHR
    which, in practical terms on the facts of this case, meant by reference
    to Article 8.


26.  In the circumstances I find that  the  Judge  had  no  jurisdiction  to
    allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules, and that  aspect  of  his
    decision must be set aside.  That is the case irrespective of  my  view
    that the Judge, in any event, erred in his approach to the evidence  in
    respect of the ETS test, and more particularly, irrespective of my view
    that the Respondent could not seemingly demonstrate that the  Appellant
    had submitted the 2013 ETS test in respect of  any  application  -  and
    certainly there was no evidence to that effect  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


27.  There has been no cross-appeal or challenge raised  by  the  Respondent
    in respect of the human rights decision that the Judge reached  to  the
    effect that the Appellant failed on human rights grounds in her appeal.
     Mr Chohan has argued before me this morning that the Judge potentially
    fell into error because he seemingly failed to give weight to  his  own
    conclusions in respect of paragraph 276B, that is to say the  ten  year
    Rule pursuant to which it is, whilst not explicit,  apparent  that  the
    Judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


28.  I note that paragraph 276B of the Rules is  not  a  provision  designed
    expressly to give effect to the UK's obligations under the  ECHR.   The
    relevant paragraph in  respect  of  private  life  in  this  regard  is
    paragraph 276ADE which sets quite a  different  regime  in  respect  of
    required periods of time present in the UK, and indeed  in  respect  of
    other matters.  In my judgement it cannot be argued that success  under
    paragraph 276B inevitably equates to  establishing  that  a  person  is
    entitled to remain on human rights grounds, albeit that there will be a
    considerable overlap in respect of facts and indeed merits; Indeed when
    I put it to Mr Chohan, he did not seek to argue that success under 276B
    was determinative of an Article 8 case.


29.  In any event it seems to me from the wording of  paragraph  44  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's Decision that the Judge had very much in mind the
    analogous provisions of  paragraph  276ADE,  even  though  he  was  not
    expressly considering the case with reference to the Immigration Rules.
     He refers to the failure to show that there would be very  significant
    obstacles if the Appellant were to return to Pakistan; the  Judge  also
    makes express reference to the "number of years" in which the Appellant
    has been living in the UK and acknowledges  that  she  "must  therefore
    have some private life".  However, perhaps mindful of the provision  of
    section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act the Judge notes  that  the  Appellant's
    presence in the UK was on a temporary  basis  with  no  expectation  of
    remaining.


30.  Pursuant to discussion, it seems to me that Mr Chohan was in  substance
    really seeking to have the decision in  respect  of  the  human  rights
    grounds remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  hope  that  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department would  change  her  view  on
    consent to raise the issue of  the  Appellant's  children.   I  am  not
    persuaded that that is a sound basis upon which I should find error  of
    law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  or  should  otherwise
    consider remittal of the human rights issue.  It seems to  me,  in  any
    event, it is always open to the Appellant to raise Article 8 by way  of
    a fresh application and indeed, as I say, it is difficult  to  see  why
    this was not done at some  point  well  prior  to  the  filing  of  the
    materials before the First-tier Tribunal.


31.  Accordingly, in all of the circumstances I  find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge fell into error of law by  assuming  a  jurisdiction  in
    respect of the Immigration Rules that the Tribunal did not possess.  To
    that extent the decision allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules must be set aside.  There is no  challenge  to  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal under human rights grounds, and  notwithstanding  Mr
    Chohan's able submissions, I can identify no sound basis  to  interfere
    with the Judge's conclusions in this regard.  Accordingly, the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in respect  of  human  rights  grounds
    stands.  The overall effect  is  that  the  Appellant's  appeal  stands
    dismissed.


Notice of Decision

32.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law. The Tribunal had no jurisdiction to allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and accordingly that aspect of the  decision  is  set
    aside and does not require to be remade.


33.  Ms [M]'s appeal remains dismissed on human rights grounds.


34.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 22 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:                                 Date: 22 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)
