
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07613/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2017                   |On 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr domingos neves
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge P J
    Holmes, promulgated on 26 September  2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on 25 November 2016.

Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason for  one
      now

Background

 3. On 7 January 2003, the respondent applied  for  asylum  in  the  United
    Kingdom as an unaccompanied minor. The Secretary of State rejected  the
    respondent's claimed age as well as his asylum  claim,  but  granted  4
    years'  Exceptional  Leave  to  Remain  until  21  February  2007.  The
    respondent was granted settlement on 17 May 2007.

 4. The respondent has a number of criminal convictions. On 12 May 2008, he
    was convicted of driving without a  licence  and  while  uninsured  and
    possessing a false or improperly obtained identity  card  or  apparatus
    for making such cards. On 31 March 2009, the respondent  was  convicted
    of  driving  while  disqualified,  while  uninsured,  in  breach  of  a
    suspended sentence and failing to surrender to custody.  On  19  August
    2015, the respondent was convicted of failing to surrender to custody.

 5. On 7 September 2015, the respondent was  convicted  of  two  counts  of
    having made/supplied articles for use in fraud and was sentenced  to  a
    total of 12 months' imprisonment. Owing to  this  last  conviction  the
    respondent was made the subject of a deportation order dated 12 January
    2016. An accompanying notice of decision, also dated 12  January  2016,
    advised the respondent that he had no right of  appeal.  That  decision
    was withdrawn and replaced with a notice of  decision  dated  14  March
    2016.

 6. In providing reasons for the respondent's deportation, the Secretary of
    State considered his claimed family life with his partner, their  child
    together, his partner's child from a previous relationship,  the  child
    they were expecting and the respondent's three children from a previous
    relationship. It was not accepted  that  any  of  these  children  were
    either British or had resided in the United  Kingdom  for  at  least  7
    years. Furthermore, it was not  accepted  that  the  respondent  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with any of the children apart from
    N, then the youngest of his children. The Secretary of State was of the
    view that it would not be unduly harsh for the appellant's  partner  or
    any of the children concerned to remain in the United Kingdom  were  he
    to be deported. It was accepted that it would be unduly harsh  for  the
    respondent's children from an earlier  relationship  and  that  of  his
    partner to accompany him to Angola.

 7. With regard to the respondent's private life claim, it was not accepted
    that he met the requirements of paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules
    because he had not been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    most of his life. Furthermore,  it  was  not  accepted,  owing  to  his
    offending, that he was socially and culturally integrated in the United
    Kingdom. Furthermore,  his  claim  to  very  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration in Angola was rejected owing to the  respondent's  return
    to Angola during 2010, using an Angolan passport he  had  obtained.  It
    was not accepted that the facts of the respondent's claim  amounted  to
    very compelling circumstances.

 8. Finally, the Secretary of State considered an implied Article  2  or  3
    claim and rejected it with reliance on the reasons previously given for
    refusing the asylum claim. With regard to the grant of  ELR,  this  had
    solely been for humanitarian reasons. Reference was also  made  to  the
    respondent's visit to Angola in 2010.



The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 9. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the respondent  was  not
    represented but gave evidence along with his partner (SK) and a  friend
    (AA). The mother of his three eldest children (MM) provided a statement
    but did not attend. The judge found that at  the  time  the  respondent
    came to the United Kingdom, he was an economic migrant and that he  was
    not a minor. He was further satisfied that the grant  of  ELR  did  not
    involve  any  recognition  that  the  respondent   was   in   need   of
    international protection. Furthermore, during his  oral  evidence,  the
    respondent admitted obtaining an Angolan passport and travelling  there
    in September 2010. The judge did  not  find  the  respondent  to  be  a
    reliable witness, except where his account was satisfactorily supported
    by other evidence. Essentially, the judge considered that it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the respondent's partner and  three  British  children
    from an earlier relationship, with whom he had a genuine and subsisting
    relationship, to remain in the United Kingdom without him.

The grounds of appeal

10. The grounds of appeal in support of the application for  permission  to
    appeal argued that the judge made a material misdirection of law  on  a
    material matter. The Secretary of State contended, in essence, that the
    judge had ignored the conclusions in BL (Jamaica) v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ  357  and  should  have  considered  the  availability  of  support
    mechanisms when  determining  whether  it  was  unduly  harsh  for  the
    respondent's partner and children to remain in the United Kingdom if he
    was deported. It was said that the judge focused "solely" on the break-
    up of the family as  being  an  unduly  harsh  consequence  in  itself.
    Reference was made to Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348 and PF (Nigeria) v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 251; in that it was argued that the judge made  no
    findings as to the effect of the split. It was further argued that  the
    judge, in finding that the appellant's offending was "at the bottom end
    of the scale," appeared to attach less weight to  the  public  interest
    than is required.

11. Permission to appeal was granted, on all grounds, on the basis that  it
    was "reasonably arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had  insufficient
    regard to the public interest in making its decision."

12. The respondent served a Rule 24 response, in the  form  of  a  skeleton
    argument in which he resisted the Secretary  of  State's  appeal.   The
    respondent contended that the Secretary of State's  arguments  amounted
    to disagreement with the judge's decision and that no material error of
    law had been identified.  It  was  argued  that  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins failed to give reasons for granting permission to appeal.

The hearing

13. The respondent was accompanied by a Mr Kabba, a litigation  friend.  It
    transpired that  Mr  Avery  had  not  seen  the  respondent's  skeleton
    argument and I gave him time to consider it.

14. Mr Avery confirmed that there were two  issues.  Firstly,  the  judge's
    findings regarding undue harshness and secondly, his treatment  of  the
    public interest issue. Dealing with the second issue  first,  Mr  Avery
    argued  that  the  judge  did  not  say  much  about  the  respondent's
    offending. At paragraph 22, the  judge  referred  to  him  serving  the
    minimum level of sentence making him liable to deportation and Mr Avery
    said that the judge started on the wrong basis. It was the respondent's
    12-month sentence which triggered deportation and this is the Secretary
    of State's view of where the public interest lies.  He referred  me  to
    headnote (1)  from  McLarty  (Deportation  -  proportionality  balance)
    [2014] UKUT 315 (IAC).

15. Mr Avery argued that there was no evidence from decision to  show  that
    the judge realised that public interest in deportation was the starting
    point. Instead he treated it as a neutral factor. He  argued  that  the
    judge made no mention of the deterrent effect of  deportation;  he  did
    not particularise the offences  and  their  impact  on  the  public  or
    address why  the  Secretary  of  State  might  think  that  removal  is
    appropriate. He argued that the judge  started  off  with  whether  the
    effect of deportation was  unduly  harsh  and  thus  started  with  the
    balance in the  wrong  place.  Mr  Avery  contended  that  the  judge's
    assessment was fundamentally flawed. While only at [19] was  there  any
    consideration  of  offences,  mainly  in   terms   of   the   appellant
    reoffending, this being only one factor and not the most important.  Mr
    Avery submitted  that  the  respondent  had  a  poor  criminal  history
    previously before  the  index  offence  and  that  there  had  been  no
    appreciation of that by the judge or of how  that  impacts  the  public
    interest. At [22] the judge failed to  take  into  account  the  public
    interest and minimised the importance of it.

16. In relation to the second ground, Mr Avery argued that the judge  erred
    in relation  to  the  threshold  for  unduly  harshness.  At  [22],  he
    minimised the availability of state support to his  partner,  which  he
    argued was a relevant factor. Furthermore, any  effect  of  deportation
    must not merely be harsh but unduly so and the judge  failed  to  apply
    this test to the circumstances of the partner. The judge's finding that
    it is a genuine relationship were irrelevant.  If  it  was  not,  there
    would be no need for it to reach the stage of considering the issue  of
    unduly harshness.

17.  In  response,  Mr  Neves  confirmed  that  he  understood  Mr  Avery's
    submissions. His own submissions resembled oral evidence. He  explained
    that he had come to the United Kingdom as a  child  and  had  grown  up
    without parents. His only offences related to driving including the 12-
    month sentence which was for car insurance fraud. He told me  that  his
    pre-sentence report said that his risk of reoffending  was  medium  and
    that he had undertaken useful work while serving that sentence as  well
    as when in immigration detention. He emphasised  that  he  was  also  a
    member of the public, which was relevant to the public interest. He had
    made a mistake from which he had learned. The  judge  had  listened  to
    him.

18. Mr Neves also mentioned that his settled status had been restored after
    his appeal was allowed. As a result his  youngest  (5th)  child  was  a
    British citizen. His 4th child was not British because  Mr  Neves,  who
    was in prison when the child was born, had no  settled  status  at  the
    time of his or her birth. Otherwise, he agreed with First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Osbourne who refused permission to appeal. He accepted  that  the
    state could financially  support  his  families  in  his  absence,  but
    emphasised that the judge was referring to emotional support. Mr  Neves
    contended that his children's lives would be  impossible  without  him,
    citing ZH(Tanzania).

19. Mr Avery accepted that the judge cited the correct test at [20] of  the
    decision and reasons but argued that the  starting  point  was  that  a
    person who commits an offence and receives a 12-month  sentence  should
    be deported and the judge got  this  wrong.  Furthermore,  it  was  not
    impossible for the  respondent's  children  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. It may be harsh but it was not unduly so, given  his  criminal
    background, because three them did not live with the respondent and the
    other two were quite young.

20. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision on error of law.

Decision on error of law

21. I conclude that the judge's decision contained the  following  material
    errors of law.

22.  The  judge's  self-direction  on  the  public  interest  question  was
    incomplete. While  he  acknowledges  that  he  has  had  regard  to  MF
    (Nigeria)[2013] EWCA Civ 1192, in particular and sets out  part  5A  to
    the Immigration Act 2014 in various places,  he  has  not  demonstrated
    that he applied sections 117C(1) or (3) which state as follows;

         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

23. The aforementioned error is material because at [27], after setting out
    the respondent's family circumstances at considerable length, the judge
    concludes that  he  is  "satisfied,  taking  into  account  the  public
    interest, that it would  be  unduly  harsh."  This  finding  gives  the
    impression that the public interest in deportation was just one  factor
    of neutral weight to be placed in  the  balance  in  assessing  whether
    there was a breach of Article 8 in this case.

24. The judge's consideration of the Article 8 claim began at [19] with his
    assessment that the risk of reoffending was low and went onto  consider
    whether the effect of the  respondent's  deportation  would  be  unduly
    harsh on his family. Only in the penultimate paragraph  did  the  judge
    set out section 117C, following which he says; "it follows  from  this,
    and my other findings above, that the public interest does not  require
    the deportation of this appellant."

25. The aforementioned passage indicates the judge  considered  the  public
    interest, as an afterthought,  only  once  he  had  made  up  his  mind
    regarding the issue of unduly harshness.

26. Furthermore, the judge repeatedly notes that the sentence involved  was
    at the bottom end of the scale;  [19],  [22]  and  [27];  which  is  of
    obvious relevance owing to section 117C(2),  but  his  reasons  do  not
    indicate that he has attached the  appropriate  weight  to  the  public
    interest in deportation. As Mr Avery submitted, the judge  started  his
    consideration of the appeal with the issue of undue harshness when  his
    starting point ought to have been the public interest in deportation of
    a person who was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.

27. Secondly, the judge did not identify why the effect of the respondent's
    removal on his partner and children would be not just harsh, but unduly
    harsh. The factors mentioned by the judge appeared to be no  more  than
    the consequences of splitting the family, which would be experienced in
    most instances. Here, I take into consideration what  was  said  in  PF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 251, at [43];

         "I fully recognise that if the Judge's factual  findings  are  well
         founded, there will be a real and damaging impact  on  his  partner
         and  the  children:  but  that  is  a  common  consequence  of  the
         deportation  of  a  person  who  has  children  in  this   country.
         Deportation will normally be  appropriate  in  cases  such  as  the
         present,  even  though  the  children  will  be  affected  and  the
         interests of the children are a primary consideration."

28. The judge did not take into consideration the availability  of  support
    mechanisms or how the partner and children coped when  he  was  serving
    his  sentence  in  finding  "What  I  find  to  be  missing  from   the
    respondent's assessment is any sufficient  consideration  of  how  (the
    partner), with a young child to look after  and  another  on  the  way,
    could reasonably be expected to manage in the  long  term  without  the
    practical and emotional support of her partner." There was  an  absence
    of findings regarding why the break-up of the family would have  unduly
    harsh consequences.

29. Owing to the aforementioned errors, I set aside the judge's decision in
    its' entirety to be re-made. As I reserved my decision on the error  of
    law issue, Mr Neves has not had the opportunity of giving further  oral
    evidence, calling witnesses or submitting further documentary evidence.
    His submissions also alluded to issues  concerning  his  own  childhood
    which did not  appear  to  have  been  explored  previously.  In  these
    circumstances, I have decided to remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard, de novo, in the interests of justice.



Conclusion

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House (which is now the  nearest  hearing  centre),  with  a  time
estimate of 2 hours  by  any  judge  except  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PJ
Holmes.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

