
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/07336/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30 August 2017                         |On 04 October 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             Mr Artur Bardhoshi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kerr, Counsel, instructed by Karis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Albania who  was  born  on  27  February
    1989.  He first arrived in this  country  in  2012  without  leave  and
    remained here until towards the end of 2013.  He was stopped in  a  car
    and it was discovered that he was in this country unlawfully.   He  was
    removed on 24 November 2013.  By this time he had met a  Ms  Wells  and
    been in a relationship with her for some eight months.

 2. Even though the appellant knew full well  that  he  had  absolutely  no
    right to be in the country he once again entered without  leave  on  23
    March 2014 when he began living with Ms Wells.   It  is  accepted  that
    they have been living together since then.  In July 2013 the  appellant
    had  applied  for  asylum,  which  is  some  four  months   after   his
    relationship with Ms Wells had  commenced,  but  that  application  was
    refused and, as already noted, the appellant had failed to leave the UK
    until he was removed in November 2013.

 3. In July 2015 the appellant applied for leave to remain under Article  8
    on the basis of his family life with Ms Wells (to whom at this time  he
    was not married) and her two daughters, the youngest of whom  was  born
    on 1 July 2004 and so at that time was aged 12 years.  She is  now  13.
    The application was refused.  The appellant could not succeed under the
    Rules as a partner because he did not meet  the  requirements  set  out
    within Appendix FM; as provided in GEN.1.2(iv), in order to be  defined
    as a "partner" for the purposes of Appendix FM, an unmarried couple had
    to have been living together in a relationship akin to  a  marriage  or
    civil partnership  for  at  least  two  years  prior  to  the  date  of
    application, which the appellant and Ms Wells had not by that stage.

 4. The appellant appealed against the respondent's refusal  to  grant  him
    leave to remain and his appeal was heard at Harmondsworth on  29  March
    2017 before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Amin  but  in  a  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on 20 April 2017 Judge Amin dismissed the appeal.

 5. By this stage the appellant and Ms  Wells  were  married,  having  been
    married in 2016.  Accordingly, by the time the  appeal  was  heard  the
    general conditions set out within Appendix FM did apply.

 6. There was some discussion during the hearing as to whether or not  with
    regard to Article 8 and in particular to  Appendix  FM  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ought to have had regard to the position as it applied at  the
    date of hearing or whether it should only have considered the  position
    at the date of  the  decision,  which  was  September  2015,  both  the
    application and the decision having postdated the change in  the  Rules
    which applied from April 2015.  However, this is an  Article  8  appeal
    and the position with regard to  appeals  remains  as  set  out  within
    Section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  which
    is that (pursuant to Section 85(4)): "On an appeal under Section  82(1)
    ... against a decision [the Tribunal] may consider ... any matter which
    [it] thinks relevant to the substance of the decision, including ...  a
    matter arising after the date of the decision".

 7. The provisions set out within Appendix FM are said within the  Appendix
    to be designed to demonstrate the matters which should  be  taken  into
    account in order to  ensure  that  the  respondent  complies  with  her
    obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR, taking into account  the  need
    to safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the UK in line with
    the respondent's duty under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.  Appendix FM is  not  designed  on  its  face  to
    provide a specific right under the Rules to leave to remain; rather  it
    is designed to set out  the  basis  upon  which  an  application  under
    Article 8 will be considered and determined.

 8. Certainly, and in my judgment rightly, Judge  Amin  did  consider  this
    appeal on the basis that Appendix FM applied.

 9. The appellant was given permission to appeal against this  decision  by
    Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  on  4  July  2017.   While  she  refused
    permission on some of the grounds for reasons which she gave (and  with
    which I am in entire agreement) at paragraphs 3 to 5  of  her  decision
    she gave her reasons as follows:

         "3.  I grant permission however on grounds 3 and 4.  In relation to
             ground 4, the judge arguably did not, when considering whether
             there were insurmountable obstacles to the appellant  and  his
             wife continuing  their  relationship  in  Albania,  take  into
             account the position of her children  ([31]  to  [35]  of  the
             decision).  A judge may well be entitled to conclude  that  it
             would not be unreasonable for them to go to Albania  with  the
             couple if that  were  their  decision  or  remain  with  their
             natural father but that is not considered.

         4.   That potential error also arguably impacts on the  finding  in
             relation to entry clearance.   The  issue  whether  there  are
             'insurmountable obstacles'  arises  first  when  applying  the
             Immigration Rules (EX.1).   The  issue  whether  it  would  be
             reasonable to expect the appellant to  return  to  Albania  in
             order to make an application  under  the  Rules  as  a  spouse
             arises only outside the Rules and therefore after it has  been
             determined that  there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
             family life continuing in the home country.

         5.   The appellant may, on the facts of this case, face  an  uphill
             struggle in persuading a  judge  that  his  appeal  should  be
             allowed.  However, I am (just)  persuaded  that  there  is  an
             arguable error for the reasons I have identified and that  the
             error may  be  material.   I  therefore  grant  permission  to
             appeal".

10. The problem with the decision which Judge  Smith  identified  was  that
    Judge Amin was obliged to consider (and he did) pursuant to Appendix FM
    whether or not there  were  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  Ms  Wells'
    relocating with the appellant to Albania in order for  family  life  to
    continue.  Appendix FM contains within  it  a  number  of  requirements
    before leave to remain will be granted to a  person  on  the  basis  of
    family life carried out with that person's partner,  but  the  relevant
    requirements (which this appellant could not satisfy) are all waived if
    the requirements of Section EX.1 are satisfied.  The relevant  part  of
    EX.1 provides as follows:

         "EX.1.   This paragraph applies if

                ...

                (b)     the  applicant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
                    relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a
                    British citizen, settled in the UK  ...  and  there  are
                    insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with   that
                    partner continuing outside the UK".

11. What amounts to "insurmountable obstacles" is then clarified in EX.2 as
    follows:

         "EX.2.   For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  'insurmountable
                obstacles' means the  very  significant  difficulties  which
                would  be  faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                continuing their family life together  outside  the  UK  and
                which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
                hardship for the applicant or their partner".

12. In this case, as already noted, Ms Wells has two  young  children,  the
    youngest of whom was 12 and the older child 16.   These  children  both
    have regular contact with their natural father and also  regularly  see
    their grandmother, who,  it  appears,  provides  support  to  both  her
    grandchildren.  The father, as noted at paragraph 25  of  Judge  Amin's
    decision, has his daughters to stay with him regularly.

13. At paragraph 29 of his decision the judge stated as follows:

         "29. The children have a very strong relationship with their mother
             and their natural father.  The children do not have  to  leave
             the UK as their best interests are met by their parents in the
             UK.  The children are not required to leave the UK".

14. I note (and emphasise) that the judge's finding with regard to the best
    interests of the children  was  that  these  were  met  by  both  their
    parents, and not just by one of them.

15. The judge properly noted at paragraph 30 that the applicant had  "shown
    a completely blatant disregard of the Immigration Rules" and that  "his
    wife has been  supporting  him  financially".   He  also  noted,  again
    absolutely properly, that both the appellant and his wife  had  entered
    into  this  relationship  with  full  knowledge  that  the  appellant's
    immigration status was precarious.

16. The judge then went on to consider whether  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles for the appellant and his wife returning to Albania, in order
    to see whether they  could  continue  their  family  life  there.   The
    difficulty with this aspect of the decision is that the judge  did  not
    in the context of this decision take account of  the  position  of  the
    children.  As Judge Smith noted when giving her  reasons  for  granting
    permission to appeal, it might be that a judge could find that it would
    not be unreasonable for the children to go to Albania with their mother
    and stepfather or indeed remain with their father in this country.  The
    effect of the former, however, would be  that  the  children  would  be
    deprived of the advantages  to  which  they  are  entitled  as  British
    citizens and for this reason this may not be  a  reasonable  course  to
    follow.  Were the appellant's wife to choose to accompany  her  husband
    to Albania, she would in  those  circumstances  face  the  prospect  of
    parting from her children.   In  these  circumstances  the  judge  when
    considering whether there are "insurmountable obstacles to family  life
    with that partner continuing outside the UK" would have to have in mind
    whether or not the difficulties which would be faced by the appellant's
    partner (in parting from her children) were sufficiently  "significant"
    that they either could not be overcome or would  entail  "very  serious
    hardship" for the appellant's wife.  Absent such  consideration  in  my
    judgment he has  failed  adequately  to  consider  within  Appendix  FM
    whether or not  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing.  This is an exercise  which  needs  now  to  be  conducted.
    Despite the robust and thoughtful way in which  the  respondent's  case
    was argued before this Tribunal, I cannot rule out the prospect that  a
    judge when considering the position of the children would find that the
    effect on the wife of  travelling  to  Albania  with  her  new  husband
    without her children would entail very serious hardship for her.

17. It follows that this appeal will have  to  be  reheard.   Having  heard
    submissions from the  appellant  in  particular  in  this  regard  (the
    respondent's  position  being  neutral)  I  am   persuaded   that   the
    appropriate course is to  remit  the  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal so that the appeal can be reheard  by  any  judge  other  than
    Judge Amin and I will so order.

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin as  containing  a
material error of law and remit the  appeal  back  to  Hatton  Cross  to  be
determined by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge  Craig                                       Date:   29
    September 2017










