
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07107/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 February 2019                 |On 15 February 2019                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                         IAN DUNCAN OMONDI ODHIAMBO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Plowright (counsel) instructed by Edmans & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Chamberlain promulgated on 28/06/2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 31/10/1998 and  is  a  national  of  Kenya.  On
15/05/2017 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application  for
entry clearance as the dependent child of the sponsor.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  Chamberlain  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision.  Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  03/01/2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The grounds are unhelpfully and unnecessarily lengthy and long winded.
    I am concerned, however, by the Judge's findings at [18] in regard to a
    lack of evidence of contact between  the  appellant's  father  and  his
    school and the lack of any mention of  the  sponsor  and  the  Pastoral
    Support Plan from Uhuru secondary school, when the document on page  70
    of the appeal bundle arguably  provides  such  evidence.  Arguably  the
    Judge's oversight in regard to that piece of evidence was  material  to
    overall findings about the role played by the sponsor and the  arguable
    lack of involvement of the appellant's mother. I  grant  permission  on
    that basis. I find little  arguable  merit,  otherwise,  in  the  other
    grounds but do not exclude them. All grounds may be argued."

The Hearing

5. Before Mr Plowright could move the grounds of appeal, Mr Duffy,  for  the
respondent, told me that a rule 24 response has been served in which  it  is
conceded that the decision contains a material error  of  law.  He  told  me
that a key plank of the Judge's reasoning is defective because, at  document
70 of the appellant's bundle of evidence, there is the school  report  which
shows that the appellant's school identifies the sponsor as the person  with
parental responsibility for the appellant. He asked me to set  the  decision
aside and remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  fresh  fact
finding.

6. Mr Plowright moved the  grounds  of  appeal  and  asked  me  to  set  the
decision aside for the reasons given by Mr Duffy. He told  me  that  because
the error is in the  Judge's  fact-finding,  an  entirely  new  fact-finding
exercise is necessary. He  asked  me  to  remit  this  case  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.

Analysis

7. Just days before his 18th  birthday,  the  appellant  applied  for  entry
clearance under rule 297 of the immigration rules to join his father in  the
UK. The respondent's decision was  made  on  15  May  2017  and  focuses  on
paragraph 297(i)(e) of the rules. The area of dispute is whether or not  the
sponsor has sole responsibility for the appellant.

8.  In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
00049 the Tribunal said that "Sole responsibility" is a  factual  matter  to
be decided upon all the evidence.   The  test  is  whether  the  parent  has
continuing control and direction  over  the  child's  upbringing,  including
making all the important decisions in the child's life.

9. The Judge's findings in relation to the immigration rules  can  be  found
between [13] and [29] of the decision. There, the Judge  repeatedly  rejects
the evidence  bemoaning  a  lack  of  corroboration.  Corroboration  is  not
required. The Judge's apparent search for corroboration is a material  error
of law.

10. The first sentence of [18] of the decision is  an  error  of  fact.  The
Judge says that there is no documentary evidence to show  that  the  sponsor
was involved  with  the  appellant's  education.  The  Judge  considers  the
evidence  of  the  appellant's  education  between  [18]  and  [22]  of  the
decision. The first sentence of [21] is wrong.

11. Document 70 of the appellant's bundle is a school report  from  February
2014. The summary at the start of the report says

    "... Ian lives with his paternal  grandmother.  He  has  not  seen  his
    mother since the age of about two. His father, who is  responsible  for
    taking care of him and paying his school fees lives in England ..."

12. The Judge's decision contains errors of  fact  and  material  errors  of
law. I set it aside. I am asked, of consent,  to  remit  this  case  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  hearing.  The  material  error  in  the
decision relates to an inadequacy of fact finding. I  cannot  substitute  my
own decision. Further fact-finding exercise is necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

13. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

15. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Chamberlain.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

17. I set aside the Judge's  decision  promulgated  on  28  June  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.




Signed
              Date 13 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




