
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/07109/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 March 2018                          | On 29 March 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    B. S.
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, Counsel, instructed by Alex Bell
Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Gambia, who entered the  UK  lawfully
    as a visitor on 1 July 2005. He became an overstayer on 1 January 2006.



 2. The Appellant applied for a grant of discretionary leave to  remain  in
    the UK as the unmarried partner of a British  citizen  on  20  November
    2015. That application was refused on 29 February 2016. His  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds against that refusal came before First tier  Tribunal
    Judge Henderson on 18 May  2017,  and  it  was  dismissed  by  decision
    promulgated on 5 June 2017.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal from the First tier  Tribunal
    on three grounds; (i) that the Judge had failed to have adequate regard
    to the cultural barriers that would be faced by  the  Appellant's  wife
    were she to seek to live with him in the Gambia, (ii) that  the  career
    of the Appellant's wife had a value to the  public,  and  as  such  was
    something  that  should  have  been  weighed  in  the   proportionality
    balancing exercise as reducing the public interest in  the  Appellant's
    removal, Lama [2017] UKUT 16, and, (iii) that the Judge's  approach  to
    section 117B of the 2002 Act was  flawed.  Permission  was  granted  by
    decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell, albeit  without  express
    reference to either of these grounds, but rather on the basis  that  it
    was arguable the Judge had reached contradictory findings in paragraphs
    25, 33, and 35 of her decision.

 4. Thus the matter comes before me.

 5. Ms Warren placed no reliance upon the  terms  in  which  permission  to
    appeal had been granted. She was right to do so. As she accepted  there
    is no substance in the suggestion that  the  Judge  made  contradictory
    findings. Instead, as I invited her  to  do,  Ms  Warren  expanded  the
    points made in the three grounds to her application for  permission  on
    the assumption that Judge Kimnell must be taken  to  have  intended  to
    grant permission in relation to each.

 6. It was common ground at the hearing before Judge  Henderson  that  were
    the Appellant then making an application for entry clearance to the  UK
    as a spouse he  would  be  unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Thus, this was never a case of the type rehearsed in
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL  40.  The  Appellant  was  far  from  certain  of
    obtaining entry clearance at any point in the future.  The  appeal  was
    not however  advanced  to  Judge  Henderson  on  the  basis  that  this
    necessarily meant a permanent separation  of  the  Appellant  from  his
    spouse, since it  was  possible  that  his  wife's  earnings  could  be
    increased beyond the minimum threshold figure in the future, which  was
    the primary obstacle to  his  gaining  entry  clearance;  MM  (Lebanon)
    [2017] UKSC 10. Ms Warren accepted, candidly, before me  that  she  had
    not sought to explore before the Judge the  hypothetical  possibilities
    for the future. She had instead argued the appeal on the basis that  it
    was impossible for the Appellant's wife to ever live in the Gambia with
    him because of the difficulties she would face in so doing; that was an
    argument that the Judge rejected.

 7. The Judge noted that the Appellant and his spouse had chosen  to  marry
    on 22 April 2017, and thus after the refusal of his application  for  a
    grant of discretionary leave to remain. She noted that  he  had  always
    been present in the UK unlawfully since 1 January 2006, and had not met
    his partner until 2013. She accepted that they had cohabited since July
    2013, but found that the argument that they could not live together  in
    the Gambia as an unmarried couple had now fallen away as  a  result  of
    their marriage [11]. She had in mind the fact that the Appellant's wife
    is white and Catholic [20] and considered the argument that the  couple
    could experience hostility to their marriage. She considered  the  very
    different cultural and religious  context  in  which  they  would  live
    together in the Gambia [25] and considered that  doing  so  would  pose
    significant difficulties for  the  couple  although  she  balanced  the
    difficulties the Appellant's wife would face, with the  fact  that  the
    Appellant could be expected to find employment and support  the  couple
    himself since he was qualified as a  teacher  in  the  Gambia  and  had
    previously pursued a career there as such [33]. The Judge rehearsed the
    difficulties the Appellant's wife would face, separately [34, 35,  39].
    She concluded that there  would  be  significant  difficulties  to  the
    couple continuing their family life in the Gambia [33]  but  that  this
    would not reach the level of very  serious  hardship  required  by  the
    Immigration Rules [35].

 8. Ms Warren advanced ground 1 on the basis that the  decision  failed  to
    provide a reasoned  analysis  of  where  upon  the  scale  of  possible
    hardships the situation faced by this couple would fall. I reject  that
    criticism. The Judge's reasons were adequate, and  her  conclusion  was
    clear.

 9. Ms Warren was initially unable to identify any material factor that the
    Judge had left out of account, or any irrelevant factor  that  she  had
    taken into account, and her submissions made it clear that the  reality
    was that this was a disagreement with the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    weight that could be attached to  the  evidence.  Pressed  on  this  Ms
    Warren then asserted that the Appellant had claimed  in  oral  evidence
    that his wife would face outright hostility from  members  of  his  own
    family, and argued that this was a matter that the Judge had  left  out
    of account. I noted that this was not a matter that  the  Appellant  or
    his wife had raised in their professionally drafted witness statements,
    a point that Ms Warren accepted but  was  unable  to  explain.  In  the
    circumstances I am not surprised that the Judge failed to see any  such
    claim as significant. The Judge plainly did consider the  more  generic
    claim that the marriage would face general  hostility,  and  took  that
    claim into account.

10. Ms Warren advanced ground 2 on the basis  that  whilst  the  Judge  had
    taken into account the nature of  the  employment  of  the  Appellant's
    wife, she had nevertheless failed  to  take  into  account  the  public
    benefit of that employment, or if she had, then she had failed to  give
    it the weight that it deserved. It is however  plain  in  my  judgement
    that the Judge did have regard to the nature of  this  employment,  and
    the dedication shown by the Appellant's wife to her clients  [34].  The
    weight that she gave to the public interest in that service  continuing
    to be provided was a matter for her.

11. Ms Warren advanced ground 3 on the basis that the Judge had  failed  to
    properly apply section 117B of the 2002 Act, in  her  approach  to  the
    Appellant's immigration status in the  UK.  The  difficulty  with  this
    criticism is that beyond the first six  months,  when  the  Appellant's
    status was lawful but precarious, he had been present unlawfully.  That
    left the Judge required to give little weight to a private life, or, to
    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner (as  his  spouse  was);
    s117B(4). That is clearly the approach the Judge took, and the decision
    affords no basis for the criticism that in reality the  Judge  gave  no
    weight to that relationship.

12. In conclusion then I am not satisfied that  the  Judge  did  leave  any
    material factor out of account, or take  into  account  any  irrelevant
    factor. Adequate reasons were given for the findings  that  were  made,
    and they were in turn quite clear enough for the reader  to  understand
    the decision, and its basis. As set out by the Supreme Court in Agyarko
    [2017] UKSC 11, the fact that the "family life" relied  upon  has  been
    established by the applicant and his partner in the full knowledge that
    his presence in the UK is unlawful affects the weight to be attached to
    that "family life" in  the  balancing  exercise.  It  is  clear  in  my
    judgement that the Judge appreciated that, and did so. This was  not  a
    Chikwamba case. The focus of this appeal was always on the  balance  to
    be drawn between the difficulties that the Appellant's wife would  face
    if she did seek to live with him in the Gambia from time  to  time,  or
    permanently (bearing in mind that this is a  holiday  destination  from
    the UK enjoyed by many), and the public interest in his removal. It was
    open to the Judge to conclude for the reasons that she  gave  that  the
    Appellant would not himself face any real difficulty  in  reintegrating
    himself, or in securing lawful employment, in the  Gambia.  Equally  it
    was also open to the Judge to conclude for the reasons  that  she  gave
    that the Appellant's wife would face significant difficulties in  doing
    so - but that these did not meet the threshold  of  "very  serious"  or
    amount to "exceptional circumstances" sufficient to tip the balance  in
    favour of the grant of discretionary leave to remain.

13. In the circumstances, and notwithstanding the terms in which permission
    to appeal was granted, in my judgement the Judge did properly  consider
    the competing interests and balanced them, giving adequate reasons  for
    her conclusions. I therefore dismiss the  challenge,  and  confirm  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

14. An anonymity direction is made.

Notice of decision

The decision promulgated on 5 June 2017 did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law sufficient to  require  the  decision  to  be  set  aside.  The
decision of the First tier Tribunal to  dismiss  the  Article  8  appeal  is
accordingly confirmed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  of  the  individuals  referred  to  in  this
decision.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 28 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
