
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07450/2017
                                                               HU/07451/2017
                                                               HU/07452/2017
                                                               HU/07455/2017
                                                               HU/07456/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 8 August 2019                     |On 5 September 2019                  |
|Judgment given orally                |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

     (1) fi
     (2) MA
     (3) MEA
     (4) ZA
     (5) AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Hollywood, Andrew Russell & Co Solicitors,
Belfast


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an order for anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  disclosure  of  any
    matter that may lead to the identification of the appellants and  other
    parties  to  these  proceedings.   Any  breach  may  lead  to  contempt
    proceedings.

 2. I am grateful to Mr Hollywood who only became aware  that  this  appeal
    had been listed late yesterday; the Upper Tribunal had sent the  notice
    of hearing to a former address despite notification of the change in an
    email which may not however have referred  specifically  to  this  case
    being  of  a  general  nature.   He  was  content   to   proceed   with
    consideration of whether the FtT had erred in law.

 3. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Murray  who,  for  reasons
    given in her decision promulgated 8 October 2018, allowed  the  appeals
    by the respondents on Article 8 grounds against  the  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer who had refused the  respondents'  applications
    for family reunion as the family members of the sponsor, a  citizen  of
    Somalia, who was granted refugee status in the United Kingdom in  2012.
    He now has indefinite leave to remain.

 4. The first respondent is the mother of the  sponsor  and  of  the  other
    respondents who were born in 2005, 2006, 2008 and 2010 are her children
    and his siblings respectively.  As summarised by the judge at  [3]  and
    [4] of her decision,  their  applications  had  been  refused  for  the
    following reasons:

         "3.  The applications were refused for a number  of  reasons.   The
             respondent found that there  was  no  supporting  evidence  to
             confirm the relationship  between  the  appellants  and  their
             sponsor and DNA testing was  suggested.   In  2014  the  first
             appellant  applied  to  join  the  same   sponsor   but   that
             application was refused as there was no provision  within  the
             Immigration Rules to cover  their  relationship,  i.e.  mother
             joining her son, so  even  if  the  appellants  can  show  and
             confirm  their  relationship  to  the  sponsor,  there  is  no
             provision to consider the  application  under  the  pre-flight
             rules as none of the appellants are the partner  or  child  of
             the person granted refugee status.  With regard to post-flight
             family reunion this attracts a fee which has not been paid but
             even if the fee had been paid the respondent was not satisfied
             with the appellants' relationship to the UK  sponsor  or  that
             the  other  sub-requirements  under  paragraph   319V(i)   and
             319V(8f) of the Immigration Rules had been satisfied.

         4.    The  respondent  then  considered  whether   the   particular
             circumstances  in  the  application   constitute   exceptional
             circumstances which, consistent with the right to respect  for
             family  life  contained  in  Article  8   of   ECHR,   warrant
             consideration by the Secretary of State of a  grant  of  entry
             clearance  to  come  to  the  United   Kingdom   outside   the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The  respondent  found
             that they  do  not  because  the  relationship  has  not  been
             established."

 5. The judge found the sponsor to be credible, likewise  the  evidence  of
    his foster father and found that the relationship between  the  parties
    as I have described above could be accepted.

 6. The judge then proceeded to consider the case under  Article  8,  there
    being no argument that the respondents  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  She explained her conclusions as follows:

         "41. I have to decide if there is family life between  the  sponsor
             and the appellants and the respondent has made the point  that
             the sponsor at the date of the application was  an  adult  but
             attempts were made before he was an  adult.   The  hurdles  in
             these applications have now been overcome but by the time they
             were overcome the sponsor was an adult.  I do  not  find  that
             this should be held against him  and  I  find  that  there  is
             family life between the appellants and the  respondent  [sic],
             shown by his continuing contact with them and  the  monies  he
             sends them and also the help he gives them, for example saving
             money so that his brother could  have  medical  treatment.   I
             find that the sponsor has a stronger than normal  relationship
             with his family than in most cases.  He is also  the  head  of
             the family since his father and brothers were killed.

         42.  The terms of the Immigration  Rules  cannot  be  satisfied  as
             there is no provision to consider an application under the pre-
             flight rules and in  any  case  the  appellants  are  not  the
             partner or a child of a person granted  refugee  status.   The
             appellants in this case are a mother and siblings.

         43.  I have therefore considered this claim under Article 8 outside
             the Rules and have carried out a  proportionality  assessment.
             I have considered the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.   I  find
             that there is family life and I accept the relationship.   The
             sponsor stayed with the appellants before he fled to  the  UK.
             This was a family unit.

         44.  Section 117 of the 2002 Act deals with public interest.  There
             is public interest in the maintenance of effective immigration
             control and the appellants do  not  speak  English.   Although
             they will not be financially independent their sponsor will be
             providing for them as will his foster father Mr  Noble.   This
             will be for the foreseeable future and I found their  evidence
             to be credible.  There will be no need for the  appellants  to
             claim benefits.

         45.  I also have to consider the safeguarding of the children.  Out
             of the five appellants four are children and although they  no
             longer live in a camp in Addis Ababa, and they have a house of
             their own, I find that it must be in their best  interests  to
             live as a family unit in safety and as the family unit  cannot
             be complete without the sponsor, I find that it  is  in  their
             best interests for them to come to the United Kingdom to  join
             the sponsor.  It is also in their best interests  to  be  with
             their mother, the first appellant.

         46.  I therefore find that when public interest is balanced against
             the human rights of the sponsor and the  five  appellants  the
             five appellants and the sponsor must succeed and it  would  be
             disproportionate when considering the  right  to  respect  for
             family life to dismiss this appeal.

         47.  This is a claim which succeeds under  Article  8  outside  the
             Rules."

 7. The grounds of challenge rely on four grounds.  As to  the  first,  the
    respondents had not made a valid application under  paragraph  319V  of
    the Immigration Rules (ground one).  This had been explicitly addressed
    in the refusal letter and  the  judge  had  not  addressed  it  in  her
    determination.

 8. As to the second ground it is contended that an assessment of the  case
    within the Rules was critical.  The Entry Clearance Officer found  that
    the evidence had failed to demonstrate that the  respondents  satisfied
    paragraph 352A or 352D and did not  establish  that  they  were  living
    alone  or  in  the  most  compelling  circumstances   under   paragraph
    317V(i)(d) and (f).  The judge had failed to make any assessment  under
    the latter provision to determine whether or not  the  application  was
    valid and, if so, whether the respondents met any of the provisions.

 9. The third ground argues that having identified the  best  interests  of
    the minor respondents and that it would  be  disproportionate  for  the
    family  to  remain  separated  the  judge  had  undertaken  no  further
    consideration of the evidence or submissions made  by  the  respondent.
    The judge had elevated the best interests consideration to be paramount
    and the only consideration using those best interests to  be  the  sole
    determinative factor in a proportionality assessment.  It is  contended
    that the judge had failed to explain her reasons with reference  to  MK
    (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641.

10. The fourth ground argues the lack of reasoning  for  the  finding  that
    there were stronger than normal ties  and  a  failure  to  address  the
    appellant's position that the family could return to live in Mogadishu.



11. In granting permission to appeal the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
    observed:

         "It is arguable that the judge failed to attach due weight  to  the
         fact that the appellants did not meet the requirements of the Rules
         (see para 42); elevated the best interests of the child  appellants
         (who now had a house of their own) to  a  paramount  consideration;
         and  failed  to  take  into  account   relevant   public   interest
         consideration, in particular lack  of  financial  independence  and
         lack of English."

    He made no comment on the fourth ground.

12. Before hearing  submissions  from  the  representatives,  matters  were
    clarified with reference to the Immigration Rules.  It was accepted  by
    both parties that paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules identified  by
    the Secretary of State in the grounds of challenge  did  not  apply  to
    this case.  The applicable rule was identified by the judge herself  in
    the decision in the paragraph I have cited above being paragraph  319V.



13. By way of submissions in respect of ground  one,  Mr  Diwnycz  accepted
    that the application and the  covering  letter  from  the  respondents'
    representatives made no reference to the applicable rule and  that,  in
    substance, an Article  8  application  was  pending  before  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.   This  was  acknowledged  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer with reference to an exchange of  emails  between  the  African
    Region International Operations and Visa and the Home Office  dated  12
    May 2014 and Mr Hollywood.  The email of 12 May  2014  from  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager confirmed as follows:

         "I have told colleagues in Addis  and  they  will  be  accepted  as
         gratis and they will not be refused or turned away.  They can  take
         this email as proof."

14. Mr Diwnycz acknowledged that the judge had referred to the  absence  of
    an application having been made under paragraph 319V in paragraph 3  of
    her decision.  When asked what the judge was required to do in relation
    to the first ground of challenge,  he  candidly  acknowledged  that  he
    could not make out that  ground.   Accordingly,  Mr  Hollywood  had  no
    submissions to make on this ground.

15. I turn to ground  two.   It  was  accepted  by  Mr  Diwnycz  that  this
    erroneously referred to paragraph 317 which it had been accepted had no
    purchase in this appeal.  He indicated that he did not  wish  to  amend
    the grounds and accepted as a consequence that this ground  fell  away.
    Inevitably Mr Hollywood had no submissions to make on this ground.

16. I turn  now  to  ground  three.   The  purport  of  the  challenge  and
    submissions related to [41] of the judge's decision, in particular, the
    reference to the history of earlier applications.  Mr Diwnycz's initial
    argument was that the judge was not entitled in the Article 8  exercise
    to reset the clock, but on further reflection he accepted this had  not
    in fact occurred here in the light of the  judge's  reference  to  time
    having passed and the fact of the sponsor being an adult, now aged  21,
    at the time of the decision.  On  reflection,  he  conceded  that  this
    disposed of ground three.  He conceded that in the event that  I  found
    no error in the decision of the judge there would be "no  complaint  in
    the light of there being no merit in the grounds".

17. In relation to ground three, Mr Hollywood simply reminded me  that  the
    judge had accepted the credibility of the sponsor and  that  the  judge
    had given proper consideration to Part 5A in particular section 117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   He  accepted  that
    whilst another judge might have come to another decision but, based  on
    the way in which the challenge had been put  and  developed  before  me
    today, he contended that the judge had not erred.

18. This is an adversarial jurisdiction.  It is an appeal in which I am  to
    consider whether the judge erred on the  basis  of  the  challenges  on
    which permission had been granted taking into account  the  submissions
    that have been made on behalf of the Secretary of State.  It  has  been
    accepted that none of those challenges in grounds one to three  can  be
    made out.

19. I now turn to ground four for which I paused giving my  judgment  as  I
    had not heard submissions.  This ground argues the failure by the judge
    to deal with the submission that the family could move  to  Somalia  in
    the light of the  improved  conditions  there.   The  ground  seeks  to
    distinguish AT & Others (Article  8  ECHR  -  Child  Refugee  -  Family
    Reunification) Eritrea [2016] UKUT 00227 on the basis that the  sponsor
    was thriving in the United Kingdom and there was no evidence  he  would
    be in a position of danger given the change in  country  conditions  in
    Somalia.  The judge acknowledged this aspect in [26] of her decision as
    follows:

         "26. The Presenting Officer  submitted  that  the  first  appellant
             states that things are very difficult in Ethiopia and they may
             require return to Somalia but at paragraph 26 of the sponsor's
             statement he states their only hope of living safely  together
             is to live here in the United Kingdom.  He cannot  face  being
             apart from them; "I would have to decide being  between  being
             with my family again and safety in the UK.  Returning to risks
             in Somalia may be my only hope of seeing them".  He  submitted
             that there are no statements from the appellants to  say  that
             they are unable to  go  to  Somalia.   He  submitted  that  he
             accepts that  the  sponsor  was  credible  but  based  on  the
             evidence there is nothing to show that the family is  actually
             going to have to go back to Somalia.  I was asked to  consider
             the  current  humanitarian  [situation]  in  Somalia  and   he
             submitted that the COI report indicates that as the appellants
             are from Mogadishu they could  return  there  in  safety.   At
             present there is no conflict there."

20. At [34] of her decision, the judge explained her understanding  of  the
    decision in AT & Another and from which she cites a  passage  from  the
    decision  of  the  President:  "...   In  particular  in  my  view  the
    orientation of these principles and policies adds to the favour  rather
    than undermine what the appellants seek to achieve  by  these  appeals.
    They qualify for substantiate weight in the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise."

21. In his submissions Mr Diwnycz acknowledged the lateness  of  the  point
    having been raised  by  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing  and
    accepted that it had not been raised by the Entry Clearance Officer  in
    the refusal decision which sets  out  the  case  the  respondents  were
    required to meet.  Candidly he explained that he was  unsure  that  the
    Presenting Officer had the power to suggest such relocation, but  might
    make submissions on such an issue and it was for the judge to deal with
    it.  He considered that the judge had done so at [34] of her  decision.
    Whilst he thought there ought to have been more but Mr Diwnycz did  not
    suggest that the  sponsor  should  surrender  his  refugee  status  and
    accepted that no cessation had been applied nor would it be so.

22. By way of response Mr Hollywood argued that he had been driven  by  the
    grant of permission and submitted that Dr Storey  had  not  granted  on
    ground four.  Beyond that he further submitted that the judge had  made
    a positive credibility finding in relation  to  the  account  that  the
    sponsor had given of the circumstances  that  had  given  rise  to  his
    asylum claim.  In the absence of cessation, relocation of  this  family
    unit to Mogadishu was not viable.  Even if permission had been  granted
    on ground four, he contended that there was no error of law.

23. It is clear to me that the point was raised as faithfully  recorded  by
    the judge at the hearing.  In order for  the  submission  to  be  given
    effect, the burden was on the Secretary of State to apply cessation  to
    the sponsor's refugee status.  Given Mr Diwnycz's acceptance that  this
    had not been done and that it would not be done, whilst I have concerns
    about the adequacy of the  judge's  reasoning  on  this  point,  in  my
    judgment it did not lead to a material error.

24. This appeal was concerned with family reunification and it  is  one  on
    which it has been accepted that the judge gave sufficient  reasons  for
    her conclusion that that would be best achieved in the United  Kingdom.
    It has been accepted that grounds one to three have not been made  out.
    I am satisfied that on the basis of the argument before me  that  there
    was no material error in relation to ground  four.   Accordingly,  this
    appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date 20 August 2019

UTJ Dawson

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
