
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/07410/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 January 2018              |On 09 February 2018             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                             Mr JOWARD VILLAMER
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Krushner, Counsel
      (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
         Judge Hanson on 16 October 2017 against the determination of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge R Hussain who had dismissed the appeal  of  the
         Appellant seeking leave to  remain  as  a  partner  and  parent  on
         Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The decision and reasons  was  promulgated
         on 3 March 2017.




    2.     The Appellant is a national of the Philippines, born on 29  July
         1989.  He is married to a  British  Citizen  by  whom  he  has  two
         British Citizen children, both born in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
         Appellant last entered the United Kingdom on 26 May  2015,  with  a
         six month  visit  visa,  at  the  expiry  of  which  he  became  an
         overstayer.  The Appellant admitted that he was unable to meet  the
         Immigration  Rules  but  argued  that  section   117B(6)   of   the
         Nationality and Asylum Act 2002 applied because of his relationship
         with his children whom it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  to
         leave the United Kingdom. Judge Hussain found that  there  were  no
         exceptional circumstances.  The Immigration Rules were not met  and
         family  life  could  be  continued  without   difficulty   in   the
         Philippines.  It was reasonable to expect the children to leave the
         United Kingdom with their parents.  He dismissed the appeal on that
         basis.

    3.     Permission to appeal was initially  refused  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal but was granted in the Upper Tribunal  because  the  judge
         had failed to consider  the  fact  that  both  of  the  Appellant's
         children were British Citizens, particularly in the  light  of  the
         Secretary of State for the Home Department's policy  regarding  the
         removal of British Citizens from the United Kingdom.

    4.     Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
         notice in letter form dated 3 November 2017 opposing the appeal was
         filed by the Respondent.

    5.     At the  hearing  Mr  Clarke  for  the  Respondent  informed  the
         tribunal that the Respondent on reflection  had  decided  that  the
         grant of permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  had
         identified a material  error  of  law.   The  two  British  Citizen
         children could not be removed under  Home  Office  policy  and  the
         Appellant had a strong relationship with them.  It was in effect an
         exceptional  situation.   The  appeal  was  thus   conceded.    The
         Respondent accepted that the decision and  reasons  should  be  set
         aside and  remade,  allowing  the  original  appeal.   Mr  Krushner
         confirmed that his client was content.

    6.     In the light of the concession, the tribunal  accordingly  finds
         that there was the  material  error  of  law  identified  by  Upper
         Tribunal  Judge  Hanson.   The  onwards  appeal  is  allowed.   The
         original decision and reasons is set aside and is remade,  allowing
         the original appeal.

    DECISION

    The appeal is allowed

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of  a  material
    error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.

    The original appeal is allowed




    Signed Dated: 6 February 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




