
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/07781/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 December 2019                      |On 23 December 2019             |
|                                         |                                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                TEDROY JONES
                       [ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms G Patel, instructed by AJA Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Foudy promulgated 1.8.19, dismissing his appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated  15.4.19  to  refuse  his
    application made on 14.3.18 for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis
    of private and family life pursuant to article 8 ECHR.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    21.10.19.

Error of Law

 3. For the reasons summarised below, I found no material error of  law  in
    the making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  the
    decision must stand as made.



The Relevant Background

 4. The relevant background can be summarised  as  follows.  The  appellant
    came to the UK as a visitor in October 2001. He obtained further  leave
    to remain as a student and entered into a relationship with  a  British
    citizen. Their  British  citizen  son  was  born  on  1.12.08  and  the
    appellant  married  the  mother  in  October   2009.   He   was   given
    discretionary leave, subsequently extended to 8.4.18.  The  application
    to which this appeal relates was made within extant leave  on  14.3.18.
    In all, the appellant had been in the UK some 18 years by the  date  of
    the appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. However, the appellant and his wife  separated  in  2016;  their  child
    remaining with his mother. The First-tier Tribunal found that there was
    no realistic prospect of a reconciliation between the appellant and his
    wife, and that he had had no contact with his son since  late  November
    2017. His wife has prevented him from contacting the son. However,  the
    appellant is not divorced and has taken no legal proceedings either  to
    terminate the marriage or to obtain contact with or access to his  son,
    having adopted a 'wait and see'  approach.  He  lives  in  hope  of  an
    eventual reconciliation with both wife and son.

 6. Judge Foudy found that the appellant did not meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules for leave to remain in relation to either private
    or family life and that the claim outside the Rules pursuant to article
    8 ECHR also failed. In the circumstances, the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds

 7. In summary, the grounds assert  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  the
    requisite Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009 'best interests' assessment in relation to the appellant's  child.
    It is also argued that the judge gave insufficient weight  to  (a)  the
    appellant's Rastafarian  faith  which  lay  behind  his  reluctance  to
    aggravate his wife by pursuing legal proceedings for contact  with  his
    son; (b) the ties he had established with his son up to the age  of  9;
    the prospect of resumption of contact with his son at some time in  the
    future  when  he  attains  greater  personal  autonomy;  and  (c)   the
    appellant's good immigration history.

 8. In granting permission,  after  reciting  the  grounds,  Judge  Simpson
    stated little more than that the grounds were arguable and disclosed an
    overall inadequacy of reasoning.

Assessment of the Grounds & Submissions

 9. For obvious reasons, the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM in relation to family life with either a partner or  child.
    In relation to private life under paragraph  276ADE,  the  judge  found
    that there were no very significant obstacles  to  his  integration  in
    Jamaica, the country of his birth, nationality, and ethnic  background,
    where he will be able practice his Rastafarian faith, and  where  there
    will be no language difficulties. Further,  there  is  no  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a qualifying child  for  the  purposes  of
    either paragraph 276ADE  or  s117B(1)(vi).  The  judge  also  found  no
    exceptional circumstances justifying leave  to  remain  under  the  GEN
    section of Appendix FM.

10. Given the above facts, including the absence  of  contact  between  the
    appellant and his son for over two years, the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that there is no  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with
    either a partner or his child sufficient to found a claim either within
    or without the Rules on family life article 8 ECHR grounds.  Article  8
    is not engaged in relation to family life.

11. The best interests of the  child  under  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 are, obviously, to remain  in  the
    UK with his mother. In an ideal world, they would also be to  have  the
    regular input of both  parents  in  his  upbringing.  However,  in  the
    absence of any  such  input  for  over  two  years,  the  child's  best
    interests do not require the appellant to remain in  the  UK  to  await
    some date in the remote future when the  child  might,  or  might  not,
    choose for himself to instigate contact with his father. As stated, the
    appellant has chosen to take no legal action to seek the assistance  of
    the courts for contact with  his  son.  Neither  does  he  provide  any
    financial support for his wife or child.

12. In summary, the fact of  the  matter  is  that  the  appellant  has  no
    physical or emotional input at all in the life of his son. At  [11]  of
    the decision, Judge Foudy was entitled to  find  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with the child is  so  "tenuous  and  sporadic"  that  the
    child's daily life will  be  "completely  unaffected  by  his  father's
    departure from the UK, as will his financial and emotional security  as
    the appellant contributes to neither of those." In her  submissions  to
    me, Ms Patel suggested that the  judge  had  made  no  mention  of  the
    'Parental Responsibility  Agreement'  signed  in  2011.  However,  even
    though he had a formal agreement as to his parental responsibility,  he
    failed to take any action to enforce it. There  was  no  error  in  not
    mentioning this document as it does not assist the  appellant  and,  if
    anything, it weakens his case by showing he failed to exercise a  right
    to involvement in the parenting of the child. Similarly, the GP  letter
    at [E86] of the respondent's bundle, stating that the doctor has  "seen
    evidence' that the appellant has joint custody with  the  mother  takes
    the appellant's case no further in the light  of  the  absence  of  any
    contact with the child for over two years. Ms Patel also relied on  the
    school report at [D82] of the respondent's bundle, but there is nothing
    in this document that indicates that it was sent to the  appellant,  as
    there is no reference to him in the document. Even if it  was  sent  to
    him, the document fails to demonstrate that  the  father  has  had  any
    active involvement in the child's education or schooling.

13. Whilst the appellant may well have had past or previous involvement  in
    his child's life, the fact of the matter is that he no longer does  so,
    apparently through choice.  The  fact  that  he  claims  that  this  is
    consistent with his Rastafarian faith does not in any way strength  his
    claim to family life.

14. I can find no error in the judge's conclusion that there  are  no  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration  in  Jamaica.  The
    findings were entirely open to the judge on the evidence  and  adequate
    reasoning has been provided. He may  experience  some  difficulties  or
    challenges after so long an  absence,  but  given  his  background  and
    faith, as well as the other  matters  referenced  in  the  decision  or
    mentioned above, there is every reason to conclude that he will be able
    to re-integrate himself into society in  Jamaica  without  there  being
    very significant obstacles.

15. In relation to private life outside the Rules under article 8 ECHR, the
    judge took  into  account  the  appellant's  long  residence.  However,
    pursuant to s117B of the 2002 Act, immigration control is in the public
    interest and little weight was  to  be  given  in  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise to his private life developed in the  UK  whilst  he
    has been here with  precarious  immigration  status.  Contrary  to  the
    assertions in the grounds, when applying s117B no credit accrues to the
    appellant in the proportionality balancing exercise for the  fact  that
    he speaks English or that he is financially independent. Neither is  he
    entitled to any credit for his good immigration history; doing no  more
    than is expected of a law-abiding resident of the UK does not  diminish
    the weight of the public interest in his removal. The argument that the
    judge failed to conduct an article 8 ECHR balancing exercise is plainly
    of no assistance on the facts of this case where there  was  no  family
    life sufficient to engage article 8 ECHR.

16. Although she was not required  to  do  so,  the  judge  considered  the
    reasonableness test under s117B(6) in relation to the appellant,  which
    is the same test that would apply under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  to  a
    child. She accepted that it would not be reasonable to expect the child
    to leave the UK but as there is no genuine and subsisting  relationship
    between the appellant and the child, these considerations cannot assist
    him.

17. Outside the Rules, the  judge  found  that  there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances to justify, exceptionally, granting leave  to  remain  on
    the basis that otherwise the decision would be unduly or  unjustifiably
    harsh.  It  is  difficult  to  see  what  compelling   or   exceptional
    circumstances there could be in this case. The  grounds  claiming  that
    the judge has applied the wrong test are entirely misguided.

18. Finally, the grounds raise a complaint  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to consider that the appellant's application for settlement fell
    under the  respondent's  discretionary  leave  policy,  so  that  after
    completing 6  years'  discretionary  leave  he  would  be  entitled  to
    Indefinite Leave to Remain. However, it appears that no  such  argument
    was presented to the First-tier Tribunal and does  not  appear  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. Although she raised  this
    matter, Ms Patel did not provide the policy  on  which  she  based  her
    argument. There can be no error of law in the judge failing to  address
    an issue that was never raised.

19. In  reality,  considering  the  case  and  evidence  as  a  whole,  the
    appellant's appeal was doomed to failure from the outset; there was and
    remains no basis  to  support  a  finding  that  the  decision  of  the
    respondent was anything  other  than  proportionate  to  his  right  to
    respect for private and family life under article 8 ECHR. I can find no
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.





Decision

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.

                    I make no order for costs.







     Signed

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 17 December 2019


