
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/07266/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |On 28 October 2020                   |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 23 October 2020                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                              MUHARREM MATRAXHI
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  promulgated  on  31   December   2019,
    dismissing his appeal under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 against a decision of the respondent made  on  29  March  2019  to
    refuse him entry clearance as the spouse of a person present and settle
    here and his human rights claim.

 2. The appellant sought entry to  the  United  Kingdom  the  spouse  of  a
    British Citizen. He had previously been resident here, claiming  asylum
    as a minor on the basis that he was from  Kosovo.  He  is,  however,  a
    citizen of Albania. He was  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  on  20
    December 2012, but re-entered unlawfully and  was  encountered  some  4
    years later in 2018. He left voluntarily.

 3. The respondent  refused  his  application  for  entry  clearance  under
    paragraphs 320 (3) and 320 (11) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. On appeal, the judge found that  the  decision  was  proportionate  and
    (apparently)that there was no reason why the appellant's partner  could
    not live with him in Albania.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred misdirecting herself in law as to paragraph 320 (11)  and  in
    failing to asked whether it would be  reasonable  for  the  appellant's
    wife to live with him in Albania.

 6. On 4 April 2020, First-tier Tribunal Judge L Murray granted  permission
    on all grounds.

 7. On 30 July 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge  Norton-  gave  directions  which
    provided amongst other matters:

          1. I have reviewed the file in this case.  In the  light  of  the
             present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-
             19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the  Procedure
             Rules[1], I have reached the provisional view,  that it  would
             in  this  case  be  appropriate  to  determine  the  following
             questions without a hearing:

               a) whether the making of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
                  involved the making of an error of law, and, if so

               b) whether that decision should be set aside.

          2. I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:

               i) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of
                  the assertion of an error of  law,  and  on  the  question
                  whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision should  be  set
                  aside if error of law is found, to be filed and served  on
                  all other parties no later than 14 days after this  notice
                  is sent out (the date of sending is on the covering letter
                  or covering email);

              ii)  Any  other  party  may  file  and  serve  submissions  in
                  response, no later than 21 days after this notice is  sent
                  out;

             iii) If submissions are made in accordance with paragraph  (ii)
                  above the party who sought permission to appeal  may  file
                  and serve a reply no later than 28 days after this  notice
                  is sent out.

              iv) All submissions that rely on any document  not  previously
                  provided to all other parties in electronic form  must  be
                  accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.

          3. Any party who considers that despite the foregoing  directions
             a hearing is necessary to consider the questions  set  out  in
             paragraph 1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons  for
             that view no later than 21 days after this notice is sent  out
             and they will be taken into  account  by  the  Tribunal.   The
             directions in paragraph 2 above must be complied with in every
             case.

 8. Both parties made submissions in response to directions, the respondent
    on 9 September 2020 stating that she does not  oppose  the  application
    for permission.

 9. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  Bearing in mind the overriding  objective
    in Rule 2 to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly,
    and bearing in mind the concession by the respondent,  I  am  satisfied
    that in the particular circumstances of this  case  that  it  would  be
    correct to make a decision being made in the absence of a hearing.

10. I am satisfied that the judge did err in reaching his  decision  as  is
    claimed in the grounds of appeal and as is accepted by the  respondent.
    The judge manifestly failed to  explain  why  paragraph  320  (11)  was
    engaged, nor does  the  identify  what  were  the  aggravating  factors
    necessary for it to apply; still less did she engage  with whether  its
    application would have a proportionate result or take into account  the
    appellant's voluntary return to Albania.   Further, the judge failed to
    ask whether it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's wife to go
    to live in Albania.

11. For these reasons, the decision clearly involved the making of an error
    of law as claimed as these errors went to the core of the case.

12. I am persuaded that, as the evidence will in effect need  to  be  heard
    again, as the core issues  needs to be determined again that  it  would
    in all the circumstances be appropriate to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing  on  all  issues.  For  the
    avoidance of doubt, none of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal are
    preserved.



Notice of Decision & Directions

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
         on all issues to be heard by a judge  other  than  Judge  Grommett.
         None of the findings made previously are preserved.




       Signed                                Date 23 October 2020


       Jeremy K H Rintoul
       Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

