
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/07669/2017
                                                               HU/07671/2017
                                                               HU/07672/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th September 2018                 |On 22nd October 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                              (1) TEMITAYO [S]
                                   (2) W O
                                   (3) F S
                   (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE IN RESPECT OF
                      SECOND AND THIRD APPELLANT ONLY)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Hashmi of Counsel, instructed by Equity Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants, citizens of Nigeria, have permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Maxwell of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  dismissing
    their appeals against the decision of the respondent made  on  23  June
    2017 to remove the first appellant as an illegal entrant along with the
    other two as her dependants.  The second and third appellants are  aged
    9 and 6 respectively.  The second appellant  was  born  in  June  2009.
    They have different fathers and neither of them has  any  contact  with
    their father.  The first appellant had claimed asylum  in  August  2013
    and her subsequent appeal was dismissed by the FtT on 4 December  2013.
    She was unsuccessful in seeking permission to appeal that decision.

2.   The appellants' grounds maintain that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law in (1) failing to apply the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in
    SF and Others [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC) and Treebhawon [2015] UKUT  00674
    (IAC) by  wrongly  regarding  it  as  supplanted  by  statutory  public
    interest considerations; (2) wrongly applying Devaseelan principles  by
    concluding that the position of the first and third  [the  judge  meant
    second] appellants had  not  changed  in  any  material  respect  since
    December 2013.

3.   The focus of ground (1) is what the judge stated at paragraph 36:

         "36. As the public interest provisions  are  contained  in  primary
             legislation they override existing case law.  Section  117A(3)
             confirms  that  the  Tribunal  is  required  to  carry  out  a
             balancing exercise.  It follows the Tribunal cannot just  rely
             on the listed public interest factors as a basis for rejecting
             a claim but must  carry  out  a  balancing  exercise  where  a
             person's circumstances engage Article 8(1) to  decide  whether
             the  proposed  interference  is  proportionate  in   all   the
             circumstances."

4.   I heard helpful submissions from Miss Hashmi and  Mr  Tan,  the  former
    highlighting the recent reported decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  MT
    and ET [2018] UKUT 00088.

5.   I consider that the judge materially erred in law.

6.   As regards ground (1), I am not persuaded that the judge meant  by  his
    first sentence of paragraph 36 to suggest that somehow Section 117B  of
    the NIAA 2002 and case law were in competition; the  judge  meant  only
    that the provisions of the  former  had  to  be  applied.   The  public
    interest considerations set out in Section 117B are not  an  exhaustive
    list and as the judge correctly stated, he was required to carry out  a
    balancing exercise.  That said, ground (1) does properly highlight  the
    fact that despite citing case law, including MA  (Pakistan)[2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705 and despite noting correctly that he was "bound  to  take  into
    account that the second appellant had resided in the UK for seven years
    (and was thus a qualifying  child)",  the  judge  nowhere  acknowledged
    that, following MA (Pakistan) his task was to ask  whether  there  were
    "powerful reasons" why the second appellant should  be  prevented  from
    remaining in the UK.  Mr Tan sought to argue that the  judge's  reasons
    for concluding at paragraph 26 that it was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    second appellant to leave the UK did  in  effect  voice  such  powerful
    reasons, but the judge's approach appears rather to have been  that  it
    was for the appellants to show powerful  reasons  why  they  should  be
    allowed to stay.

7.   In assessing ground (2), it can be said that the  judge  did  recognise
    that the fact that the second appellant had now been in the UK for over
    seven years did constitute a material change of circumstances.  That is
    clearest from paragraph 23 where the judge stated:

         "23. As I have already indicated, I am mindful of the fact that the
             passage of time means that the second appellant has now  lived
             in the United Kingdom for more than 7  years.   This  means  I
             must consider whether she meets the requirements of  paragraph
             276ADE(v) and/or whether her  circumstances  are  such  as  to
             engage section 117B(6)  as  well  as  taking  account  of  the
             respondent's policy in relation to the removal of  non-British
             children.  None of these issues were considered in the earlier
             decision as the second appellant was under the  age  of  seven
             years at that  time.   I  note  the  respondent  has  made  no
             reference to her  policy  in  the  refusal  however  it  is  a
             consideration I am bound to take into account."

    However, this recognition co-existed with an unqualified  statement  at
    paragraph 17 that "there  are  no  factors  before  me  that  were  not
    considered by the judge at the first appellant's most recent appeal".

8.   Taken on its own, I do not consider ground  (2)  describes  a  material
    error of law since paragraph 17 read in context was primarily  intended
    to address the asylum-related aspects of  that  appeal.   Nevertheless,
    this ground does reinforce the point that  the  judge  did  not  really
    grasp how material the change in the second  appellant's  circumstances
    had been as a result of residing in the UK for seven years  and  coming
    under a different set of criteria as set out in Home Office policy  and
    case law.

9.   For the above reasons I consider that the judge's decision must be  set
    aside for material error of law.

10.  Both parties expressed the view that if I set  aside  the  decision  of
    the FtT Judge I was in a  position  to  re-make  the  decision  without
    further ado.  I agree.  In re-making the decision I have regard to  the
    appellants' indexed bundles that include a number of documents relating
    to the second and third appellants' education and achievements.

11.  Whilst I have set aside the decision of the FtT Judge  there  has  been
    no challenge to his principal findings of fact.  Those findings include
    the following:  that the first appellant has an  appalling  immigration
    history (paragraphs 12 - 13, 28); that the first appellant has a sickle
    cell trait but this is a genetic condition, not a disease and  she  had
    not produced evidence to show she suffered from  any  significant  ill-
    effects (paragraph 14); that none of  the  appellants  has  significant
    health problems (on the second appellant, see  paragraph  26(i));  that
    the appellants would have family support in Nigeria (paragraph 21)  and
    would not be destitute (paragraph 18(ii)); that both children would  be
    able to continue their education in Nigeria  (paragraph  18(ii));  that
    language would not be a significant obstacle to the children because in
    Nigeria English is the official language (paragraphs  21  and  26(iv));
    that overall there would be no insurmountable obstacles or difficulties
    to their integration; that there is a lack of family  relationships  in
    the UK (paragraph 26(iii)); and that the third appellant is  relatively
    young and removal to Nigeria would not have a significant  effect.   As
    regards the second appellant, the judge's findings  (on  which  I  have
    already drawn) were that:

         "26. When considering this policy, I note the following:


             i.   Although  a  number  of  assertions  have  been  made  in
                  relation to the state of health of the  second  appellant,
                  there  is  no  evidence  before  me  to  suggest  she   is
                  undergoing any course of treatment or suffering  from  any
                  life-threatening or serious illness.  There is no evidence
                  before me to suggest  that  the  healthcare  available  in
                  Nigeria would, in relation to the second appellant, be  of
                  such poor quality as to threaten her well-being.


             ii.  The second appellant  would  have  to  leave  the  United
                  Kingdom if her appeal is not allowed however she will  not
                  do so alone but rather in the company of  her  mother  and
                  her younger sibling; neither of whom  have  any  right  to
                  which he clearly was not entitled  to  it  in  the  United
                  Kingdom.


             iii. There is already a finding of fact  as  to  the  lack  of
                  family relationships in the United Kingdom and there is no
                  evidence before me  to  suggest  that  circumstances  have
                  changed since the previous decision of this Tribunal.


             iv.  I am satisfied that the second appellant, along with  the
                  first and third appellants are  citizens  of  Nigeria  and
                  whilst I accept that neither she nor her  younger  sibling
                  have ever visited that country, I am mindful that  she  is
                  very young and of  an  age  when  integration  is  at  its
                  greatest ease.  Further, English is a language in  Nigeria
                  the second appellant  may  well  need  to  learn  a  local
                  language  but  she  has  sufficient  command  of  existing
                  language in Nigeria to enable her to communicate with  her
                  peers and to understand lessons  in  an  English  speaking
                  school."

12.  I remind myself that when  conducting  the  proportionality  assessment
    very significant weight must be given  to  the  fact  that  the  second
    appellant has been in the UK all her life, having been now resident for
    nine years.  She cannot reasonably be expected to be removed  from  the
    UK unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary.  I remind myself,
    as well, that in MT and ET the Upper Tribunal allowed  the  appeals  of
    appellants, also Nigerian, where the qualifying  child  (aged  14)  had
    been in the UK for over ten years and  had  embarked  on  a  course  of
    studies leading to the taking of GCSEs.

13.  In the present case I consider  there  are  powerful  reasons  why  the
    second appellant can reasonably be expected to  leave  the  UK  in  the
    company of the first and third appellants.  Whilst the second appellant
    has put down roots in the UK, she is still under 10.  Both children are
    making excellent progress at their school (and have some involvement in
    their local church), but the evidence does not indicate that either has
    established significant links in the UK outside their own family.

14.  The appellants have no other family  relationships  in  the  UK.   They
    will be able to receive education in Nigeria in English and they are of
    an adaptable age.  In Nigeria they will have family support.  There  is
    no evidence to indicate that despite the fact that  neither  child  has
    lived  in  Nigeria,  they  would  face  significant   difficulties   in
    integrating (the first appellant has lived there for most of her life).
     None of the appellants has a significant health  problem.   The  first
    appellant is educated.  So far as concerns the best  interests  of  the
    two child appellants, the balance of considerations. indicate that they
    lie in remaining with the first appellant, but not necessarily  in  the
    UK.

15.   In  assessing  the  factors  to  be  weighed  in  the  proportionality
    assessment and in evaluating whether they amount  to  powerful  reasons
    why the second appellant should not be expected to leave the UK, I must
    adopt the approach that public interest factors stand to be taken  into
    account  both  in  assessing  whether  the  appellants  can  meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules including on the basis of private
    life  considerations  (paragraph  276ADE(v))  or  by   satisfying   the
    requirements of Section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  In this context it is necessary to  examine  in  more
    detail what  comprised  the  first  appellant's  appalling  immigration
    history.  This was dissected by the FtT Judge at paragraph 12:

         "12. The first appellant  has  an  appalling  immigration  history.
             During the course of her asylum  appeal  (AA/09830/2013),  she
             was found to have lied both to that Tribunal and the  Tribunal
             that had heard her earlier appeal against  the  refusal  of  a
             Residence Card.  The judge described the  first  appellant  as
             mendacious.  I cannot ignore these findings."

    It was also noted in  paragraph  6(i)  that  the  first  appellant  had
    arrived in the UK using a false passport.

16.  On its own it is arguable that this immigration history  constitutes  a
    powerful reason for requiring the second appellant to leave the UK; and
    of  course,  I  must  also  take  into  account  that  the  immigration
    wrongdoings of a parent should not be visited upon the children in  any
    direct way.  However, when I weigh up the factors pointing in favour of
    the public interest in this case, I consider they do  amount  in  their
    totality to "powerful reasons".  I am conscious that in MT and  ET  the
    Tribunal did not consider as a powerful reason the  parent's  abuse  of
    immigration law and receipt in the past of a community order for  using
    a false document to obtain employment.  I  do not in any event consider
    it helpful to try and compare two different sets of facts  or  seek  to
    link them along a spectrum of immigration misconduct.  What  I  do  see
    fit to do, however, is assess that the first appellant in this case has
    sought to obtain immigration advantage over a lengthy period  -  having
    used a false passport  on  entry  and  unsuccessfully  claimed  asylum;
    having applied for an EEA residence card in 2008 without any foundation
    in fact; having failed to depart despite  the  issuing  of  enforcement
    notices; having been considered by two different FtT  Tribunals  to  be
    mendacious and (by FtT Judge Maxwell) to be  someone  who  has  "simply
    attempted to play the system making  futile  application  after  futile
    application and being content to lie both to the  respondent  and  this
    Tribunal in her attempts to gain leave to remain"  (paragraph  20).   I
    repeat the observation I made earlier that the appellants' grounds make
    no challenge to this or any other of Judge Maxwell's findings of fact.

17.  For the above reasons I conclude that the appellants  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  in  particular  the  second
    appellant does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1).
    Neither do they satisfy  the  reasonableness  requirement  set  out  in
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.   Having  weighed  all  the  competing
    considerations and even taking as my starting  point  that  the  second
    appellant (and in consequence the first and  third  appellants)  should
    not be expected to leave the UK unless there exist powerful reasons  to
    the contrary, I conclude that the decisions of the  respondent  do  not
    amount to a disproportionate interference with their right  to  respect
    for family or private life.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.

The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellants' appeals.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  second  and
third appellants are granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify them.  This direction applies both  to
the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 16 October 2018

               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

