
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07500/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 July 2020                    |On 6 August 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                DEVENDRA RAI

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                       For the ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Mr M Moriarty of Counsel instructed by Everest Law
                    Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



           Background

        1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
           appeal to the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge  on
           8 April 2020 against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Wylie, promulgated on 13 December 2019 following a hearing
           at Hatton Cross on 5 December 2019.

        2. The appellant is a Nepalese national born on 13  November  1976.
           On 12 December 2018, he  sought  entry  clearance  as  an  adult
           dependent child to join his father, a former Gurkha, present and
           settled in the UK. His application was refused by the ECO on  25
           February 2019 and the decision was upheld following a review  by
           the Entry Clearance Manager on 10 September 2019. The  appellant
           lives with two of his brothers in  the  family  home.  An  older
           brother is married and lives apart. The  sponsor  and  his  wife
           came to the UK in July 2016 in order to obtain medical treatment
           for the latter's heart condition and with the belief  that  they
           would be able to sponsor their adult children at a  later  date.
           They visited Nepal in  July  2018.  Although  the  sponsor  then
           returned here four weeks later, his wife stayed behind  but  her
           health deteriorated and she passed away in  February  2019.  The
           sponsor managed to reach Nepal a few days earlier and stayed for
           about a month. Since his initial arrival in the UK, he has  been
           sending funds to the appellant.

        3. The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor. It was  conceded
           by Counsel at the hearing that  the  appellant  could  not  come
           within the policy as he was well over 30  when  the  application
           was made (at 26) and the appeal was pursued on article 8 grounds
           only.  The judge found that there was no family life such as  to
           engage article 8 (at 43). Accordingly, she dismissed the appeal.

        4. The grounds of appeal put forward by the  appellant  argue  that
           the judge took irrelevant considerations into account  and  that
           she failed to properly  apply  the  correct  test.  Reliance  is
           placed on Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320, and Uddin [2020] EWCA 338 for
           the correct approach to be applied.  Permission was  granted  on
           both grounds.

           Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

        5. The matter was due to be listed for a hearing at Field House but
           due to the Covid-19 pandemic and the need  to  take  precautions
           against its spread, the hearing  was  adjourned  and  directions
           were sent to the parties on 15 May  2020.  They  were  asked  to
           present any objections to the matter being  dealt  with  on  the
           papers and to make any further submissions on the error  of  law
           issue within certain time limits.

        6. The Tribunal has received written submissions from both parties.
           I now consider the matter.

        7. In doing so I have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
           Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment  of  Osborn  v
           The Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note
           No 1 2020: Arrangements during the Covid-19 pandemic  (PGN)  and
           the Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction  (PPD).  I  have
           regard to the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of
           the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being  "to
           enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly".
           To this end I have considered that dealing with  a  case  fairly
           and  justly  includes:  dealing  with  it  in  ways   that   are
           proportionate to the importance of the case, the  complexity  of
           the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking
           flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable,
           that  the  parties  are  able  to  participate  fully   in   the
           proceedings; using any special expertise of the  Upper  Tribunal
           effectively; and avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with
           proper consideration of the  issues  (Rule  2(2)  UT  rules  and
           PGN:5).

        8. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and to all the
           evidence  before  me  before  deciding  how  to   proceed.   The
           respondent raises no objection to the matter being considered on
           the papers but the appellant seeks a remote hearing  to  present
           his arguments.

        9. A full account of the facts are set out in those papers and that
           the issue to be decided is straightforward; more so,  given  the
           respondent's position (which I shall address below).  There  are
           no  matters  arising  from  the  papers  which   would   require
           clarification and so an oral hearing would  not  be  needed  for
           that purpose. The objections put forward by the appellant are on
           general grounds only and there is nothing specific  put  forward
           to suggest that he would be disadvantaged by the lack of an oral
           hearing  particularly  as  he  is  overseas  and  his  sponsor's
           evidence was unchallenged. I have regard to  the  importance  of
           the  matter  to  the  appellant  and  consider  that  a   speedy
           determination  of  this  matter  is  in  his   best   interests,
           particularly  as  the  sponsor  is  unwell  and   requires   the
           appellant's help as soon as possible. I am satisfied that  I  am
           able to fairly and justly deal with this matter  on  the  papers
           before me and I now proceed to do so.

           Submissions

       10.  The  appellant's  submissions  are  dated  26  May  2020.   The
           respondent's are dated 8 June 2020. To date nothing  appears  to
           have been received in reply from the appellant.

       11. The appellant relies on the  grounds  for  permission  in  their
           entirety. It is pointed out that there was no challenge from the
           respondent as to the veracity of the sponsor's written and  oral
           evidence  and  no  suggestion  in  the  determination  that  the
           evidence relied on in support of the appeal was  anything  other
           than  entirely  credible.  It  is  submitted  that  the  judge's
           conclusions in relation to whether  the  undisputed  facts  were
           sufficient to engage with the correct test of  "real,  effective
           or committed support" (as per Rai) under article 8 were at  best
           unclear and/or inconsistent. It is submitted that the  issue  of
           whether or not the sponsor has bonds with  his  other  children,
           who have not  sought  entry  clearance,  is  irrelevant  as  the
           ultimate question for the purposes of  this  appeal  is  whether
           there  is  support  between  the  sponsor  and   the   appellant
           sufficient to engage with article 8. It is submitted that  there
           does not need to be anything different, unusual  or  exceptional
           about the appellant's relationship with his father  compared  to
           relationship his siblings have and that it is entirely  possible
           for the sponsor to have family life with more than  one  of  his
           adult children.

       12. It is submitted that the only basis  on  which  the  appeal  was
           dismissed was the finding that article 8  was  not  engaged  and
           that  in  reaching  this  finding  the  judge  had  treated  the
           sponsor's bonds with his  other  children  as  material  to  the
           assessment  and  had  erroneously   taken   those   bonds   into
           consideration when applying the test.

       13. It is submitted that the fact that the appellant and two of  his
           brothers continue to reside in the family  home  and  that  they
           cared for their mother in Nepal during the last eight months  of
           her  life  was  relevant  to  the  extent  that  it  served   to
           demonstrate they were not living independent lives and that  the
           family  unit  continued  to  subsist  following  their  parents'
           settlement in the UK.

       14. It is submitted that the  sponsor's  unchallenged  evidence  was
           that he had to borrow money to apply for his own settlement  and
           that he is  of  limited  means.  Given  his  circumstances,  the
           respondent quite properly did not take issue with the fact  that
           he had not sponsored entry clearance applications for his  other
           sons to join him in the  UK.  Notably,  he  was  not  given  any
           opportunity to address  the  judge's  apparent  concerns  as  to
           whether he had any future intention  to  do  so,  this  being  a
           matter  which  only  came  to  light   upon   receipt   of   the
           determination.

       15. It is submitted that the factual findings that the appellant was
           unmarried, accommodated by  and  financially  dependent  on  his
           father who was in poor health, and with  whom  he  maintained  a
           close relationship, were more  than  capable  of  engaging  with
           article 8 with reference to Rai if the test of support had  been
           properly applied. It is  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to
           provide any reasons for concluding to the contrary and that  the
           determination suggests (at paragraph 40) that a heightened  test
           of particular emotional dependency was  erroneously  applied  in
           dismissing the appeal. It is submitted that the  judge's  errors
           were plainly material to the outcome because they were the  only
           reasons given for the dismissal of the appeal. The  Tribunal  is
           urged to set aside the determination.

       16. In his submissions for the respondent, Mr Tan concedes that  the
           judge materially erred in considering whether article  8  family
           life was engaged for the reasons put forward in the grounds  for
           permission to appeal and the submissions of 27 May 2020.  It  is
           accepted that having found that the appellant had lived with the
           sponsor until his departure from Nepal,  that  he  continued  to
           live in the sponsor's family home thereafter, that  the  sponsor
           had visited and stayed with him on  two  occasions  since  2016,
           that the appellant was financially dependent on the sponsor  and
           that they remained in regular and close contact, the judge erred
           in taking into account the relationship between the sponsor  and
           his other sons  when  considering  a  family  life  was  engaged
           between  himself  and  the  appellant.  The  respondent  further
           accepts that inadequate reasons were given for the finding  that
           article 8 was not engaged in light of  the  above  findings  and
           that the conclusion of the  judge  appeared  at  odds  with  the
           guidance  set  out  in  Rai  (op  cit),   Ghising   and   others
           (Ghurkhas/BOC: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC) and
           Uddin (op cit).

       17. The Tribunal is invited to set aside the decision of  the  judge
           and re-make it without the need for a further hearing given  the
           sole issue was whether article 8 was engaged and that the  judge
           stated that he would have allowed the appeal if family life  had
           been found to exist.

           Error of Law

       18. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds  for  permission
           and the  submissions made by both parties. I am grateful to  the
           parties for their helpful submissions and to Mr Tan  for  fairly
           conceding the errors  in  the  judge's  determination  which,  I
           agree, makes the decision unsustainable.

       19. The judge, for reasons which are entirely unclear in  her  short
           determination, appears to consider  that  any  family  life  the
           sponsor has with  his  two  other  non  appellant  sons  somehow
           detracts from the family life he  has  with  the  appellant.  In
           doing so, she considered an irrelevant matter and  strayed  away
           from the correct test which was whether there  was  family  life
           between the sponsor and the appellant.  As  pointed  out  by  Mr
           Moriarty, the sponsor is not barred from having family life with
           others and that certainly does not make the family life with the
           appellant any less effective. This having been a matter of  such
           concern that  it  was  used  to  dismiss  the  appeal,  fairness
           dictates that the judge should have put it to the sponsor at the
           hearing.  It  is  certainly  not  an  obvious   point   and   so
           unsurprising  that  the  appellant's  representatives  has   not
           thought to cover it.

       20. On this basis  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.

           Re-making the decision

       21. This is an appeal where the facts and  evidence  are  undisputed
           and all that remains is for the  law  to  be  applied  to  them.
           Having regard to the respondent's position as  set  out  in  her
           submissions of 8 June 2020 and assuming that the appellant would
           have no objections to the matter being disposed of in his favour
           I proceed to re-make the decision and allow the appeal. In doing
           so I have had regard to the burden on the appellant to make  out
           his case on the balance of probabilities and to all the evidence
           and submissions before me.  My reasons are as follow.

       22. There is no challenge to the sponsor's oral and written evidence
           and no challenge to the  evidence  from  the  appellant.  It  is
           accepted that the appellant lived with  his  parents  until  the
           sponsor and his wife came to the UK in 2016, largely due to  the
           appellant's  mother's  ill  health  and  believing  that   their
           children  could  join  them  at  a  later  date.  The  appellant
           continued, as before, to live in the family home in  Nepal  with
           two of his brothers and continued to  rely  on  his  father  for
           support as he had done prior to  the  sponsor's  departure  from
           Nepal. It is accepted that the appellant is single and does  not
           work.  The sponsor is of limited means and it is  accepted  that
           he could not afford to travel more frequently to Nepal  but  the
           evidence is still that he made visits in 2018 and 2019 and  that
           his wife who travelled with him in 2018 remained there and  died
           the following year. It is accepted that the appellant cared  for
           his mother in the last months of his life assisted  by  his  two
           brothers. It is accepted that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor
           speak almost daily and have maintained a close bond. I  make  no
           findings on when the sponsor also shares the same closeness with
           his two other sons as that is not relevant for the  purposes  of
           this appeal.

       23. I am satisfied on the unchallenged evidence that  the  appellant
           has shown that he has family life capable  of  engaging  article
           8(1). The support between the appellant and his father is  real,
           effective and committed and the correct test is met.

       24. The respondent does not rely on any  poor  immigration  history,
           deception or criminality to  argue  that  interference  in  that
           family life would be proportionate. In  the  circumstances,  the
           historic injustice to Gurkhas  and  their  families  requires  a
           decision in the appellant's favour.




           Decision

       25. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  as  it
           contains errors of law. I have re-made the  decision  and  allow
           the appeal.




           Anonymity

       26. There has been no request for an anonymity order  at  any  stage
           and I see no reason to make one.






      Signed




        R. Keki?

      Upper Tribunal Judge




      Date: 29 July 2020






