
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07600/2018
                                                HU/09741/2018, HU/07591/2018
                                                HU/07592/2018, HU/07598/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2019                  |On 2 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                           A.M. (FIRST APPELLANT)
                           L.M. (SECOND APPELLANT)
                           H.K. (THIRD APPELLANT)
                           A.K. (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                           S.K. (FIFTH APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Symes of Counsel instructed by Ali Levene
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The personal details of the Appellants in these linked  appeals  are  a
    matter of record on file and are not repeated here -  in  keeping  with
    the anonymity direction that has been made  in  these  proceedings  and
    which I continue.  Suffice to say that  the  Appellants  are  a  family
    comprising two parents and three minor children.   The  minor  children
    are presently aged 11, 8 and almost 3 years old.   The  eldest  of  the
    three children entered the United Kingdom in the company of her  mother
    in 2010.  The other two children were born in the United Kingdom.

2.   The Appellants appeal against  the  decisions  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colvin promulgated on 8 January 2019 dismissing on  human  rights
    grounds  each  of  their  linked  appeals  against  decisions  of   the
    Respondent dated 9 March 2018 to refuse leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom.

3.    The  immigration  histories  of  the  Appellants  are  summarised   at
    paragraph 2 of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Save  with  one
    caveat Mr Symes acknowledged that this paragraph set  out  an  accurate
    and adequately comprehensive recitation of the  immigration  histories.
    It is convenient to repeat it here:

         "The immigration history is that the  first  appellant  [A.M.,  the
         father of the family] was granted  leave  to  enter  the  UK  on  2
         October 2008 as a student until January 2010 and  subsequently  was
         granted leave as a Tier 1 (Post Study  Work)  until  January  2012.
         The second appellant, [L.M., the mother], entered the UK  with  her
         daughter [S.K.] in October 2010 with entry clearance as  dependants
         of the first appellant and had leave until January 2012.  The other
         two children [H.K. and A.K.] were born in the UK.  This application
         was made in April 2011 to extend the first appellant's Tier 1 leave
         and on human rights grounds.  It was refused on 9 May  2017  and  a
         subsequent appeal Decision promulgated on 26 January 2018 dismissed
         the Tier 1 appeal but  allowed  the  human  rights  appeal  to  the
         limited extent that the respondent give proper consideration to the
         welfare of the children.  The second refusal is dated 9 March  2018
         on the grounds that the appellants do not fulfil  the  requirements
         of private and family life under the Immigration Rules and that  it
         is not unreasonable for the children to  return  to  Pakistan  with
         their parents".

4.   The caveat, or perhaps more accurately  the  further  detail,  that  Mr
    Symes brought to my attention at the commencement of hearing before  me
    was in respect of an absence from the UK of the First Appellant shortly
    after his initial grant of leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study
    Work) Migrant.  Variation of leave was granted in this capacity  in  or
    about January 2010, and the First Appellant then left the UK to  return
    to Pakistan: he was absent from the United  Kingdom  for  a  period  of
    eight months between February and October 2010.

5.   Mr Symes very properly brought this circumstance to  the  attention  of
    the Tribunal because it is pertinent to the basis of  challenge  raised
    in the grounds of appeal upon which permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted.  I shall explore  this  in  more  detail  further
    below, but suffice to say for the moment pursuant to paragraph  276A(a)
    of the Rules this broke the continuity  of  lawful  residence  for  the
    purposes of consideration of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

6.   The Appellants' appeals were  brought  against  the  decisions  of  the
    Respondent dated 9 March 2018.  In considering the  appeals  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Colvin  has  prepared  what  seems  to  me  to  be   a
    particularly detailed  and  thorough  consideration  of  the  evidence.
    Indeed there is no suggestion in the challenge raised by the Appellants
    that the Judge overlooked  any  material  evidence,  and  there  is  no
    specific challenge to any of the primary findings  of  fact.   In  this
    regard, it is perhaps pertinent to note in particular the  findings  at
    paragraphs 26-28 with regard to the circumstances of the family.

7.   The Judge concluded  that  both  parents  were  well-educated  and  had
    significant work experience - setting out the details of  such  matters
    at paragraph 26.  The Judge also found that both parents  had  extended
    families in Pakistan with whom they remained in contact (paragraph 27).
     The Judge concluded on the basis of all of these circumstances that he
    did not find that there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    parents reintegrating in Pakistan (paragraph 28).  In this context  the
    Judge stated:

         "They have  significant  qualifications  and  work  experiences  to
         assist them and there is no evidence before me to suggest that they
         would be unable to find substantial employment.  In any event  they
         have a number of family members who were well-established with good
         jobs particularly in Islamabad and no satisfactory reason has  been
         given as to why these family members would  not  support  them,  at
         least initially on return."

8.   The Judge gave consideration to the circumstances  of  the  children  -
    rehearsing the evidence, including an independent social worker  report
    that had been produced  in  support  of  the  appeals  in  considerable
    detail.  The Judge makes observations and findings in  respect  of  the
    social worker report: I note in particular the following:

         "Whilst I accept the  obvious  point  that  the  removal  of  these
         children to Pakistan will require some significant adjustment to  a
         new way of life and education system, some other  assumptions  made
         by [the social worker] seem to lack a clear and specific evidential
         foundation when it comes to the particular  circumstances  of  this
         family.  For example, she considers that the parents  are  unlikely
         to have the resources to support the family on return  to  Pakistan
         but does not specify why she has reached that view particularly  as
         on the evidence before me I find that this is unlikely  to  be  the
         case  when  considering  their  respective   qualifications,   work
         experience and family connections.  Another example are the remarks
         in the report regarding the children's education  opportunities  in
         Pakistan.  She says that they may be disadvantaged  in  respect  of
         their education progression in Pakistan as they do not know how  to
         read and write in Urdu  and  that  the  same  social  and  learning
         opportunities available to them in the  UK  may  not  be  similarly
         available in Pakistan.  The issue of the extent that these children
         speak and understand Urdu appears not to have been explored and nor
         has the likelihood, on the evidence before me, that  their  parents
         would choose a private English Medium school in Islamabad which  is
         likely  to  make  their  transition  to  a  new  education   system
         significantly easier even if they have  to  learn  to  become  more
         proficient in Urdu.  The other issue of [S.K.] having to conform to
         a different lifestyles as a young Muslim girl/woman in Pakistan  is
         an issue of some importance but, again, the  Report  fails  to  put
         this in context.  [S.K.]  will  be  returning  with  well-educated,
         middle-class and relatively  sophisticated  parents  who  are  well
         aware and sensitive to this issue and who no doubt will do all that
         they can to protect  and  support  her  from  the  worst  forms  of
         discrimination that exists against women including taking decisions
         as regards her education and social circumstances in a cosmopolitan
         city such as Islamabad.  In short they will not only be  good  role
         models for her to follow but are likely to have  the  resources  to
         overcome, or at least  lessen,  any  discrimination  that  she  may
         face." (paragraph 41)

9.   Against this background and evaluation the Judge made an assessment  of
    the children's best interests.  The  Judge  concluded  that  "the  best
    interests of all these children is that they remain living  with  their
    parents in a family unit", and in respect of  the  two  older  children
    "their best interests would be to remain in the UK with  their  parents
    as an ideal result" (paragraph 42).

10.  It seems to me that the Judge's conclusion as to 'best  interests'  was
    in substance to accept what must have been the  highest  at  which  the
    Appellants sought to put their 'best interests' case.

11.  Necessarily - 'best interests' being a primary, but  not  a  paramount,
    consideration in the context of immigration - the  Judge's  conclusions
    in  respect  of  'best  interests'  was   not   inevitably   favourably
    determinative of the appeals. It provided a primary foundation for  the
    assessment of the different and wider issue of  'reasonableness'.   The
    Judge recognised this:

         "However I must go beyond this and assess the 'reasonableness' test
         under s.117B(6) particularly as  it  has  been  considered  in  the
         recent case of KO when it comes to looking  at  the  facts  in  the
         'real world' and asking the ultimate question: is it reasonable  to
         expect these children to follow their parents to Pakistan  as  they
         have no right to remain here." (paragraph 42)

12.  The Judge's consideration of this issue is set  out  at  paragraphs  44
    and 45 with the ultimate conclusion then being set out at paragraph 46.



         "44. I have set out above my findings in relation  to  the  parents
             returning to Pakistan and have concluded  that  there  are  no
             very  significant  obstacles  to  their   reintegration   into
             Pakistan.   I  further  consider  that   on   a   balance   of
             probabilities the evidence  is  that  they  will  be  able  to
             provide satisfactorily for the welfare of  their  children  on
             return for the reasons given and this  includes  their  stated
             choice of private education in the English Medium  system  and
             the ability to gain access to  appropriate  medical  treatment
             for [H.K.]'s conditions which are relatively common  childhood
             ones.  I am also in no doubt that these parents will provide a
             supportive setting to assist these children to adapt  to  life
             in Pakistan and in this context it is to be noted  that  these
             children have lived within the culture of  their  parents  and
             been exposed to a multi-cultural school population  whilst  in
             the UK over many years.  There is also the important  evidence
             that [S.K.] has remained in  social  media  contact  with  her
             cousins in Pakistan using the Pashtu language so  she  clearly
             has some connection with and understanding of their lives.

         45.  Before reaching my conclusion on the issue of 'reasonableness'
             I return to the issue of the 6-year delay on the part  of  the
             respondent and to its relevance in this  case.   There  is  no
             doubt that this delay has allowed the family,  and  [S.K.]  in
             particular, to put down roots and establish themselves in  the
             UK.  However, even in this context, regard has to be given  to
             s.117B(5) that states little  weight  is  to  be  given  to  a
             private  life  established  whilst  being  in  the   UK   with
             precarious status - although I  consider  that  this  is  more
             applicable to the  parents  rather  than  the  children.   The
             parents said in evidence that it would  have  been  easier  if
             they had been required to return to Pakistan in  2011  -  that
             is, if a refusal decision had been made  earlier  without  the
             delay.  That may well be true on some levels and  particularly
             so in terms of having to  change  education  systems  for  the
             eldest child [S.K.].  On the other hand the delay has  brought
             advantages  to  this  family  especially  in  terms  of   work
             experience in the UK and  in  terms  of  the  eldest  children
             having being  part  of  the  education  system  here  at  such
             formative ages.  In weighing up all these factors,  I  do  not
             think this is a case where it can be said that the  delay  has
             led to any greater expectations of this family being  able  to
             stay in this country.  But perhaps more importantly I  do  not
             think on balance that it has made a critical difference to how
             this issue of 'reasonableness' is assessed in relation to  the
             qualifying children when all the other factors mentioned above
             are also taken into account.

         46.  In conclusion, I have reached the view that  whilst  the  best
             interests of these qualifying children would have been for the
             whole family to remain here, it is nevertheless reasonable  to
             expect them to accompany their parents  who  are  required  to
             leave and return to Pakistan.  I therefore find that s.117B(6)
             of the 2002 Act does not apply in this case.  And as no  other
             exceptional circumstances have been put forward other than the
             issue of delay which I have  discussed  above,  I  am  further
             satisfied that it is not disproportionate under Article  8  to
             require these appellants as a family unit to leave the UK."

13.  It is pertinent to note that in respect  of  the  issue  of  delay  the
    Judge set out in the decision guidance from the cases of EB (Kosovo)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2008]  UKHL  41  and  MN-T
    Columbia [2016] EWCA Civ 893: see paragraphs 33 and 34.  The Judge also
    rehearsed in detail jurisprudence in relation to 'best  interests'  and
    'reasonableness', including the cases of EV (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874, ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53:  see
    paragraphs 35-38.

14.  On the face of it the Judge's consideration  of  the  particular  facts
    and circumstances of the Appellants was set within the  milieu  of  the
    jurisprudence that was applicable to  these  cases.   Again,  there  is
    nothing in the challenge to the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that suggests that the Judge has mis-cited or misquoted  any  of  these
    materials.

15.  The only case not cited by the Judge to  which  Mr  Symes  directed  my
    attention is Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58. Mr Symes was not able to  confirm
    that Rhuppiah had been employed  in  arguments  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Nonetheless  he  identified  that  it  indicated   that   in
    exceptional circumstances the public interest consideration pursuant to
    section 117B(5) could be ameliorated  or  negated  depending  upon  the
    particular circumstances of the case.

16.  The appeals having been  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  This was
    on the basis of grounds of  appeal  settled  by  Mr  Symes  -  who  had
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal instructed by  the  Appellants'
    then representatives Wilson  Barker  LLP.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on 22 January 2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett.

17.   This  is  a  convenient  juncture  to  note   that   there   is   some
    correspondence on file in relation to the grant of permission to appeal
    and a change of representative.  It appears, for reasons  that  I  need
    not go into and are in  any  event  ultimately  not  a  matter  of  any
    particular concern for  the  Tribunal,  that  the  Appellants'  changed
    representative following the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and
    instructed their current representatives Ali Levene  LLP.   Ali  Levene
    then instructed a different Counsel to settle  grounds  of  appeal  and
    indeed a different notice of appeal with different grounds  settled  by
    different Counsel was forwarded to the Tribunal.  It is clear  that  no
    decision  was  ever  taken  on  this   'alternative'   application   in
    circumstances  where  the  permission  to  appeal  had   already   been
    considered pursuant to the grounds settled by Mr Symes.

18.  In brief preliminary discussions before me, Mr Symes indicated that  he
    had taken instructions on the matter and  the  position  was  that  the
    Appellants wished to proceed with  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    grounds settled by him (and upon which basis permission to  appeal  was
    granted); the Appellants did not want to apply to amend the grounds  to
    incorporate any of the matters pleaded  in  the  'alternative'  grounds
    settled  by  a  different  Counsel.  The  appeal  before  me  proceeded
    accordingly.

19.  The grounds of challenge are set out under three separate headings.

20.  The first heading is "Mistake as to  Material  Fact  -  Proportionality
    and Length of time in the UK".  This ground is premised  on  the  First
    Appellant having accumulated ten  years  of  lawful  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It is argued  in  the  written  ground  that  in  such
    circumstances he would be eligible for indefinite leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of long residence under paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, provided that there were no reasons why it would be  undesirable
    for him to be given indefinite leave to remain.  Further, it is  argued
    that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred   in   marginalising   or
    disregarding this circumstance at paragraph 43 of the Decision:

         "The fact that the first  appellant  may  be  eligible  to  make  a
         further application on the basis of continuous  long  residence  is
         not a matter that I can take into account in terms of the  position
         as it is before me at the time of this appeal hearing."

21.  I have noted above that at the outset  of  the  hearing  before  me  Mr
    Symes brought  to  my  attention  the  fact  that  there  had  been  an
    interruption to the continuity of the First  Appellant's  residence  by
    reason of an eight month absence from the  United  Kingdom.   In  those
    circumstances, Mr Symes acknowledged that he could not  rely  upon  the
    ground as drafted because the necessary premise was not made  out.   He
    explained that the confusion had arisen because no reference  had  been
    made to this period of absence in  any  of  the  materials  or  witness
    statements  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  I   have   already
    indicated, it seems that once Mr Symes  was  aware  of  the  period  of
    absence he very properly fulfilled his duty to not pursue the point any
    further and to inform the court of the reasons for so doing.

22.  Mr Symes indicated that the two remaining heads of  challenge  were  in
    substance  facets  of  the  same  point,  and  invited   me   to   give
    consideration to the submissions with particular regard  to  the  third
    heading "Misdirection on Relevance of Delay".

23.  Mr  Symes  reiterated  the  fact  of  the  delay  in  the  Respondent's
    consideration of the Appellants' applications. This  is  identified  at
    paragraph  2  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge's   decision:   the
    Appellants' applications were initially made in April 2011 and  it  was
    just over six years before they were refused in May 2017.   Even  then,
    the applications were not refused on a full and proper basis, resulting
    in remittal by the First-tier Tribunal to the  Secretary  of  State  to
    consider the welfare of the children - resulting in the  new  decisions
    of March 2018.

24.   Having  emphasised  the  fact  and  duration  of   delay,   Mr   Symes
    acknowledged  that  the  Judge  had  directed   himself   to   relevant
    jurisprudence (paragraphs 33 and 34), before focussing his  submissions
    on the Judge's consideration of such matters at  paragraph  45  (quoted
    above).

25.  In the course of his submissions Mr Symes ultimately acknowledged  that
    he was driven to assert that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  principle  in
    consideration of delay as a  possible  factor  that  could  lead  to  a
    favourable outcome in the case; he acknowledged he could not  establish
    an error of law by pursuing a submission premised on a disagreement  as
    to the Judge's evaluation of weight to be accorded  to  any  particular
    factors in the appeal.

26.   It  seems  to  me  that  such  an  acknowledgement  -   properly   and
    appropriately  made  -  presents  Mr  Symes  with   an   insurmountable
    difficulty in the instant case.  In substance he seeks  to  argue  that
    the Judge effectively proceeded on the basis that delay  could  not  in
    any circumstance favourably avail the Appellants.  I do not accept that
    such a submission can succeed in circumstances where the Judge not only
    properly directed himself to the relevant jurisprudence, but  also,  in
    my  judgment,  manifestly   balanced   the   delay   in   the   overall
    consideration, and in so doing implicitly  recognised  the  possibility
    that delay could 'tip the balance' in favour of  applicants/appellants.
    This is clear from the final sentence of paragraph 45:

         "But perhaps more importantly I do think on balance  that  it  [the
         delay] has  made  a  critical  difference  to  how  this  issue  of
         'reasonableness' is assessed in relation to the qualifying children
         when all the other factors mentioned  above  are  also  taken  into
         account."

    Inherent in  that  passage  is  a  recognition  that  delay  can  be  a
    significant and important factor, but that the Judge  considers  it  in
    the overall consideration of the case. I can see no error of principal.



27.  I accept that there may be some awkwardness in the reference  to  delay
    having "brought advantages" in circumstances where, as  was  indicated,
    the parents said it would have been easier to have had  a  decision  in
    good  time  and  then  to  have  returned  to  Pakistan  in  2011.  The
    disruptions now faced - particularly in the context of S.K.'s education
    - undermined any concept of  advantage,  for  example  in  having  been
    admitted to the  education  system,  when  the  alternative  of  having
    returned to Pakistan in 2011 subsequent to a prompt refusal would  have
    resulted in an ability to pursue education without disruption. it seems
    to me some  caution  is  appropriate  before  describing  factors  that
    accumulate in consequence of delay as being 'advantageous'. However, it
    is nonetheless adequately clear that the Judge expressly recognised the
    disruptions inherent in now  returning/relocating  to  Pakistan  -  and
    indeed found that it was in the best interests of the children  not  to
    have their education disrupted and to remain in education in the UK. In
    all such  circumstances  I  do  not  consider  that  the  reference  to
    'advantage' undermines the overall consideration of the  issue  in  the
    appeals - and far less is it indicative of an error of law.

28.  The second heading in the grounds of challenge is "Misdirection of  Law
    - Interests of the Children". As noted above Mr  Symes  indicated  that
    this and the third head of challenge were  essentially  facets  of  the
    same point, and in this regard focused his submissions on the issue  of
    delay. Indeed it seems to me that the second head of challenge  in  the
    main part simply restates the substance of the Appellants' case -  with
    particular reference to the children - as it was presented  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I do not accept that it could  be  said  that  the
    Judge failed to identify that the issue was one of  reasonableness,  or
    that he applied the wrong legal framework. As I have noted above, in my
    judgement  the Judge set out with manifest care the  appropriate  legal
    framework and considered his findings of  fact  -  which  are  not  the
    subject of any challenge - against that framework.

29.  In all such circumstances I reject the challenge  to  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decisions

30.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of law  and
    accordingly the decisions in each of these linked appears stand.

31.  The Appellants' appeals remain dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
