

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals: HU/07222/2017
                                                               HU/07225/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 21 December 2018                 |On: 16 January 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                     KOSTIAN OSTROVSKI & MARIA OSTROVSKA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by McClure Collins,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against a decision by FtT Judge David  C  Clapham
    SSC, promulgated on 4 July 2018,  dismissing  their  appeals  on  human
    rights grounds against refusal of entry clearance.


 2. The grounds of appeal allege error as follows:

    1 (a), no reference to or consideration of proportionality, other  than
    in recording submissions at [28];

    (b), test for overseas appellants in Ribeli [2018]  EWCA  Civ  611  not
    applied; no express finding  on  whether  family  life  existed;  there
    should have been a finding of family life, and of interference, leading
    to further findings  (i)  that  this  was  not  a  case  of  choice  of
    residence, it not being practical for the extended family  to  move  to
    Ukraine, the child being at a specialist school in Scotland,  and  (ii)
    on proportionality;

    (c) evidence having been accepted at [32] of a bond between  the  child
    and his grandfather, error in giving  any  weight  to  the  unsupported
    assertion that the child might visit Ukraine;

    (d) error in respect of section 55 of the 2009 Act, by referring to the
    "best interests" of the child rather than to "the need to safeguard and
    promote the welfare of children who are in  the  UK";  having  accepted
    evidence that the child is autistic and mute, the judge  erred  (i)  by
    misinterpreting the statute and (ii) failing to reason why the  welfare
    of the child should not be given greater weight;

    alternatively -

    (e) if the correct test was applied to proportionality,  inadequacy  of
    reasoning to justify the outcome.

    2.  The UT should allow  the  appeal  and  entry  clearance  should  be
    granted.

 3. The further points which I noted from the submissions by Mr Bryce  were
    these:

      i) Relationships between grandparents and grandchildren  are  relevant
         to article 8.

     ii) The positive obligation on the  state  in  an  entry  case  is  not
         materially different from the obligation in an expulsion case.

    iii) The s.55 duty is relevant to that positive obligation.

     iv) The judge went wrong by considering it not open to him to allow the
         appeal, absent compliance with the immigration rules.

      v) In light of those positive obligations, the judge should have  seen
         that relocation to the Ukraine was not a choice, due to the child's
         needs.

     vi) The case had moved away from the appellants being  adult  dependent
         relatives, but that aspect, and their increasing frailty,  did  not
         cease to be relevant.

    vii)  Grandparent - grandchild relationships could and should have  been
         found to constitute family life: European Court  of  Human  Rights,
         Guide on article 8, [281] - [285]; Dasgupta, [2016] UKUT 00028.

   viii) The appellants' case was better for being made from outside the UK,
         not after entering  in  another  capacity,  or  overstaying;  their
         immigration history is good,  with  no  element  of  illegality  or
         precariousness.

     ix) The judge at [33] in effect took the rules  as  determinative,  and
         failed to set out the factors which weighed on the other side  from
         the public interest.

      x) The judge's view that  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  the  child
         visiting Ukraine went against the weight of the evidence.

     xi) The decision did not clearly explain how the  "ultimate  question",
         in terms of Agyarko [2017]  WLR  823  at  [59]  -  [60],  had  been
         answered.  It should be set aside and there  should  be  a  further
         hearing.

 4. In responding to the submission for the respondent, Mr Bryce  made  the
    further point that the question whether there  were  greater  than  the
    normal emotional ties went to relationships among adult family members,
    rather than to relationships  between  grandparents  and  grandchildren
    (who remained minors).

 5. Having considered also the submissions for the respondent, I find  that
    the appellants have not shown that the decision of the FtT involved the
    making of any error on a point of law, such that it  ought  to  be  set
    aside.

 6. As Mr Govan pointed out, the  case  had  moved  a  long  way  from  the
    original applications, which were for leave to enter as adult dependent
    relatives, and for which the evidence presented to the ECO, and to  the
    FtT, fell far short of the requirements of the rules.  The  grounds  of
    appeal to the  FtT  say  that  the  child  will  "be  unable  to  enjoy
    meaningful family life with his grandparents", but do not say  how  the
    decisions have that impact.  The grounds then found upon  the  need  of
    the appellants for "round the clock care" from the sponsor,  which  was
    not shown.

 7.  The  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT  overstate  the  position  about
    difficulties in maintaining the link between the appellants  and  their
    grandchild, other than by finding that they have a right to  reside  in
    the UK.  The family, including the child, has visited the appellants in
    the Ukraine, and there is no reason why they should not continue to  do
    so.  The appellants have visited their family here.

 8. Mr Bryce was correct in pointing out that the criterion of  "more  than
    usual emotional ties" generally applies to finding whether family life,
    in the  more  restricted  sense  required  for  article  8  protection,
    continues  among  adult  relatives.    As   between   grandparent   and
    grandchild, the question is usually whether the grandparent has assumed
    the role of a parent.  The judge recognised a special and close bond in
    this case, but it was not of that nature.  The  child  has  the  active
    care of both parents.

 9. The judge at [32] and [33] was clearly aware that a case might  succeed
    outside the rules, and treated the child's interests as a  primary  but
    not as the sole consideration.  He found the  circumstances  "difficult
    and unfortunate", but not "compelling".  No error of law has been shown
    in his approach.

10. It is readily understandable, as the judge observed,  that  the  family
    members strongly prefer to live together in the UK, but  there  was  no
    evidence that family  life  for  article  8  purposes  extended  beyond
    parents and child; that the  decisions  of  the  ECO  interfered  to  a
    serious extent with family relationships; or that the  child's  welfare
    would be promoted by his grandparents moving here permanently, to  such
    an extent that they have a right to do so,  other  than  in  compliance
    with the immigration rules.

11. Even if some error of legal  approach  had  been  detected,  there  was
    nothing by which the appeal might realistically have been allowed.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            7 January 2019
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




