
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07152/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On Tuesday 25 June 2019              | On Monday 8 July 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE THORNTON DBE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr HenrEy Wilkinson
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant/Secretary of State for the Home Department: Mr N Bramble,
                    Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   INTRODUCTION

   Procedural background

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department.
      For ease of reference we refer below to the parties as they were in
      the First-tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State for the
      Home Department is technically the Appellant in this particular
      appeal.  The Respondent appeals against a decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 27 March 2019 ("the Decision")
      allowing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of
      March 2018 to deport the Appellant to Jamaica pursuant to section
      32(5) UK Borders Act 2007.



   2. Before us there was no appearance by the Appellant or any
      representative on his behalf.  The notice of hearing had been sent to
      the Appellant's solicitors and to the Appellant himself.   We put the
      matter to the back of our list in case the Appellant or his
      representative were running late but no-one had appeared by the time
      we concluded the remainder of our list for the day.  There was at that
      time no application to adjourn the hearing nor any explanation for the
      absence of the Appellant or his representatives. Accordingly, we
      considered it to be in the interests of justice to proceed in the
      Appellant's absence.



   3. Following the conclusion of the hearing, on 27 June 2019, the Tribunal
      received by post a letter from SLA Solicitors dated 20 June 2019
      asking to come off the record as acting for the Appellant because he
      had failed to give them instructions sufficient to permit them to
      prepare for the hearing.  That letter was not sent by facsimile or e
      mail to ensure it was received prior to the hearing.  It is not clear
      to us why it took until 27 June for a letter dated 20 June to reach
      the Tribunal.  In any event, the contents of that letter do not alter
      the conclusion we reached at the hearing that it was appropriate to
      proceed absent the Appellant or his representatives since the reason
      given for non-attendance by the representatives is due to the
      Appellant's own inaction for which there remains no explanation.

   The Appellant's background

   4. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica.  His date of birth is 2 April
      1997.  He was granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK as a child
      of a settled parent on 23 May 2002 when was 5 years old.



   5. On 18 October 2017 he was convicted of violent disorder and sentenced
      to 19 months imprisonment, following which the Respondent served
      notice of intention to deport pursuant to Section 32(5) UK Borders Act
      2007.   The Appellant appealed the decision and the appeal was heard
      by First Tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan.



   THE LAW

   6. As a foreign criminal who had been sentenced to a period of
      imprisonment of at least 12 months, the Appellant became subject to
      deportation pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.



   7. Under section 33(2) of the UK Borders Act, Exception 1 to the
      automatic deportation under section 32(5) arises where the deportation
      of the foreign criminal would breach his Convention rights or the UK's
      obligations under the Refugee Convention. Only the first of those is
      potentially relevant in the Appellant's case.



   8. Sections 117A to 117D of Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002 apply in this case. Section 117A applies where the
      Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision under the
      Immigration Acts breaches an appellant's right to respect for private
      and family life under Article 8 and, in the case of a foreign
      criminal, requires the Tribunal to have regard to the matters in both
      sections 117B and 117C.    In brief summary, the statutory provisions
      and the relevant Immigration Rules (A398-A399D) create two exceptions
      to deportation based on Article 8 ECHR (in relation to family life and
      private life respectively) and provide that, where those exceptions
      are not met, a foreign criminal may still succeed where there are very
      compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions.  In that
      regard, the statutory provisions are not clear in relation to the
      application of that subsection (Section 117C (6)) to a medium offender
      (that is to say one sentenced to a period of twelve months to under
      four years); the statute refers only to those sentenced to four years
      or more.  However, as the Court of Appeal concluded in NA (Pakistan)
      and another v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
      Civ 662 ("NA (Pakistan)"), the provision applies equally to medium
      offenders (see [24] to [27] of the judgment).

   9. The FTT and the Upper Tribunal will respect the high level of
      importance which the legislature attaches to the deportation of
      criminals (NA(Pakistan) at [22]).


  10. The test in the Rules (and the corresponding test in section 117C of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002) is intended to
      "provide a structured basis for application of and compliance with
      Article 8, rather than to disapply it" (NA(Pakistan), at [26]).


   THE FTT DECISION


  11. The Judge arrived at the following key conclusions in the Decision:


             "40. This is not an automatic deportation case, it is a
             conducive to public good deportation under Section 5(3) of the
             Immigration Act 1971, and there is an element of discretion in
             such cases. The Appellant entered the UK in 2001; he was age
             four at the time. he has spent almost all of his life in this
             country. He does not possess British citizenship but in every
             other aspect he considers himself to be British


             41. Paragraph 339A(2) states:
                       '2. the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent
                  at least half his life living continuously in the UK
                  immediately preceding the date of the immigration decision
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment) and he has no
                  ties (including social, cultural or family) with the
                  country to which he would have to go if required to leave
                  the UK.'


                  42. The test of ties with the country of origin was set
             in the case of Kaur, R (on the application of) Secretary of
             State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1423 (21 June
             2018). The word 'no ties' was considered by Blake J and UT
             Judge O'Connor in the Upper Tribunal's decision in Ogundimu v
             SSHD [2013] UKUT. The Upper Tribunal held that the phrase
             imports a continued connection to the life of a country of
             origin. The test under the Rules is an exacting one.
             Consideration of whether a person has no ties to a country
             must involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant
             circumstances, and it is not limited to cultural and family
             circumstances.
                  ...
                  44. The Appellant in this case has lived almost all of
             his life in the UK. I accept the Appellant's, his mother and
             sister's evidence that there is no family remaining in
             Jamaica. As the Appellant has spent his life in the UK, he
             would not have any ties, cultural or social with anyone in
             Jamaica. I find that the Appellant would not be considered as
             an "insider" and would not have a "reasonable opportunity" to
             be accepted in Jamaica."



   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

  12. We are satisfied that there are errors of law in the Decision and that
      it must be set aside.



  13. The Judge applied a previous version of the Immigration Rules and an
      outdated test of 'no ties' with Jamaica to the Appellant's private
      life rather than considering whether there are very significant
      obstacles to integration in his home country (paragraph 399A).   On
      behalf of the Respondent, Mr Bramble referred us to the Court of
      Appeal's decision in AS v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1284 where the Court
      considered the legal deficiencies in applying the earlier version of
      the rules in relation to integration into a home country:

              "54. The First Tier Tribunal did not refer to sections 117A-D
             and cited the previous version of the Immigration  Rules.  The
             Judge spent some time in his judgment specifically considering
             the issue  of  'ties'  including  by  quoting  form  Qgundimu,
             expressly because it had considered the meaning of  "the  term
             'ties' in paragraph 399". It is right that the Judge referred,
             briefly, at the end of his decision to the three  factors  set
             out in the new paragraph 399A. But as the Upper Tribunal Judge
             noted, it is plain that the FtT Judge was "concerned with  the
             issue of whether the Appellant had ties to Iran...  being  the
             former manifestation" of the Immigration  Rules.  It  is  also
             plain, as again noted by the Upper Tribunal Judge,  that  this
             brief reference "does not follow from any reasoned assessment"
             of the issue of very significant obstacles.  Absent  any  such
             assessment, it was almost inevitable that the  Upper  Tribunal
             would decide that there had been a material error of law.
             55. In my view, it also cannot be successfully argued that, to
             quote from AJ(Angola), paragraph 49, "on the materials  before
             the tribunal any rational tribunal must have come to the  same
             conclusion". I do not accept Mr Buley's  submission  that  the
             differences between the rules were of no significance.  It  is
             right to say that, when considering the  former  version,  the
             Court applied  a  "rounded  assessment  of  all  the  relevant
             circumstances" (YM(Uganda) paragraph 51,  approving  Ogundimu)
             and that the  latter  version  required  "a  broad  evaluative
             judgment" (Kamara paragraph 14). However, the  assessment  and
             the evaluation are undertaken in the context of the  different
             formulations which provide the relevant framework.  The  Upper
             Tribunal  was  justified  in  deciding  that  the  First  Tier
             Tribunal had adopted too narrow an approach and did  not  take
             potentially relevant factors  into  account.  To  repeat  what
             Sales LJ said in Kamara, paragraph 14, "It is not  appropriate
             to treat the statutory language as subject to some  gloss  and
             it will usually be sufficient  for  a  court  or  tribunal  to
             direct itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen to use".
             In this case, the First Tier Tribunal had not directed  itself
             in the correct terms."
  14. Secondly; the Judge mistakenly considered the case was not an
      automatic deportation case. For a reason which is not apparent to us,
      he seems to have thought that it was a "conducive to public good
      deportation" ([40]).  Not only is that wrong in fact but the Judge
      also appears to have thought that he had some discretion as a result
      although he does not say what is the source of that discretion nor how
      that comes into play in a case where the only issue is whether the
      decision to deport breaches the Appellant's Article 8 rights. His
      reference in this context to 'an element of discretion in such cases'
      at paragraph [40] of his decision leads us to the conclusion that the
      Judge failed to give proper weight to the public interest in the
      deportation of foreign criminals.



  15. We note that the Judge did cite from the case of Secretary of State
      for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 ("Kamara") at
      [43] of the Decision.  We considered whether it might be said that the
      very obvious errors to which we have alluded are not material since
      the case of Kamara does refer to the correct test whether there are
      "very significant obstacles to integration" in an appellant's home
      country.  However, having set out [14] from the Court of Appeal's
      judgment, the Judge went on to reach the findings at [44] of the
      Decision which we set out above.  As Mr Bramble submitted, and we
      accept, notwithstanding the citation from relevant case law as to the
      current test, the Judge continues to look at the Appellant's ability
      to return to Jamaica only in terms of the ties he has there.  In other
      words, he there continued to apply the wrong, outdated test.



  16.  As a consequence of the foregoing, very obvious errors the Judge
      failed lawfully to explain why the Appellant should succeed. We
      therefore set aside the Decision.  Given the extent and very clear
      nature of the errors, in particularly the misdirections in law, we
      venture to suggest that the Decision ought probably to have been set
      aside on review at an earlier stage and remitted to another Judge for
      re-hearing.  As it is, since the re-hearing of the appeal will require
      a second Judge to start from scratch, the extent of fact finding
      required on re-hearing is such that we consider it appropriate, having
      regard to the Joint Practice Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and
      Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal and
      to the overriding objective, to remit this appeal to the First-tier
      Tribunal for re-hearing..


NOTICE OF DECISION

We are satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of law.  We set
aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 27
March 2019. We remit the appeal for re-hearing before a Judge other than
Judge M A Khan.







Signed        The Hon. Mrs Justice Thornton DBE       Dated: 4 July 2019



