
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/07087/2016
                                                               HU/07089/2016
                                                               HU/07093/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House              |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 13 February 2018                    |             On 9 March 2018        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     ST
                                     MB
                                     MAB
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant, a national of  Pakistan,  is  the  mother  of  the
    second and third appellants.  The appellants were  each  refused  entry
    clearance, the ECO concluding: (i) that the first appellant's  marriage
    is  not  genuine  and  subsisting  and  (ii)   that   the   maintenance
    requirements of the Rules had not been met. On review the ECM  conceded
    the second issue but agreed with the ECO in relation to the first.

 2. The appellants' appeals came before FtT Judge Amin on the 14 June  2017
    and were dismissed in a conjoined decision promulgated on 27 June 2017,
    notwithstanding a finding in favour of the appellants on the only  live
    issue on the appeal. Judge Amin, without having raised the  issue  with
    the parties, dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  English
    language requirements of the Rule had not been met.

 3. Unsurprisingly, the appellants were granted permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal. In her Rule 24 response the ECO accepts  that  the  FtT
    erred in law, a concession I concur with.   Judge  Amin  plainly  acted
    unfairly in taking an issue against the appellants that  had  not  been
    taken by the ECO and without giving the appellants  an  opportunity  to
    engage with such  issue.  For  this  reason,  I  set  aside  the  FtT's
    decision.

 4. The Rule 24 response also makes clear that the ECO/ECM  were  satisfied
    that the English language requirements of the Rules had been met by the
    appellants. Consequently, the ECO invites the  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appellants' appeals.  I accede to this request.

 5. The appellants meet all of the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.
    There is plainly a family life between the appellants and the  sponsor,
    which would be interfered with  by  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance.
    Article 8 is thus engaged.  The Rules reflect the  SSHD's  view  as  to
    where the public interest lies in the proportionality assessment to  be
    carried out under Article 8. The Rules have been  met  in  the  instant
    case. There is nothing else in this case which  leads  me  to  conclude
    that despite the Rules having been met, refusing entry clearance  would
    be proportionate. In the circumstances, and given the concession of the
    ECO, I conclude that each of the appellants' appeals must be allowed.

Decision

The decision of the FtT is set aside.

Upon remaking the decision under appeal, I allow  each  of  the  appellants'
appeals on the basis that refusing entry clearance would lead  to  a  breach
of Article 8 ECHR.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 13 February 2017

This decision has been amended under the slip  rule  (r42  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008)
