
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/07301/2016
      Hu/00231/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 December 2017                   |On 13th December 2017                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                             MUZAFFAR NASRULLAH
                                 AFIFA IJAZ
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                       For the Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr A Khan of Counsel instructed by Thompson and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellants are siblings who seek to challenge the determination
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego dismissing their joint appeals
         by way of a determination promulgated on 12 June 2017  following  a
         hearing at Hatton Cross  on  28  June  2017.   They  are  Pakistani
         nationals born respectively on 25 May 1994  and  3  February  1997.
         They appeal  the  decisions  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  entry
         clearance for family reunion under paragraph 352A-F and on  article
         8 grounds on 15 February 2016 (for  the  first  appellant)  and  22
         November 2016 (for the second). The first decision was reviewed  by
         the Entry Clearance Manager but maintained on 10 June 2016.


      2. The appellants' father, the sponsor,  was  granted  asylum  on  the
         basis of his Ahmadi faith in November 2015. The family,  consisting
         of the appellants, their younger brother  and  their  mother,  then
         made  an  application  on  13  January  2016  to  join  him.    The
         applications of the mother and youngest son were granted  and  they
         subsequently joined the sponsor. The appellants were both over  the
         age of 18 when their applications were made. They were both refused
         entry clearance.


      3. Permission to appeal was refused on  27  July  2017  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Pickup but granted  on  renewal  by  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Smith on 26 September 2017 on the basis that it was  arguable
         that the judge had failed to consider  the  discrimination  against
         Ahmadis in Pakistan as part of the article 8 assessment and that he
         had not expanded on what he claimed were credibility issues.


      4. The matter then came before me on 1 December 2017.


      5. The Hearing


      6. The sponsor attended the hearing and I heard submissions  from  the
         parties.


      7. An interpreter had been booked for the hearing  presumably  at  the
         request of the appellants' solicitors. Counsel  could  not  explain
         why this step had been taken as no oral evidence was to  be  called
         and the services of the solicitors were  dispensed  with.  I  would
         remind Thompson and Co to be more careful with such requests in the
         future so as to avoid unnecessary  court  costs  and  interpreters'
         wasted time.


      8. Mr Khan submitted that the two adult appellants were  part  of  the
         sponsor's pre-flight family and although the judge had accepted the
         genuine affection between them and their parents  and  brother,  he
         had failed to resolve the issues of dependency, whether  they  were
         part of the sponsor's pre-flight family  unit,  whether  they  were
         vulnerable due to their religious affiliation and whether there was
         an absence of family  support  in  Pakistan.  He  relied  upon  the
         respondent's policy instructions on children over 18 years  of  age
         and pointed to the section on exceptional circumstances (at  p.19).
         He accepted that the facts in both cases were similar. He sought  a
         de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


      9. Mr Tarlow submitted that there were no errors of law in the judge's
         determination and that the challenge amounted to  no  more  than  a
         disagreement with the findings which were properly  made  and  well
         reasoned. He submitted  that  the  family  relationships  had  been
         accepted as had the fact that the appellants lived in the sponsor's
         house, were  students  and  received  financial  support  from  the
         sponsor. However, these were  not  factors  beyond  what  would  be
         expected between student children and their parents.  He  submitted
         that the guidance in Kugathas and  Hesham  Ali  had  been  properly
         applied. He agreed that a de novo hearing would be required  if  an
         error of law were to be found.


     10. Mr Khan responded. He submitted that if it had been  accepted  that
         the appellants were dependent upon the sponsor and that family life
         had been disturbed then article 8 was engaged. He  reiterated  that
         the judge had raised a  problem  with  credibility  issues  in  his
         determination but then failed to explain what those were.


     11. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         reserved my determination which I now give.


     12. Conclusions


     13. I have taken full  account  of  the  evidence  before  me  and  the
         submissions made.


     14. More than half of the judge's determination  consists  of  a  self-
         direction on the law and the jurisprudence. Much  of  the  rest  is
         taken up with a summary of the respondent's case,  the  appellant's
         case and the submissions made by  the  appellants'  representative,
         there being no appearance by the respondent. This leaves just  over
         a page  for  the  findings  and  conclusions  which  are  presented
         succinctly although this is not necessarily a problem.


     15. The judge finds that the appellants are related as claimed  to  the
         sponsor, that they have the necessary  medical  certificates,  that
         they are students who receive financial support from their  father,
         that they keep in touch with the family, that they  live  in  their
         father's   house   and   that   they   have   encountered   routine
         discrimination  on  account  of  their  faith.  However,  he   also
         mysteriously finds that "there  are  credibility  issues  with  the
         evidence given" but fails entirely to expand on what these are  and
         what he makes of them. It is incumbent upon a judge to give reasons
         for his findings and conclusions; AK Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00230  and
         MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC).  The
         appellants, when reading this part of the  determination,  will  be
         completely in the dark as to what issues the  judge  was  referring
         to. On that basis alone, the determination is flawed  and  must  be
         set aside.


     16.  I  am  less  persuaded  that  there  are  errors  in  the  judge's
         consideration of the policy and article 8.  The  findings  in  this
         respect  are  more  detailed  (at  57-61)  but  given  the  judge's
         reference to credibility  issues,  I  cannot  be  sure  that  these
         findings have not been infected with whatever adverse view  he  has
         formed  of  the  appellants.  I  therefore  set  aside  the  entire
         determination (except as a record of proceedings). No findings  are
         preserved. The decision shall be re-made by another  judge  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal at a date to be arranged.


     17. Decision


     18. The First-tier Tribunal judge made errors  of  law  such  that  the
         decision is set aside. It shall be re-made by another judge of  the
         First-tier Tribunal at a date to be arranged.


     19. Anonymity


     20. No request was made to continue the anonymity  order  made  by  the
         judge of his own volition and I see no reason to do so.


         Signed










         Upper Tribunal Judge
         Date: 8 December 2017
