
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07812/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2019                            |On 20 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                          mr wasiu akorede oreniwa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tampuri, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a Nigerian national born on  17  June  1979.   He  has
    been granted permission to appeal the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hussain promulgated on 30 July 2018, dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal against refusal by the respondent on 3 July 2017  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain as the spouse of a British citizen.

2.   The respondent refused the appellant's application on both  suitability
    and eligibility grounds.  The respondent alleged that as  a  result  of
    major inconsistencies between statements given by the appellant to  the
    police and the Home Office, it was  found  that  he  had  either  given
    information that was false to one  or  both  of  the  organisations  in
    respect of the suitability ground.

3.   Insofar as the eligibility requirements were concerned, the  respondent
    was not satisfied that the relationship between the appellant  and  his
    partner was genuine.  In coming to this view the respondent  took  into
    account that an Immigration Judge  had  previously  accepted  that  the
    appellant's marriage was genuine and subsisting as did the Home Office.
     However, when questioned by the police, the appellant  claimed  to  be
    married to [LM] but then attended an interview with his claimed partner
    [CM] on 17 August 2016 at which various inconsistencies emerged.

4.   The appellant's claim was considered under the  10-year  partner  route
    but was  refused  on  suitability  grounds  for  the  same  reasons  as
    previously given. The respondent was of the view that this  application
    would not succeed under paragraph EX.1 because his relationship was not
    genuine and subsisting.

5.    The  respondent  also  considered  whether  the  appellant   met   the
    requirements for  10-year  private  life  route  within  the  terms  of
    paragraph 276ADE.  The respondent did not consider that there would  be
    very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  into  the
    country which they would have to go if required to leave  the  UK.   It
    was not accepted that there would be such obstacles because although he
    may experience a degree of temporary hardship, these difficulties could
    be  overcome  bearing  in  mind  his  knowledge  of  the  language  and
    familiarity of the Nigerian culture and custom.

6.   Finally, the respondent gave consideration to whether  the  appellant's
    circumstances were exceptional to merit the grant of leave outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  However,  in  view  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    finding  that  the  appellant's  relationship  was  not   genuine   and
    subsisting, she concluded that there were no exceptional circumstances.

7.   At the hearing before the judge, it was agreed by the parties that  the
    issues  were  suitability  and  genuineness  and  subsistence  of   the
    appellant's marriage.  The judge said if he found  in  the  appellant's
    favour in regard to these two  issues,  then  the  appeal  fell  to  be
    allowed.

8.   The judge heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  who  adopted  his
    written statement as his  evidence-in-chief.   He  explained  that  his
    wife,  [CM]  was  not  present  at   the   hearing.    They   had   had
    misunderstandings.  Since February she has been upset over  the  things
    happening with the Home Office.  He was referred to the  police  report
    in which he said that he was  married  to  someone  else  and  had  two
    children.  The  appellant  said  at  the  hearing  that  he  was  in  a
    relationship with [LM].  He did not tell the police that he was married
    to [LM].  In 2014 [LM] told him that she had two children, one or  both
    of whom could be his.  They had an argument about that.   The  argument
    led him to the police station.  He has never seen the children's  birth
    certificates.  When asked why she would say that he may be the  father,
    he said he did not know why she would say that.  He was  never  married
    to her.  Her children do not bear his name.  He  does  not  know  their
    father's name either.  He was asked why at interview his wife said that
    he had been married before, to which the appellant  said  that  he  had
    told her about [LM].  He did not hide anything from her.  The reason he
    said she had two children was because [LM] said they were his.  He  did
    not tell the interviewer that he had two children because  he  was  not
    sure.

9.   Since the Home Office decision, he has tried to do DNA tests.  Then  he
    said that the test had in fact been done, sometime last  year,  and  in
    fact showed that they were his children.  He had not provided copies of
    these to the Tribunal because he did them his "own  way".  He  was  not
    sure that they are allowed to be admitted.  He said [LM] was not  aware
    that DNA tests had been  done.   He  took  the  children's  samples  by
    himself.

10.  He was asked which partner he was presently living with,  to  which  he
    said it was [CM]. They married in 2012.  She was  not  present  because
    they have an issue.  When in interview she said that  he  was  married,
    she may have taken it out  of  context.   He  has  never  been  married
    before.  He denied the suggestion that he married her to stay  in  this
    country.  He said he was not  aware  that  he  has  any  children.   In
    Nigeria he has a senior brother.  His mother is alive, but  his  father
    is dead.

11.  The judge then made the findings which are set out at paragraphs 17  to
    24.  The judge again repeated at  paragraph  18  that  the  appellant's
    application under the Immigration Rules was refused on suitability  and
    eligibility grounds.

12.  The suitability grounds were that  the  appellant  had  provided  false
    representations either to the police or the Home Office or  both.   The
    judge said that in his view it was not sufficient for the Secretary  of
    State, who carries the burden of proving that the appellant  falls  for
    exclusion on  suitability  grounds,  to  assert  false  representations
    without particularising what these were.   He  said  the  Secretary  of
    State should have made clear what representations  the  appellant  made
    that were false and proven that the representations  were  false.   The
    judge found that the Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to  do  so  and
    accordingly he found that the appellant's application did not fall  for
    refusal on suitability grounds.

13.  Insofar as the eligibility grounds  were  concerned,  the  judge  noted
    that the Secretary of State asserted that she was  not  satisfied  that
    the appellant was in a genuine and subsisting marriage.  In taking that
    position, the Secretary of State acknowledged that  the  appellant  has
    previously satisfied an Immigration Judge that his marriage was genuine
    and subsisting as well as the Home Office.  However, the  Secretary  of
    State asserted  that  new  evidence  had  emerged  which  involved  the
    appellant giving a statement to the  police  as  well  as  he  and  his
    claimed wife being  interviewed  by  the  Home  Office,  where  various
    inconsistencies had emerged.

14.  The Secretary of State asserted that in his interview with  the  police
    the appellant claimed to be  married  to  a  woman  called  [LM].   The
    appellant denied that he had  said  that,  claiming  instead  that  his
    assertion was taken out of context.  The judge said he  had  looked  at
    the statement prepared  by  DC  Sarah  Hoyle  where  she  recorded  the
    appellant's comments which clearly showed that the  appellant  did  say
    that [LM] was "his wife".   With  regards  to  the  inconsistencies  at
    interview, the judge said they had to be seen in  the  context  of  the
    refusal letter.  He said the appellant did not provide  a  response  to
    the contents of the refusal letter other than to say  that  there  were
    discrepancies but claimed that they were  trivial  in  nature  and  not
    sufficient to lead to the conclusion that his marriage was not  genuine
    and subsisting.  The judge did not accept that position.

15.  The judge stated that  insofar  as  the  eligibility  requirements  are
    concerned, the burden of proof is on the appellant.  He found that  the
    appellant  has  not  adequately   explained   why   there   should   be
    inconsistencies between him and his claimed wife unless of course there
    was no substance to their marriage.  Her absence from the  hearing  did
    not assist the appellant.  In his witness statement he claimed that his
    relationship with her had now broken down which had nothing to do  with
    the Home Office decision contrary to what he had said in oral evidence.
     The appellant said that he had been out of work since the  application
    was refused and his wife has started "cheating".  The judge found  that
    the plain fact of the matter is that the appellant's marriage  has  now
    broken down if ever it existed.  Since the appellant's  appeal  was  on
    human rights grounds, the judge said it could only succeed  if  at  the
    date of the hearing, he was able to show that he  had  a  family  life.
    Self-evidently he cannot.  As  a  result,  the  judge  found  that  the
    decision not to grant the appellant leave does not interfere  with  his
    family life.

16.  The judge said that as far as the appellant's  private  life  claim  is
    concerned, he agreed with the Secretary of State that it has  not  been
    shown why there would be very significant obstacles to his  integration
    into Nigeria, a country in  which  he  grew  up  and  the  culture  and
    language he is familiar with.

17.  The judge said that  the  appellant's  claim  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules can only  succeed  if  his  circumstances  can  be  shown  to  be
    exceptional.  Insofar as his family claim outside the Immigration Rules
    are concerned, that cannot succeed in view  of  his  finding  that  the
    appellant is not in a subsisting relationship.  His private life cannot
    succeed because there is nothing exceptional  in  his  circumstance  to
    justify the grant of leave outside of the Immigration Rules.  In making
    this  decision,  the  judge  had  regard   to   the   public   interest
    considerations in Section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002

18.  The application for permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davidge in a decision dated 17  September  2018.   Judge
    Davidge said as follows:

         "2.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain (Ft TJ) heard an  appeal  on
             human rights grounds against a refusal of an  application  for
             leave to remain on dual grounds of 10 years  lawful  residents
             and on the basis of marriage.  The respondent had refused both
             grounds of application on the  basis  of  suitability  arguing
             that the appellant had lied because he had  been  inconsistent
             about his marital status as between statements he had made  to
             the police and the Home Office.  The  FTT  J  found  that  the
             respondent had not done enough to meet the burden  of  showing
             that the appellant was not suitable.  The FTT  J  went  on  to
             conclude  that  the  appellant  did  not  have   a   genuinely
             subsisting relationship  of  marriage,  so  that  neither  the
             marriage rules nor an article 8 claim based on family life  in
             the context  of  the  marriage  could  succeed.   The  grounds
             complaint that the fact that the couple are not divorced makes
             the FTTJ's conclusion unsustainable is without merit as it  is
             a subsistence of the relationship rather than the  fact  of  a
             continuing marriage which is relevant.


         3.   The grounds point out that  the  judge  failed  to  separately
             decide  the  appeal  against  refusal  of  10   years   lawful
             residence, having concluded that the decision was wrong in  so
             far as it related to suitability the FTTJ needed to separately
             assess the rules-based position in respect of  long  residence
             rather than the issue of very  significant  obstacles  to  his
             integration to Nigeria.  I have  read  the  decision  and  the
             grounds.  It is arguable that in failing to reach a conclusion
             about the 10 years lawful residence requirements the FTTJ  had
             an insufficient factual matrix upon which to make his  article
             8 ECHR assessment, given that it must start from an assessment
             of  the  public  interest  considerations  as  represented  by
             application of the immigration rules including those  of  long
             residence, to the application made by the appellant.


         4.   The grounds reveal an arguable error of law."

19.  The  appellant  appealed  Judge  Davidge's  decision.   Permission  was
    granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis as it appeared that in  the
    light of what Judge Davidge said at paragraph 3 of  her  decision,  she
    intended to grant permission and erroneously refused permission.

20.  At the hearing before me, I drew  Mr  Tampuri's  attention  to  grounds
    dated 17 August 2018  lodged  by  the  appellant  against  the  judge's
    decision.  The grounds said as follows:

         "1.  At paragraph 16 of the determination, IJ Hussain asserts  that
             the Secretary of State has failed to discharge the  burden  in
             relation to false representations to the police  or  the  Home
             Office, however, he goes on to dismiss the appeal on the basis
             of eligibility requirement when in fact,  the  main  issue  in
             relation to the eligibility requirement relates  to  the  same
             allegation of false representation to the police.  In doing so
             the IJ contradicted himself.


         2.   Similarly, the fact that the appellant's relationship with his
             wife had broken down due to  disagreement  doesn't  mean  that
             their  marriage  was  no  longer  subsisting.   They  are  not
             divorced.

21.  I informed Mr Tampuri that there was no mention in these  grounds  that
    the judge had failed to consider  an  appeal  against  refusal  of  ten
    years'  lawful  residence.   Mr  Tampuri   said   that   he   submitted
    supplementary grounds which referred to it.   He  could  not  find  the
    supplementary grounds and there was not a copy on the  court  file.   I
    have not seen these grounds.  It appears to me that Judge Davidge  must
    have seen the supplementary grounds in the light of what  she  said  at
    paragraph 3 of her decision.

22.  Mr Tampuri  however  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  not  made  an
    application to the  Secretary  of  State  for  leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph 276B  on  the  basis  that  he  has  been  lawfully  resident
    continuously in the United Kingdom for ten years.  It is apparent  from
    the judge's decision that this issue was not raised  before  him.   Mr.
    Tamuri said the issue appeared in the appellant's grounds.  I have seen
    the grounds that were lodged against the respondent's refusal  decision
    dated 3 July 2017.  The grounds were dated 12 July 2017.   The  grounds
    did not contain any reference to an application for the appellant to be
    considered under the ten years' lawful continuous  residence  rule.   I
    find that Judge Davidge was misled into believing  that  the  appellant
    had raised this issue and that it was not considered by the  judge.   I
    note that at paragraphs 8 and 18 the judge identified the  issues  that
    the parties agreed  were  the  issues  before  him.   The  issues  were
    suitability,  eligibility  and  genuineness  and  subsistence  of   the
    appellant's marriage.  I find that these  issues  were  properly  dealt
    with by the judge.

23.  Mr Tampuri submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  not  making
    findings in respect of the appellant's private life with his  children.
    Mr Tampuri conceded that  the  judge  had  no  evidence  that  the  two
    children were the appellant's children.   There  was  no  DNA  evidence
    before the judge.  Although he has now submitted the result of the  DNA
    evidence which claims that the two boys his children, that evidence was
    not before the judge.  Furthermore, I find  that  this  evidence  alone
    would not have been sufficient to get the appellant through.  He  would
    have to show what relationship  he  has  with  the  two  boys  who,  it
    appears, are being cared for by their mother.  In the  absence  of  DNA
    evidence and the appellant's relationship with the two boys, it  cannot
    be argued that the judge's failure to make a finding in respect of  the
    appellant's private life with his children disclosed as error of law.

24.  Mr Tampuri conceded after I took him through the various findings  made
    by the judge, that the judge's decision disclosed no error of law.

25.  I find that the judge's  decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  17 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun


