
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07666/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31 January 2019                    |On 21st February 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    m T I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gajjar, Counsel


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge D  P  Herbert  OBE  in  which  he
    allowed the appeal of the respondent against the Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse his application for leave to remain in the UK on the
    basis of his ten  years'  long  residence.   The  respondent  made  the
    application on  21  August  2017.   The  Secretary  of  State's  letter
    refusing the application is dated 16 March 2018.

2.   The respondent will from now on be referred to  as  the  applicant  for
    ease of reference.

3.   The applicant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  15  January  1978.   He
    entered the UK on 12 September 2007 with entry clearance as a  student.
    He was granted leave to enter as a student until 28 February  2009  and
    further leave to remain valid until 31 January 2010.

4.   On 11 January 2010 the applicant made an in time application for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant.  He was  granted  leave  to
    remain until 4 February 2012.  He was granted further leave  to  remain
    in this capacity until 24 May 2013 and again until 5 June 2016.  On  21
    May 2016 he applied in time for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier  1
    (General) Migrant.  On 21 August 2017 he varied his  Tier  1  (General)
    Migrant indefinite leave to remain application into an application  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of ten years' long residence in
    the United Kingdom.

5.   In the Reasons for Refusal Letter the Secretary  of  State  listed  the
    number of  documents  submitted  by  the  applicant  with  his  various
    applications.  Next the Secretary of State considered the  most  recent
    application  under  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Secretary of State noted that whilst  the  applicant  had  accrued  ten
    years of continuous residence in the United Kingdom, he fell under  the
    general grounds for refusal.  The respondent considered  paragraph  322
    of the Immigration Rules which outlines the general grounds for refusal
    of leave to remain, in particular sub-paragraph 5 - the undesirability
    of permitting the person concerned to remain in the United  Kingdom  in
    the light of his conduct  (including  convictions  which  do  not  fall
    within paragraph 322(1C), character or association or the fact that  he
    represents a threat to national security.

6.   The applicant  had  submitted  various  documents  for  HMRC  with  his
    application and these clearly  showed  that  he  had  made  significant
    underpayment and under declaration of tax for the years 2010  to  2013.
    The respondent noted that there  was  a  letter  from  the  applicant's
    previous accountant stating that the tax returns for the year 2010/2011
    and 2012/2013 were submitted incorrectly.  The error had  been  noticed
    in September 2015 when he went to  a  mortgage  advisor  to  check  his
    eligibility for a mortgage.  His accountant then discovered a shortfall
    in the tax paid for the year ending 2011 and the year ending 2013.   He
    then asked his accountant to carry out a full review of his tax  return
    for the years ending 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014.  The Secretary of State
    claimed that there was a significant  difference  which  the  applicant
    must have been aware  of  himself.   HMRC  confirmed  his  amended  tax
    return.  The Secretary of State relied on the fact that these documents
    were submitted to HMRC six months prior to the applicant submitting his
    application for indefinite leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (General)
    Migrant.

7.   The respondent was therefore not satisfied that the applicant  had  not
    been previously deceitful or dishonest with his dealings with HMRC  and
    the UK Visas and Immigration.  The Secretary of  State  took  the  view
    that in the light of this evidence  the  applicant  did  not  meet  the
    criteria  on  account  of  his  conduct  and  therefore   refused   the
    applicant's application.

8.   The judge said the applicant's claim was  that  if  the  HMRC  did  not
    conclude that his behaviour was dishonest or  deceptive,  it  would  be
    wholly inequitable for the Secretary of State to do so simply based  on
    that fact.

9.   At paragraph 35 the judge set  out  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
    guidance on paragraph 322(5) which said the threshold was a  high  one.
    The policy guidance to caseworkers states

         "The main type of guidance you need to  consider  to  refuse  under
         paragraph 322(5) for  those  involved  in  serious  criminality,  a
         threat to national security, a war  crime  terrorist  activity.   A
         person does not need  to  be  convicted  for  this  to  apply  when
         deciding whether  to  refuse  under  this  category.   The  key  to
         consider is if there is reliable evidence to support  the  decision
         is that the person's character and conduct is unacceptable and that
         it is undesirable to allow them to enter the United Kingdom.  ...".

10.  The judge at paragraph 36 said the  guidance  goes  on  to  state  that
    behaviour resulting in a single conviction and  sentence  is  generally
    unlikely to meet the paragraph 322(5) threshold.

11.  The judge went on to find as follows:

         "38. On any view, it is accepted that the appellant did not  engage
             in criminality. Neither the HMRC nor the  respondent  sort  to
             impose any separate penalty, financial or  otherwise  for  the
             appellant's conduct. The appellant was  not  investigated  for
             the criminal conduct by the HMRC or by any  other  agency.  He
             has a good immigration history over the last 11 years together
             with his family. He has clearly contributed to the UK  economy
             where  applicable  by  pursuing  is  life  as  established   a
             significant family and private life throughout that  10  years
             period. And he had been in the UK  continuously  for  10  year
             period perfectly lawfully to establish himself here.


         39.  Even if the appellant had been convicted on one occasion of an
             under declaration of tax, that itself  would  be  unlikely  to
             meet the high threshold of paragraph 322 (5).


         40.  This case and any disparity in  the  appellant's  conduct  was
             brought to life by himself well before he made any application
             foe leave to remain under the human rights of the basis of his
             10 years residency.


         41.  I therefore find that any criticism of the  appellant  conduct
             falls short of that envisaged under paragraph 322 (5).


         42.  On the basis of  the  facts  taking  into  account,  his  age,
             conduct associations  and  the  other  criteria  set  out  the
             appellant clearly satisfies the immigration rules."

12.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Birrell  granted  the  Secretary  of  State
    permission to appeal.  He said the grounds assert that the judge  erred
    in that he failed to make a finding on a central issue in this case  as
    to whether the applicant had used deception; the judge failed  to  take
    into account the guidance in R (on the  application  of  Khan)  v  SSHD
    (Dishonesty, tax return, paragraph 322(5)) [2018] UKUT 00384.

13.  Judge Birrell held that the judge's findings are  arguably  underpinned
    by the view that his conduct does not meet the threshold  of  paragraph
    322(5) when Khan makes very clear that such conduct, where it has  been
    found to be dishonest, entitles the Secretary of State to refuse  leave
    under paragraph 322(5).  Therefore, it is arguable that failing to make
    a finding as to whether the applicant was dishonest  was  an  error  of
    law.

14.  I find that the judge placed significant emphasis in his  reasoning  on
    the fact that the applicant has not been  penalised  or  prosecuted  by
    HMRC for submitting incorrect tax returns.   I agree  with  Ms  Jones's
    submission that the judge's failure to resolve the issue of  dishonesty
    means that the judge made an error  and  the  error  was  material  and
    consequently the judge's decision cannot stand.

15.  The applicant's appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross for rehearing  by  a
    First-tier Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert.

16.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  18 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun








