
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07210/2017
                                                               HU/07209/2017
                                                               PA/06137/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th December 2018                         |On 30th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          K C O O (First Appellant)
                           I E O (Second Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss G Loughran of Counsel instructed by Bindmans
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal made against  the  decision  of
    Judge McIntosh following a hearing at Taylor House on 6th March 2018.



Background

 2. The claimants are citizens of Nigeria.  They applied to remain  in  the
    UK both for leave to remain on the grounds of their  private  life  and
    compassionate circumstances in respect of Mrs O's medical condition and
    because Mr O feared a return to Nigeria where he said that he would  be
    persecuted for his political opinion.

 3. In 2002, the first claimant, Mr O, applied in 2002 for a  student  visa
    to come to the UK but was refused.  The following year he  was  granted
    entry clearance in the name of his father and was granted a multi-visit
    visa on 31st October 2003.  He arrived in the UK and overstayed.

 4. In 2008 he submitted an asylum claim, again  using  the  alias  of  his
    father, and was  again  refused.   As  a  consequence  of  having  been
    encountered using false documents he  was  sentenced  to  four  months'
    imprisonment in October 2008.  His application for asylum  was  refused
    in February 2011, and  a  subsequent  appeal  was  dismissed.   Further
    submissions and representations were made,  including  judicial  review
    proceedings, at which point the Secretary of State agreed to reconsider
    the previous decision.  On 14th June 2016 the Secretary of State  again
    refused and again further representations were made.

 5. On 12th June 2017 a further decision to refuse him asylum was made, and
    it was this decision which was the subject of  the  appeal  before  the
    Immigration Judge.

 6. The judge recorded the claimant's evidence and concluded  that  he  had
    now established his true identity.

 7. At paragraph 66 she wrote:-

         "I have however, considered  the  appellant's  application  not  in
         isolation, but together with the  information  in  support  of  the
         asylum appeal.  I have heard evidence in  relation  to  the  asylum
         appeal and read the documents in support of the appellant's  asylum
         claim.  I noted also the previous  decision  of  Immigration  Judge
         Kelsey, which concerned the first appellant's  asylum  claim,  upon
         which Mrs O was named as a dependent (sic).  I find the decision of
         Immigration Judge Kelsey to be distinguishable  as  the  facts  and
         criteria are different.  I am however permitted to have  regard  to
         the judge's findings in relation to  the  appellant's  credibility.
         Immigration Judge Kelsey found the appellant's  credibility  to  be
         damaged due to his use of false documents, his conviction  for  the
         use of false documents and having been found in possession of false
         documents.  Mrs O had also admitted to using false  documents.   At
         his previous appeal the appellant failed  to  produce  evidence  to
         verify his true identity.  Within the  proceedings  before  me  the
         appellant had gone to great lengths to obtain  evidence  to  verify
         his true identity and to confirm his continued presence in  the  UK
         from 2003.  I found the evidence of the first appellant, Mr  O,  to
         be consistent with the documents he produced.  I have regard to his
         evidence in conjunction with  the  background  information  of  his
         asylum claim.  I note that historically, as part of his case he had
         not been detained by  the  SSS  but  had  received  information  in
         relation to his friend  C.   He  also  saw  the  injuries  which  C
         sustained during his detention.  The appellant states that  he  was
         frightened by what he  was  told  and  what  he  had  seen.   As  a
         consequence, the appellant became less involved with the  political
         activities in Nigeria.  I found that part of the  appellant's  case
         to be telling and indeed feasible.  I found the appellant  had  not
         sought to exaggerate the circumstances of his case".

 8. The judge went on to state that it was the claimant's case that he  had
    always had an interest in the political regime in Nigeria and  that  he
    had been repeatedly detained and tortured  there,  the  worst  instance
    being in 1997 when he was taken to a garrison and kept for four months.
     She concluded that the claimant faced a real risk of persecution for a
    Convention  reason  and  allowed  the  appeal,  allowing   the   second
    appellant's appeal in line with that of her husband as the spouse of  a
    refugee.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had made a material misdirection of law failing to  correctly
    adhere to the principles outlined in the  case  of  Devaseelan  (Second
    Appeals - ECHR -  Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri  Lanka  [2002]  UKIAT
    00702.  There had been very little detail or analysis of  the  findings
    of the previous judge.  The present judge had  failed  to  treat  those
    findings as the starting point when assessing the new evidence  in  the
    appeal.

10. Secondly, the judge had failed  to  provide  reasons  or  any  adequate
    reasons for finding on material  matters,  namely  failing  to  provide
    adequate  evidence-based  reasons  for  departing  from  the   previous
    determination and not providing  adequate  evidence-based  reasons  for
    concluding that the claimant continued to be politically active or that
    he was politically active in Nigeria.

11. Finally, the judge provided no proper reasons for concluding  that  the
    claimant was now a credible witness.  It was not known why he  had  now
    been found to have made out his  claim  to  the  required  standard  of
    proof.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Chohan on 18th October  2018.



13. Following that grant the second claimant sought  permission  to  appeal
    against the judge's decision in relation to her findings on Article  8.
    Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 28th  November
    2018, which took Mr Tarlow by surprise since he was not  aware  of  the
    claimant's cross-appeal.

Submissions

14. Mr Tarlow submitted that the judge had not properly taken into  account
    as her starting point the findings of  Immigration  Judge  Kelsey,  and
    insufficient reasons had been given for departing from his conclusions.
     Secondly, it was unclear  why  the  claimant  had  now  been  able  to
    establish that he would be at risk on return.

15. Miss Loughran strenuously defended the  decision  submitting  that  the
    decision of Judge Kelsey was made principally because there was a  lack
    of supporting evidence, both as to  the  claimant's  identity  and  his
    ability to substantiate his claim to be at risk on return  to  Nigeria.
    By contrast, before First-tier Judge McIntosh the claimant had produced
    four witnesses and a large number of  documents  which  the  judge  was
    entitled to rely on for the reasons which she gave.  There was  medical
    evidence which was consistent with the claimant's case that he had been
    tortured in Nigeria, together with a country expert  report  addressing
    the risk which the couple would face on return as a childless couple.

16. Miss Loughran submitted that there was no general reasons challenge  in
    the grounds which had been pleaded solely in relation to  an  error  of
    law in relation to the First-tier Judge's decision.

Consideration as to whether there is an Error of Law

17. In spite of Miss Loughran's coherent arguments I am  not  persuaded  by
    them.

18. First, in relation to the Devaseelan point, whilst I accept that  there
    was far more evidence before the present  judge  than  there  had  been
    before Judge Kelsey, and that she may have been entitled to depart from
    his findings, she did not in fact apply the  correct  test.   She  said
    that she was permitted to  have  regard  to  Judge  Kelsey's  findings,
    whereas in fact she ought to have treated them as  the  starting  point
    when making credibility findings in the present case.  It is not at all
    clear from the determination that she did treat that.

19. Second, whilst I accept that the Secretary  of  State's  grounds  could
    have been clearer, I am satisfied that in fact at 2b), 2g) and  2h)  of
    the grounds, the Secretary of State was articulating a general  reasons
    challenge.

20. It is made out.  I am quite unclear from this determination as  to  why
    the judge has concluded that the claimant would be at risk on return to
    Nigeria were he to be returned today.

21. In Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT  00341  the  Tribunal
    said:-

         "We are not for a moment suggesting that judgments have to set  out
         the entire interstices of the evidence presented or  analyse  every
         nuance between the parties. Far from it.   Indeed, we  should  make
         it clear that it is generally unnecessary, unhelpful and  unhealthy
         for First-tier Tribunal judgments to seek to rehearse every  detail
         or issue raised in the case.   This  leads  to  judgments  becoming
         overly long and confused.   Further,  it  is  not  a  proportionate
         approach to deciding cases.   It is, however, necessary for  First-
         tier Tribunal judges to identify and resolve the key  conflicts  in
         the evidence and explain in clear and brief terms their reasons for
         preferring one case to the other so that the parties can understand
         why they have won or lost."

22. Whilst it is clear from the determination why the judge concluded  that
    the claimant had now established his true identity it  is  not  at  all
    clear why she considered that he had established that he  was  entitled
    to a grant of asylum.

23. Accordingly, the decision is set aside and will have to be remade.

24. All parties agreed that the decision on Article 8 in  relation  to  the
    second claimant will be remade at the same time. I note that there have
    been considerable delays in this case, not least a delay  of  over  six
    months (not referred to in the grounds) between  the  hearing  of  this
    case and the  promulgation  of  the  decision.   It  would  be  helpful
    therefore if it could be reheard as soon as possible.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 4 January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor












