
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07561/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th December 2018                    |On 08th January 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mrs Sushma More
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Harvey (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Whitwell (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy, promulgated on 23rd May 2018, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 18th May 2018.  In the determination, the  judge  refused
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of India, and  was  born  on  29th
    October 1982.  She appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 23rd May 2017, refusing her application for  entry  clearance  to
    join her husband, who is present and settled in the UK.  The  Appellant
    satisfied the requirements of suitability, relationship, and  financial
    requirements.  What she needed to  satisfy  was  whether  she  met  the
    English language requirements.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge observed that the Appellant was required to state her  unique
    reference number in her application form so that it could  be  verified
    on the IELTS SET  consortium  online  system,  to  verify  whether  the
    Appellant had acquired certification of the English  language  test  at
    the requisite level (paragraph 7).  The evidence before the  judge  was
    that the  Appellant  had  obtained  the  IELTS  academic  qualification
    because she was a trained nurse and was applying for  nursing  jobs  in
    the UK prior to entry.  She had worked previously in South Africa.   To
    work as a nurse in the UK,  the  Appellant  had  to  provide  an  IELTS
    academic  qualification  (paragraph  11).   The  Appellant  obtained  a
    further IELTS qualification which contained a unique reference  number.
    This was to support a fresh application that she submitted on 8th March
    2018.   However,  the  requisite  verification  was   not   forthcoming
    notwithstanding the existence of the unique reference number.

 4. Instead, what the judge was  faced  with  was  a  printed  certificate.
    This, held the judge,

         "Does not satisfy the provisions of  Appendix  O,  which  specifies
         that results are verified through the online  system.   I  have  no
         means  to  access  that  system.   Upon  enquiry,  Mr  Smith   [the
         Presenting Officer] said he had no means to do so.  The only people
         who do are those involved in entry clearance  directly"  (paragraph
         12).

 5. Therefore, for "technical reasons"  the  appeal  stood  to  be  refused
    (paragraph 13), as the evidence before the judge did not  disclose  the
    fact that there had been verification through online  certification  of
    the Appellant having sat the  requisite  English  language  test.   The
    judge, on more than one occasion, referred to  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor as being "blameless" (paragraph 10 and paragraph 13).

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the Appellant and her husband had
    stated a number of times to the authorities, and before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that the unique reference number can be  verified  online  by
    recognised  organisations  (such  as  the  Entry   Clearance   Officer,
    universities and employers).  They cannot be accessed by the  Appellant
    herself.  The necessary verification could not be produced  before  the
    Tribunal but this was through no fault of the Appellant or her Sponsor.



 7. On 29th October 2018, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable that the judge erred in  law
    in not considering that the IELTS B1 academic certificate relied on  by
    the Appellant was verifiable online.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 17th December 2018, Ms Harvey, appearing as
    Counsel on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  handed  up  her  well-compiled
    skeleton argument.  She submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in
    law by holding that an IELTS certificate had to be able to be  verified
    online by the Appellant, or by him, and by the Presenting Officer.   It
    could be verified by the Entry Clearance Officer in order to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph E-ECP.4.1.  That was not in  dispute.   As  a
    consequence of suggesting that the  Appellant  and  others  could  also
    verify it, the judge erred in holding that the Appellant did  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  In further  consequence  of
    this, the judge's approach to proportionality was in error.  It was not
    necessary in a democratic society, and nor  was  it  proportionate,  to
    deny entry to the Appellant.   Furthermore,  the  judge  erred  in  his
    approach to proportionality in holding that the interference  with  the
    Appellant and her Sponsor's right to family life was necessary  in  all
    the circumstances of the case.

 9. Ms Harvey made good her submissions by stating that the sole reason for
    refusal of the Appellant's application by the Respondent was  expressed
    by the Entry Clearance Manager in his review of 23rd November 2018 (see
    the Appellant's bundle at page 25), where he referred to the  Appellant
    as having submitted the  "wrong"  IELTS  certificate,  because  he  had
    submitted the IELTS academic certificate and not the  IELTS  for  UKVI.
    The Entry Clearance  Manager  asserted  that  this  did  not  have  the
    "required"  unique  reference  number.   However,  the  Appellant   had
    submitted an IELTS academic certificate at level B1, and this  exceeded
    the required A1 level, which was taken with an approved  provider,  and
    was less than two years old, because she needed to obtain this for  her
    nursing career in the UK.  The judge, however, held that the  Appellant
    (at paragraph 7) was required to state her unique reference  number  on
    her application form so that it could be verified online on  the  IELTS
    SET consortium system.  He had held (at paragraph 12) that  he  himself
    had not been able to access the system and  nor  could  Mr  Smith,  the
    Presenting Officer, so that "the only people who do are those  involved
    in entry clearance directly" (paragraph 12).  On this basis, the  judge
    held that the Appellant had failed  to  satisfy  the  English  language
    requirements because of "technical reasons" (paragraph 13).

10. However, submitted Ms Harvey,  if  one  looks  at  Appendix  O  to  the
    Immigration Rules, this refers to  tests  taken  outside  the  UK,  and
    includes the IELTS  life  skills  test,  as  well  as  the  IELTS  SELT
    consortium provider, and underneath  the  section  "documents  required
    with application", it is stated that "for tests taken on or  after  6th
    April 2015 no document required (scores will be  verified  using  IELTS
    SELT consortium online system using a  unique  reference  number  which
    should be stated on the application form)".  This was  set  out  by  Ms
    Harvey at paragraph 8 of her skeleton argument.

11. Thereafter, Ms Harvey  submitted  that  Appendix  FM-SE  sets  out  the
    evidential requirements for applications made under  Appendix  FM,  and
    this provides that the evidence required of passing an English language
    test in speaking and  listening  with  the  provider  approved  by  the
    Secretary of State, where the applicant relies on that pass to meet  an
    English  language  requirement,   is   confirmation   on   the   online
    verification system operated  by  an  approved  English  language  test
    provider, as specified in Appendix O.

12. Ms Harvey went on to say that the phrase "as specified in  Appendix  O"
    refers  simply  to  those  identified  as  approved  English   language
    providers.  Nothing more is specified by the note  against  the  rubric
    "documents  required".   She  explained  that  rather  than  specifying
    documents, the statement "for tests taken on or after 6th  April  2015:
    no document required (scores will be  verified  using  the  IELTS  SELT
    consortium online system using a unique reference number  which  should
    be stated on the application form)" is recorded that no  documents  are
    required.  Nowhere is it suggested that they could  not  be  submitted.
    The unique reference number obviates the need to submit a document, but
    nowhere in the Rules is it suggested that it bars such submission.

13. Accordingly, the effect of this was that the judge had fallen victim to
    the very complexity and confusion of the Immigration Rules that he  had
    sympathetically referred to on behalf of the  Appellant  (at  paragraph
    10).  The Appellant herself had made no error in assuming that an IELTS
    academic certificate could satisfy the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-
    ECP.4.1.  The judge  had  no  basis  in  law  for  his  conclusion  (at
    paragraph 13) that the Appellant had  failed  to  satisfy  the  English
    language requirement.  In accordance with Appendix FM-SE, she submitted
    a  certificate  which  could  be  verified  online,  from  an  approved
    provider, at the requisite level, obtained within the past  two  years.
    The Appellant submitted  with  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, a copy of the online verification  certificate,  obtained  by
    the potential employer whom she asked to provide her with a copy of the
    verification it had undertaken (see the Appellant's bundle  before  the
    Upper Tribunal at page 81B).  She applied for this to  be  admitted  in
    evidence.  If an error of law was to be found, Ms Harvey submitted that
    could then be taken into account.

14. For his part, Mr Whitwell submitted that the  starting  point  was  the
    failure of the Entry Clearance Officer to actually  verify  the  online
    test.  This is clear from the application detail, submitted before this
    Tribunal by Mr Whitwell, in relation to  the  Appellant's  application.
    What this showed (at page 3 of 9) was that on 21st March 2017 there had
    been an attempt by the Entry Clearance Officer  to  attempt  an  online
    verification.  The entry on the left-hand column states  that,  "unable
    to verify IELTS online verification - no details found".  Then again on
    22nd March 2017, another effort was made to seek verification and there
    is an entry in the left-hand column of "unable to verify  IELTS  online
    verification - no details found".

15. Mr Whitwell went on to say that the CRS notes of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer for 23rd November 2017  makes  it  clear,  before  the  refusal
    letter was issued that:

         "Refusal only on basis of Appellant taking wrong  IELTS  test  even
         though it was done at an approved IELTS for  UKVI  test  centre  in
         India.   Grounds  state  Appellant's  IELTS  certificate  was   not
         considered which is a misinterpretation of the refusal notice as it
         was considered by not valid  as  certificate  doesn't  have  unique
         reference number."

16. Mr Whitwell then referred to the refusal letter of the Entry  Clearance
    Officer dated 9th June 2017.  This makes it clear  that  the  Appellant
    has:

         "Not passed an English language test (A1 level of  Common  European
         Framework) with the provider approved by UKBA and/or do not hold an
         academic qualification recognised by NARIC UK to be the  equivalent
         to the standard of a bachelors or masters degree or PhD in  the  UK
         ... You have not provided a UKVI IELTS certificate."

17. The ECM's report which followed this, on  23rd  November  2017,  states
    also that the Appellant had submitted the wrong test.  This is  because
    the IELTS for UKVI test centre certificate does not have  the  required
    unique reference number which should be printed below  the  candidate's
    ID number.  The Appellant had taken the wrong test.  The requisite test
    required for settlement application is "IELTS for UKVI" and  not  IELTS
    academic test.  Alternatively, the  Appellant  could  provide  a  NARIC
    letter, as advised on the refusal  notice,  in  order  for  her  degree
    certificate to be accepted as meeting the English language requirement.



18. Ms Harvey submitted that the statement in the notes of 21st March  2017
    and  22nd  March  2017  stating  "unable   to   verify   IELTS   online
    verification" was  misleading  because  they  implied  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was unable to verify, rather than implying  that  the
    Appellant had not submitted the unique reference  number,  which  would
    have meant that the fault lay not on the side of  the  Appellant.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer erred in stating that the IELTS  test  was  not
    verifiable.  The  mechanism  of  a  unique  reference  number  was  not
    something that allowed for verification in this  case.   The  Appellant
    had not sat the wrong test at all.  The  Entry  Clearance  Manager  was
    wrong.  Both tests could be verified online and it is not the case,  as
    the ECM suggests, that the  IELTS  academic  test  cannot  be  verified
    online.

Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, such that it stands to be set
    aside.  My reasons are as follows.  First, this is  a  case  where  the
    Appellant was unable herself to verify online the IELTS test, which  in
    any event was only verifiable by virtue of a unique  reference  number.
    It  could  be  verified  by  the  authorities,  by  employers,  and  by
    educational institutions.  After all, it was verified  by  the  British
    Council, because the Appellant had to work in the UK as a  nurse.   The
    evidence shows that there was an attempt made by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer to verify the tests taken by the Appellant both on  21st  March
    2017 and on 22nd March 2017.  However, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    department was unable to do so on the basis  that  it  was  "unable  to
    verify  IELTS  online  verification".   This  does  not   explain   why
    verification was not possible.  It does not state that verification was
    not possible because there had been an absence of  a  submission  of  a
    unique reference number.

20. Second, what was plain, however, was that not only was it the case that
    the judge himself was in no position to seek  online  verification,  or
    that the Presenting Officer at the hearing before the judge was  unable
    to do so, but the Appellant herself was singularly  unable  to  do  so.
    Therefore, at the hearing before Judge McCarthy, the Appellant produced
    a printed copy of the test, which bore  the  unique  reference  number.
    This would have allowed  the  Appellant  to  put  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal, so as to enable the burden of proof to be discharged, insofar
    that the disclosure of the unique reference  number,  would  mean  that
    those who were able to undertake the online verification process,  were
    able to do so.  The relevance of Appendix O to the  Immigration  Rules,
    is  such  that  alongside   the   rubric   "documents   required   with
    application", it is simply stated "no document required (scores will be
    verified using IELTS SELT  consortium  online  system  using  a  unique
    reference number which should be stated on the application  form).   It
    does not mean to say that such a document cannot actually  be  produced
    itself.  If the document contains the  unique  reference  number,  such
    that it is stated on the application form, then this can only assist in
    the  necessary  verification  being  carried  out.   Otherwise,  it  is
    perverse to require verification of something which  is  impossible  to
    verify for the Appellant herself.  In short, the Appellant was entitled
    to assume  that  her  IELTS  academic  certificate  could  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph E-ECP.4.1.

Remaking the Decision

21. I have remade the decision on the basis  of  the  evidence  before  the
    judge, the submissions that I have heard today, and the  findings  made
    by the judge previously.  I am allowing this appeal on the  basis  that
    the  Appellant,  in  accordance  with  Appendix  FM-SE,   submitted   a
    certificate that could be verified online, from an  approved  provider,
    at the requisite level, obtained within the past two years.

22. The Appellant submitted  with  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal a copy of the online verification of her certificate, and this
    being obtained from a potential employer, whom she asked to provide her
    with a copy of the verification  that  had  been  undertaken  (see  the
    bundle before the Upper Tribunal at  page  81B).   There  has  been  no
    suggestion that anything is wrong with the certificate provided by  the
    Appellant.

23. Finally, the appeal is also allowed on the basis of the decision of the
    Secretary of State being disproportionate.  This was a case  where,  as
    the judge properly found, both  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  were
    "blameless" (see paragraph 10), and had met all of the requirements  of
    the Rules.  The Appellant met all the requirements of the Rules and  to
    refuse to admit her serves no legitimate objective and is not necessary
    in a democratic society.  This was a  case  where  the  Appellant  only
    failed "on technical reasons" (paragraph 13).

24. At the time of the decision, the Appellant was in the  advanced  stages
    of her pregnancy.  The strain of application and  separation  from  her
    husband, at a very difficult  time,  meant  that  it  was  particularly
    important that she and her  husband  were  together.   The  Appellant's
    husband owns his own home in the UK and works in the UK.  Travelling to
    India to be with his wife would interfere with his private life in  the
    UK.

25. The Appellant herself is now with a child.  In all  the  circumstances,
    accordingly, this appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

27. No anonymity direction is made.

28. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 4th January 2019










