
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/07533/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 May 2017                        |     On 31 May 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                              Mrs mandeep kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rashid Ahmed of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of India who was born  on  17  April  1986.
    She appeals against the respondent's  decision  of  17  September  2015
    refusing to grant her leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of her family and private life.

 2. The respondent considered that Appendix FM R-LTRP was not  met  because
    the appellant had not provided an original English language certificate
    from an approved provider.  The appellant  had  submitted  a  City  and
    Guilds language certificate at level B2 which the respondent considered
    was no longer acceptable.

 3. The respondent also considered the appellant's private and family  life
    under  Appendix  FM,  paragraph  276ADE  and  Article  8  outside   the
    Immigration Rules.  The respondent considered that  the  appellant  did
    not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  and  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances warranting grant of leave to  remain  outside
    the Rules.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated  on  20  October  2016  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mace dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 5. With regard to the English language requirement  (on  what  appears  to
    have been an  acceptance  by  the  appellant's  representative  at  the
    hearing that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules
    in relation to her application as a partner because she was  unable  to
    meet the English language requirement) the judge considered a number of
    issues based on  the  appellant's  submissions  that  the  respondent's
    decision  had  produced  unfairness.   The  appellant  had  sought   to
    undertake another English test but had been unable to do so because the
    Home Office were in possession of her original passport.  The judge did
    not accept that there had  been  any  unfairness  and  found  that  the
    application was fairly considered by the respondent.   The  judge  then
    considered the claim under the partner route considering EX.1(b) of the
    Immigration  Rules  and  also  considered  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge found that the appellant did not meet the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and that there  would  not  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights  if
    she were to be removed.

 6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and on 17  March  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Osborne granted the appellant permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 7. The grounds of appeal set out two bases of appeal, the  first  is  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in  its  consideration  of  the
    English language requirements.  It is submitted that the appellant  met
    the requirements of the Rules because  the  certificate  that  she  had
    submitted fell within the transitional arrangements which  stated  that
    applicants who took the language tests on or before 5 April 2015  would
    be able to use their certificates until  5  November  2015.   City  and
    Guilds was one of the approved test providers  at  the  time  that  the
    appellant took the test.  She took her test before  5  April  2015  and
    therefore it was still valid at the date of the  respondent's  decision
    because she was entitled to use it until 5 November 2015.  The  grounds
    of appeal with regard to Article 8 submit that the judge set too high a
    threshold for determining when Article 8 was engaged.
 8. In the Rule 24 response the Secretary of State submitted that the First-
    tier Tribunal  had  directed  itself  appropriately.   It  was  however
    accepted that the appellant's certificate was on the transitional  list
    of approved providers at the time of the application and  decision  but
    it is submitted that the error is not material.  The Secretary of State
    argues that the appellant was applying for  leave  as  a  spouse  of  a
    settled person and therefore the certificate needed to be at the  level
    of A1.

 9. At the commencement of the  hearing  Mr  Clarke  addressed  me,  having
    discussed the matter with Mr Ahmed.  The respondent accepted  that  the
    appellant was entitled to rely, under the transitional arrangements, on
    the certificate that had been provided. Mr Clarke  also  conceded  that
    the certificate at B2 was of a higher level than the A1 level required.
    It was conceded that the appellant met the requirements of the Rules as
    this was the only issue upon which the respondent had refused leave  to
    remain.

10. On the basis of the respondent's concession and my own consideration of
    the transitional arrangements  I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in making the finding that  the  appellant  did
    not meet the requirements of the Rules.

11. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

12. I remake the decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision.

Notice of decision

The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 28 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw








