
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07143/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 April 2019                         |On 15 May 2019                    |
|                                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                           Arumugam sundaralingam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Emma Harris, Counsel instructed by NAG Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal from  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State for the Home Department ("the Department") to
    refuse to grant him leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  private  life
    pursuant to Rule 2767ADE(1)(iii).  The First-tier Tribunal did not make
    an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider  that  the  appellant
    requires anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date of birth is 27 May
    1949.  On 20 July 2017 he applied for leave  to  remain  on  family  or
    private life grounds.  In a covering letter, his solicitors  said  that
    their  client  had  entered  the  UK  in  March  1996  and  had   lived
    continuously in the  UK  for  the  past  20  years.   He  was  also  in
    relationship with a partner who was present and settled in the UK.

 3. On 9 March 2018 the Department gave  their  reasons  for  refusing  the
    application.   The  application  fell  for  refusal   on   grounds   of
    suitability, because he had been convicted at Guildhall Crown Court  on
    31 March 2000 for indecent assault on a female, an offence committed on
    16 December 1997, and he had been sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment.
     His presence in the UK was thus not conducive to the public good,  and
    paragraph S-LTR.1.4 of Appendix FM of the Rules applied.

 4. He also had failed to provide information and documents requested in  a
    letter dated 16 December 2017 and again in a letter  dated  31  January
    2018.  He was also asked to provide evidence of his partner's  address,
    which he had failed to provide.  He had provided no  reasonable  excuse
    for failing to do so, and so paragraph S-LTR.1.7 of Appendix FM of  the
    Rules also applied.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. In a decision promulgated on 16 January  2019,  Judge  Zahed  gave  his
    reasons for dismissing the appellant's appeal following  a  hearing  at
    which he was represented by Counsel, and at which  the  Judge  received
    oral evidence from the appellant and from Ms [LP].

 6. The Judge found at paragraph [16] that  the  appellant  had  sought  to
    bolster his claim by stating that he had a partner, when in fact Ms [P]
    was not his  partner.   Accordingly  he  made  an  adverse  credibility
    finding against the appellant for advancing this false claim.

 7. The Judge then turned to consider the appellant's private  life  claim.
    He found that the appellant had been living in the UK continuously  for
    20 years and 3 months at the date of application.   Discounting  the  9
    months he served in prison, the appellant had been living  continuously
    in the UK for 20  years  and  6  months.   Thus,  he  had  been  living
    continuously in the UK for at least 20  years.  The  Judge  found  that
    nonetheless the appellant could not succeed  under  the  Rules  as  his
    application fell for refusal under S-LTR.1.4.

 8. The Judge went on to conduct a proportionality assessment  outside  the
    Rules.  He concluded that the appellant's circumstances were  not  such
    as to be one of those rare  cases  that  Article  8  could  be  granted
    outside the Rules, notwithstanding the fact that he had been living  in
    the UK for over 20 years.  On that basis, he dismissed the  appellant's
    human rights appeal.



The Application for Permission to Appeal

 9. The application for permission to appeal was settled by the appellant's
    solicitors.  They pleaded that the Judge had undertaken  no  meaningful
    assessment of the refusal under  paragraph  S-LTR.1.4.  The  Judge  had
    failed to consider whether in fact the presence of the appellant in the
    UK was not conducive to the public good as at the date of the  hearing.
    The Judge's failure to conduct such an assessment was incompatible with
    the provisions of paragraph S-LTR.3.1.  His failure to conduct such  an
    assessment was material to the outcome, as the Judge found at paragraph
    [27] that the balancing exercise was finely balanced.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

10. On 28 February 2019,  Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons: "It is arguable that  the  Judge  has
    set out  an  insufficient  analysis  of  the  factors  appertaining  to
    suitability in this context pursuant to the Rules.  It is arguable that
    the factors identified in the permission application  at  paragraphs  6
    and 7 fall to be evaluated.  It is arguable  that  the  proportionality
    assessment has been affected."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

11. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out,  Ms  Harris  developed  the  case  advanced  in   the   permission
    application.  In  reply,  Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had directed himself appropriately and that no error  of
    law was made out.

Discussion

12. This appeal raises an issue as to the construction of S-LTR.1.4.   This
    provides that the presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive
    to the public good because they have been convicted of an  offence  for
    which they had been sentenced to imprisonment for less than 4 years but
    at least 12 months.

13. In order to place this paragraph in context, it should be noted that S-
    LTR.1.2 provides that the applicant will be refused  limited  leave  to
    remain on grounds of non-suitability if any of the paragraphs S-LTR.1.2
    to 1.8 apply.

14. The grounds set out in S-LTR.1.2 to 1.7  are  of  descending  order  of
    gravity.  S-LTR.1.2  applies  where  the  applicant  is  currently  the
    subject of a deportation order.  S-LTR.1.7 applies where the  applicant
    has failed without reasonable excuse to comply with the requirement  to
    (a) attend an interview; (b) provide information; (c) provide  physical
    data; or (d) undergo  a  medical  examination  and  provide  a  medical
    report.

15. S-LTR.2.1 provides that the  applicant  will  normally  be  refused  on
    grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.2.2 to 2.5 apply.

16. The next provision is S-LTR.3.1, which provides that  when  considering
    whether the presence of the applicant to the UK is not conducive to the
    public good, any legal or practical reasons why  the  applicant  cannot
    presently be removed from the UK must be ignored.

17. It is clear from the Judge's line of reasoning that he considered  that
    the only factual question which arose under S-LTR.1.4 was  whether  the
    appellant had been convicted of  an  offence  for  which  he  had  been
    sentenced to imprisonment for less than 4 years but at least 12 months.
     He did not regard himself as required or empowered to ask whether  the
    presence of the appellant in the UK was  no  longer  conducive  to  the
    public good, given the passage of time since the offending had occurred
    or given other potentially relevant considerations.

18. Ms Harris submits that the Judge erred in law in  this  regard,  as  S-
    LTR.3.1 envisages that the decision-maker  will  evaluate  whether  the
    presence of the applicant in the UK is  not  conducive  to  the  public
    good, even if the factual criteria for its invocation are met. However,
    I do not consider that the construction which Ms Harris seeks to  place
    on this paragraph is correct for a number of reasons.

19. I consider that the paragraph is aimed at directing the  decision-maker
    to ignore any legal or practical reasons as to why an applicant  cannot
    presently be removed from the UK, rather than directing  the  decision-
    maker to conduct a wider evaluative exercise. Moreover, the language of
    S-LTR.1.3 and 1.4  effectively  precludes  any  such  wider  evaluative
    exercise being undertaken.  In 1.3, it is  simply  the  fact  that  the
    applicant has been convicted of an offence for  which  they  have  been
    sentenced to imprisonment for at least 4 years that  means  that  their
    presence in the UK is not conducive to the public good.  Similarly,  in
    1.4, it is simply the fact that the applicant has been convicted of  an
    offence for which they have been sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  less
    than 4 years or at least 12 months, which means that their presence  in
    the UK is not conducive to the public good.

20. For the above reasons, I do not consider that the Judge erred in law in
    finding that S-LTR.1.4 applied because the appellant had been convicted
    of an offence for which he had been sentenced to imprisonment for  less
    than 4 years but at least 12 months.  In deciding whether the appellant
    was disqualified from taking the benefit of the 20-year Rule, the Judge
    did not  have  discretion  to  dis-apply  S-LTR.1.4.   His  ability  to
    exercise discretion arose only in  the  context  of  a  proportionality
    assessment outside the Rules.

21. The Judge rightly recognised this. In his  proportionality  assessment,
    he said that it was in the appellant's favour that he had been  in  the
    UK for nearly 22 years; that he was  convicted  of  sexual  assault  in
    March 2000 for an offence committed in December 1997; and that  he  had
    he had not offended since; that the offence was thus over 20 years ago;
    and that the respondent had at no  time  over  that  period  sought  to
    deport the appellant, notwithstanding that he could have been contacted
    as he had made further submissions in  2004  which  were  not  rejected
    until 10 years later in 2014.

22. The Judge continued in paragraph [27] as follows:

         "I find that the balancing exercise is finely balanced but I  find,
         that the fact that the appellant has committed a sexual assault  on
         [a] girl, an offence for which he received 18 months' imprisonment;
         that the appellant's entire life in the UK  has  been  here  as  an
         overstayer; the fact that he has benefited from receiving treatment
         and medicine from the NHS; the fact that he has worked  in  the  UK
         when he was not entitled to do so; the fact that he has no  partner
         or children in the UK; the fact that no evidence has been submitted
         that his life in the UK cannot be replicated in Sri Lanka; the fact
         that the appellant has not submitted evidence of friends, community
         groups or any religious affiliation to show that his  private  life
         would be severely altered if he were to live in Sri Lanka; that  it
         is a proportionate and legitimate interference with the appellant's
         right to a private life and in the public interest  to  remove  the
         appellant from the UK."

23. The Judge added that the appellant  could  receive  treatment  for  his
    medical conditions in Sri Lanka, and that he had family in  Sri  Lanka,
    including a sister who he had spoken to,  and  who  could  support  him
    while he found employment.  The fact that he had been in employment  in
    the UK, a country that he had not been  to  before  he  came  in  1996,
    pointed to the fact that he would be able to  find  employment  in  Sri
    Lanka - a country where he had lived during his  formative  years.   He
    also noted that the appellant had previously worked in Kuwait.

24. As I have indicated earlier in this decision, the appellant  could  not
    succeed in a private life claim under Rule 276ADE(1)(iii) on account of
    the operation of Rule 276ADE(1)(i) which provides that the requirements
    to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the grounds of private
    life in the UK are that, at the date of application, the applicant does
    not fall for refusal under any of the grounds contained in, inter alia,
    sections S-LTR.1.2 to S-LTR.2.3 of Appendix FM.   The  appellant  could
    only ever succeed in an Article 8 claim  outside  the  Rules,  and  the
    Judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that,  on  balance,   the
    threatened interference was proportionate.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


