

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07804/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On  16th May 2017                      |On 26th May 2017                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                Ms. GA BLACK

                                   Between

               MR HARRISON GATHAGE                  Appellant


                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                              Respondent
No anonymity order made

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr I Kumi Counsel instructed by Templeton Legal services
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding Home office Presenting Office


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1.  I shall refer to the parties as follows; "the Appellant"  in  these
    proceedings is  Mr  Gathage  and  the  Secretary  of  State  is  "  the
    Respondent". This is an error of law hearing in respect of the decision
    and  reasons  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal   (Judge   Fowell)("FTT")
    promulgated on 7th November 2016, in which she dismissed the appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

Background

     2.     The Appellant is a citizen of  Kenya  and whose  date  of  birth
    is  17.9.1963.

    3.  The Appellant first entered the UK in 2002 by way of a multi  visit
    visa which allowed him to make trips to the UK over a five year period.
     He remained in the UK from 2003. He claimed that in 2007 his wife  and
    children were killed in Kenya and his house was burned  down  [2].   He
    made two applications for leave to remain and then claimed asylum which
    was never considered [4].  In November 2013  he  married  his  wife,  a
    British citizen. In his application  for  leave  to  remain  he  raised
    health problems suffered by his wife and argued that in  the  event  of
    return  to  Kenya  he  would  suffer  trauma  because  of  the   tragic
    circumstances of the death of his family members in 2007 [7].

    4.  The FTT found that the family tragedy never took place.   It  found
    that there was no supporting evidence in addition to which there was no
    asylum claim made by the  appellant  nor  any  reference  made  to  the
    incident in his application in 2009 [30].  It  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant and his wife were a genuine relationship and that he lived in
    the UK for 14 years (mostly illegally).  The FTT took  into  account  a
    letter dated March 2015 from the appellant's wife's GP [33]  and  found
    that her medical conditions were common and  that  treatment  would  be
    available in  Kenya  [33-34].   Accordingly  the  FTT  found  that  the
    appellant had not shown insurmountable obstacles under the  Immigration
    Rules to  continuing  married/family  life  in  Kenya.  In  considering
    Article 8 outside of the Rules the FTT cited the  judgment  of  Agyarko
    [2015] EWCA Civ 440 [39] and concluded that Article 8 was  not  engaged
    and that the interference was proportionate.  The FTT took into account
    that the appellant lived unlawfully in the  UK  and  that  the  parties
    entered the relationship in that knowledge [40].   The  FTT  considered
    that Chikwamba v SSHD 2008 UKHL did not apply in the light of the  fact
    that there would be a 60 day delay time for a visa  application  to  be
    considered [43-44].


Grounds of application for permission

    5. The appellant argued that the  FTT  failed  to  fully  consider  the
    availability of medical treatment in Kenya and that it  applied  a  too
    stringent test to the question of "insurmountable obstacles".

Permission to appeal

    6. Permission was granted on renewal by FTJ Gibb who observed that  the
    Supreme Court decision in Agyarko v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11  had  not  been
    before the FTT and that the public interest can be reduced where  there
    has been delay and where the Appellant met the requirements of Appendix
    FM.  Further more FTJ  Gibb  found  that  the  FTT  arguably  erred  in
    assessing the evidence  in  reaching  a  negative  finding  as  to  the
    occurrence of the family tragedy in Kenya.


The hearing

    7.  At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  representatives.  Mr
    Kumi relied on a skeleton argument in addition to the grounds of appeal
    and relied heavily on the terms of the grant of permission by FTJ Gibb.
    The details of the appellant's submissions were fully set  out  in  the
    various documents and in the record of proceedings and I do not  repeat
    the same. Mr Wilding contended  that  the  application  was  simply  an
    attempt to rehear matters before this Tribunal and that  the  terms  of
    permission by FTJ Gibb were beyond the scope of the grounds.


    8. At the end of the hearing I decided that there was no material error
    of law and that none of the grounds argued were made out.  The decision
    and reasons shall stand and the appellant's appeal is dismissed. I  now
    give my reasons.

 Reasons for decision

    9.  I am fully satisfied that the FTT applied the  proper  approach  in
    its consideration of the  existence  of  insurmountable  obstacles  and
    which was consistent with the guidance given by the  Supreme  Court  in
    Agyarko.  The FTT made negative findings of fact that were open  to  it
    to make on the occurrence of the family tragedy in Kenya. It relied  on
    the lack of supporting evidence together with findings relating to  the
    appellant's immigration history.  The FTT fully considered the  medical
    evidence about  the  appellant's  wife's  conditions  set  out  in  the
    decision and reasons [43].  The FTT considered Article 8 with reference
    to SS(Congo) [38] and concluded that no exceptional  circumstances  had
    been established.  Although subsequent to the hearing  before  the  FTT
    the Supreme Court effectively removed the threshold test for Article 8,
    the FTT did go on to consider relevant  factors  in  assessing  of  the
    proportionality of the interference including the period of  separation
    measured by reference to a visa processing times  documents  showing  a
    period of 60 days, awareness of precarious circumstances at the time of
    the relationship and the length of unlawful residence.  Those  findings
    were again entirely sustainable on the evidence before the FTT.   There
    was no contrary evidence relied on by the  appellant  to  question  the
    processing period of  60  days  for  a  visa.   It  appeared  that  the
    appellant's application for entry clearance would  meet  the  financial
    requirements having regard to his wife's earnings.  I find no basis for
    raising any argument under section 117B (6), which was misconceived and
    indeed this was not a matter raised in the grounds of  application  for
    permission.   The FTT did in any  event  consider  proportionality  and
    weighed up the public interest and private interest and had  regard  to
    the factors relevant in Chikwamba.


    10.  There is no material error of law disclosed.  The FTT decision and
    reasons shall stand.  The appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed            Date 25.5.2017


                               GA Black


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








                               No anonymity order made
                               As the appeal is dismissed there is no fee
                                   award.




                               Signed            Date 25.5.2017


                               GA Black


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


