
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/07133/2015
                                                               hu/07154/2015
                                                               hu/07162/2015
                                                               hu/07178/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29th September 2017                 |On 23rd October 2017                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              (1) Mohammad [A]
                               (2) Tamanna [A]
                                    [W H]
                                    [W A]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss Hafsah Masood (Counsel), Law Dale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton (Senior HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hanes, promulgated on 1st December 2016, following a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 14th November 2016.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeals  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the  Appellants
    subsequently applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are  a  family  of  Bangladeshi  nationals.   The  first
    Appellant, the husband and father respectively was born  on  [  ]  July
    1982.  The second Appellant, the wife and mother respectively, was born
    on [ ] November 1981.  The third Appellant, their son, was born on [  ]
    2008.  Finally, the fourth Appellant, their daughter, was born on  [  ]
    2012.  The principal Appellant first entered the UK on 2nd May 2005, as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student, with the visa valid until 31st  July  2006.
    There were various extensions of stay.  This present appeal concerns  a
    application for leave to remain on the basis of Article 8  private  and
    family life rights and it was refused by the Secretary of State on 15th
    September 2015.  This appeal is against that decision.

The Judge's Determination

 3. The judge gave consideration to the fact that the adult Appellants were
    both 34 years of age at the date of the hearing and had lived in the UK
    for  about  eleven  and  a  half  years  and  nine  and  a  half  years
    respectively.  Both parties had close family ties to  Bangladesh.   The
    judge did not find the Appellant credible on three  particular  issues.
    First, he did not accept that the  principal  Appellant  was  estranged
    from his parents on account of having married his wife against her will
    because otherwise the principal Appellant's father and uncle would  not
    have funded his education to the UK, or invited his wife to  live  with
    them for two years whilst he was himself living in the UK.  It was also
    not accepted by the Judge that  the  principal  Appellant  developed  a
    relationship with his future wife travelling some three to  four  hours
    on a bus.  Second, it was not accepted that the principal Appellant did
    not work in Bangladesh.  Third, the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    principal Appellant did not have contact with his parents given that he
    was their only son or that his wife did not maintain contact  with  her
    close relatives or that either party was estranged from  close  family.
    Ample reasons for these findings were given (at paragraph 11).

 4. It was, however, with respect  to  the  two  minor  children  that  the
    determination was more nuanced.  At the date of the application on 22nd
    June  2015,  the  third  Appellant,  the  son,  met  the   seven   year
    requirement, but the fourth  Appellant,  the  daughter,  did  not  (see
    paragraph 13).  The judge recognised that it was in the best  interests
    of the children to live with their parents and be brought  up  by  them
    (paragraph 14).  He gives specific consideration in some depth  to  the
    individual circumstances of each child.   With  respect  of  the  third
    Appellant, the judge observed how the fourth Appellant was  two  and  a
    half years of age and was primarily focused on her parents and  was  at
    an adaptable age, such that her best  interests  were  to  remain  with
    their parents should they return to Bangladesh  (paragraph  17).   With
    respect to the third Appellant, the son, the  judge  observed  that  he
    would have to "give considerable weight to the fact that he would  have
    spent seven years (or eight years  as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing)
    continuously living in the UK",  such  that  he  was  "well-settled  in
    school, and had started to develop friendships", and that  "English  is
    his primary language" (paragraph 18).  Nevertheless, given that it  was
    proposed to remove the Appellants together to Bangladesh there would be
    no interference with their family life (paragraph 23).

 5. The judge was not oblivious to the primary consideration that the  best
    interests of the children are a  primary  consideration  and  that  the
    third Appellant "is a qualifying child as defined in Section 117B as he
    has lived in the UK for a continuous period of  seven  years  or  more"
    (paragraph 24).   Nevertheless  when  this  was  balanced  against  the
    "public interest"  in  immigration  control,  it  was  clear  that  the
    Appellants had no legitimate expectation that they would be allowed  to
    remain and it would not be unreasonable to expect them to leave the  UK
    in accordance with the requirements of Section 117B(6), particularly as
    "[WA] was born in the UK whilst her parents were overstayers.

 6. The parties  have  all  obtained  treatment  on  the  NHS  whilst  here
    unlawfully and the children have had the benefit of a British education
    to  which  they  were  not  entitled"   (paragraph   25).    In   these
    circumstances removal was not disproportionate in all the circumstances
    of the case.

 7. The appeals were dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  failed  to  attach
    significant weight to the child's residence over seven  years  pursuant
    to the guidance given in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705  and  also
    failed to apply Section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum  Act  2002.   Furthermore  that  the  judge  took  into  account
    irrelevant matters, such as the fact that  the  children  were  legally
    entitled to NHS treatment and an education during the currency of their
    time in the UK, even though the Appellants were in the UK unlawfully.

 9. On 7th August 2017 permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 29th  September  2017,  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Miss  Masood  of  Counsel  and  the   Respondent   was
    represented by Mr Staunton, a Senior Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.
    Miss Masood relied upon her Grounds of Appeal, and  her  detailed,  and
    well-compiled skeleton argument of five pages, together  with  appended
    legal authorities, which I was urged to  take  into  account.   In  the
    submissions, she stated that the judge in the final  paragraph  of  the
    determination had wrongly given weight to the following: "[WA] was born
    whilst her parents were overstayers.  The  parties  have  all  obtained
    treatment on the NHS whilst here unlawfully and the  children  had  the
    benefit of the British education  to  which  they  were  not  entitled"
    (paragraph 25).  The effect of this statement  was  that  the  children
    were  here  unlawfully  and  obtained  benefits  unlawfully.    In   MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] 1 WLR 5098, this approach was described as flawed  by
    the Court of Appeal.

11. It followed from the judgment of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas [2013]  1
    WLR 3690 that children should not be blamed for matters for which  they
    were not responsible.  More fundamentally, she submitted that accessing
    NHS treatment per se whilst in the UK unlawfully cannot be  a  relevant
    factor to be weighed in the proportionality balancing exercise.

12. Second, the judge wrongly weighed the following in  the  balance:  "...
    the public interest ensuring that the limited resources of the  country
    (including itself and educational  resources)  are  used  to  the  best
    effect for the benefit of those for whom  they  are  intended".   Given
    that the third Appellant in this appeal was a child who had been in the
    UK for more than seven  years,  and  was  a  "qualifying  child",  (see
    paragraph  24  of  the   determination),   these   were   impermissible
    considerations, bearing in mind the purposes  of  Section  117B(6),  in
    that the case law was clear that, where there was  a  qualifying  child
    there  had  to  be  "strong  reasons"  with  choosing  leave  (see   MA
    (Pakistan)).

13. Finally, drawing from her skeleton argument, Miss Masood also submitted
    that there was in actual fact no evidence that, "the parties  have  all
    obtained treatment on the NHS whilst here unlawfully"  (paragraph  25),
    given that the parties had been in the UK lawfully right up until 2010,
    during which time the first and second Appellants had both  worked  and
    paid tax; the first and third Appellants had had leave until 2010;  and
    certain NHS services were free to everyone  regardless  of  immigration
    status; and the evidence before the judge was that the Appellants  paid
    for their medication (see the determination at paragraph 7).

14. For his part, Mr Staunton submitted that the  determination  was  well-
    reasoned.  He relied upon the Rule 24 response.  He submitted that  the
    essential question was one of the giving of  weight  to  the  range  of
    facts before the judge.  It was clear that the judge has earlier stated
    that, "when considering the best interests of [WH], I gave considerable
    weight to the fact that he would have spent seven years (or eight years
    as at the date of hearing) continuously  living  in  the  UK  ..."  (at
    paragraph 18).  Moreover, the judge was not unmindful  of  the  leading
    cases on the best interests of the child, citing EA (Article 9  -  best
    interests of child) Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00315  and  of  Azimi-Moayed
    [2013] UKUT  00197,  to  which  the  judge  referred  extensively  (see
    paragraphs 14 to 15).

15. In reply, Miss Hafsah submitted  that  the  fact  that  the  judge  had
    weighed in the balance other factors such as the children's  access  to
    NHS treatment and to  the  educational  facilities  in  the  UK  was  a
    material error, especially given that one of the two  children  was  by
    now a qualifying child and entitled to remain here, unless  there  were
    "strong reasons" to the contrary.



Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.   My  reasons  are  as  follows.   In  what  is  otherwise  a
    comprehensive  and  detailed  determination,  fully  cognisant  of  the
    relevant law and the essential facts in the appeal  before  the  judge,
    the reference to the Appellants having accessed NHS  treatment  "whilst
    here unlawfully and the children have had  the  benefit  of  a  British
    education to which they were not entitled" (paragraph 25) is a material
    error.  This is not least given that the judge in the same breath  goes
    to say that, "the ability to speak English  and  be  financially  self-
    sufficient are neutral factors".

17. If that is the case, as it clearly is, the accessing of  NHS  treatment
    and  of  the  British  education  system  is  also  a  neutral  factor,
    especially given that the judge was considering  the  position  of  the
    third Appellant, who was a qualifying child, and had been in the UK for
    a continuous period of over seven years.  It is clear that the  balance
    of considerations shifted against the children on account of the manner
    in which these considerations were brought into play.

18. Second, and quite apart from this, it does not even appear to be  clear
    on the facts determined by  the  judge,  that  the  NHS  treatment  was
    accessed unlawfully by the Appellants.  This is  because  the  evidence
    before the judge was that, "the Appellant confirmed that  his  children
    attend a state school and that they use the services of the NHS but pay
    for their medication" (paragraph 7).

19. Of course, there may well be circumstances  where  accessing  education
    and medical health facilities is  a  supremely  relevant  consideration
    weighing heavily on the public purse (see as an  example  AE  (Algeria)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 653, but such a case has not been made out on the facts
    of the present appeal.  Accordingly, the determination is infected with
    a material error of law.

Re-Making the Decision

20. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal only to  the  extent  that
    under practice statement 7.2(a) the matter should be remitted  back  to
    another judge  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  proper  balancing
    exercise to be carried out, with the findings that the judge below made
    in respect of the adult  parents  (at  paragraph  11)  being  preserved
    intact.

21. At the hearing before me, Miss Masood, while  stating  that  she  would
    rightly not wish to give evidence before the  Tribunal,  had  expressed
    concern, on instructions from the principal  Appellant  sitting  behind
    her, that the witness statement crafted by his solicitor at the hearing
    below, had not been read out to him prior to the hearing, and  that  he
    wished to add the matters set out at paragraph 11 of the  determination
    of the judge below, reconsidered.

22. To the credit of Miss Masood, once the hearing was over,  she  returned
    back into the courtroom to inform  the  Tribunal  that,  having  sought
    further clarification from the principal Appellant about the  state  of
    affairs, she was now given to understand that a  copy  of  the  witness
    statement by the principal Appellant's solicitor had been emailed  over
    to him the night before. However, he had failed to give it his full and
    complete attention, so that when he turned up at  court  the  following
    day, he proceeded simply to affirm  it,  without  reading  through  it.
    Given that this was the case,  the  judge  below  cannot,  I  find,  be
    criticised for making the findings that he did at paragraph 11, on  the
    basis of a witness statement  that  the  Appellant  had  confirmed  the
    contents of, his having been sent such a statement the night before  by
    his solicitors.  The other matters, such as the  accessing  of  medical
    treatment and educational facilities remained to be reconsidered again,
    on the basis of any fact or facts that are relevant to them, as well as
    the children's current condition and circumstances.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside. I set aside the decision  of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than Judge Hanes at Taylor House.



24. An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th October 2017
