
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07060/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23rd April 2019                    |On 14th May 2019                      |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           MISS SURYA KUMARI LIMBU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop of Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 29th  December  2018.   The
    Appellant had made an application for entry clearance to settle in  the
    United Kingdom as the  adult  dependent  relative  of  the  Appellant's
    Sponsor,  Mr  Harka  Bahadur  Limbu  -  an  ex-Ghurkha  soldier.   That
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 7th  February  2018.
    A review by the Entry Clearance Manager on 21st  February  2018  upheld
    the original decision.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Eden sitting at Taylor House on 6th December 2018.  In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 20th December 2018 the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on human rights grounds.

 3. On 16th January 2018  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 22nd March  2019  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Macdonald granted permission to appeal.  Judge Macdonald noted that the
    grounds of application found that there was  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and her parents before they left Nepal.  While the judge gave
    reasons why he did not consider that  the  Appellant's  life  with  her
    parents had continued after they had stopped living together there  was
    arguable merit in the grounds for the reasons stated therein.

 4. The Appellant appears  by  her  instructed  Counsel,  Mr  Balroop.   Mr
    Balroop is familiar with this matter, having appeared before the First-
    tier Tribunal and  is  the  author  of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  Mr
    Avery.

Submission/Discussion

 5. I am greatly assisted in this matter by  the  approach  adopted  by  Mr
    Avery who advises that on behalf of the Secretary of State he  concedes
    that there is a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  He has referred me to  paragraphs  14  to  16  of  the
    judge's decision, and in particular at paragraph 16 where the judge has
    stated:

         "Although she has received financial and emotional support from her
         parents, this does not go beyond  the  normal  love  and  affection
         between adult children and their parents".

    Mr Avery advises that the problem with that finding is that  the  judge
    has given no explanation and consequently, particularly bearing in mind
    the fact that there is no basis for the Appellant being  considered  to
    be capable of supporting herself without  financial  support  from  her
    parents, that the matter needs to be reconsidered.  He asks me to remit
    the matter.

 6. Mr Balroop asks me to re-make the decision, pointing  out  that  it  is
    accepted that the Appellant does not work and that reliance  is  placed
    on the authorities particularly of Rai v Entry Clearance Officer [2017]
    EWCA Civ 320 and that the contention that the Appellant is  financially
    dependent on her parents because she is illiterate and not working  and
    reminding me that they continue to send her money by money transfer and
    that this could be evidenced.  He submits that  it  had  been  accepted
    that the Appellant does not work and that therefore  I  should  be  re-
    making the decision.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 9. I am quite satisfied that the  submission  made  by  Mr  Avery  is  the
    correct one, namely that there is a material error of law  because  the
    judge has failed to give reasons as to  why,  particularly  bearing  in
    mind that the Appellant is not working, that the judge  has  failed  to
    set out reasons as to why there is emotional and financial support that
    does not go beyond normal love and affection.  After  consideration,  I
    accept the submission made  by  Mr  Avery,  namely  that  the  decision
    requires a detailed analysis of the relationship between the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor and that it is difficult to do  this  without  evidence
    and consequently,  despite  the  submissions  made  by  Mr  Balroop,  I
    consider it is appropriate that the matter be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing.  Directions are given hereinafter for  the
    rehearing of this matter.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter  for  the  rehearing
of this matter:-

 1) That on the finding that there is a material error of law the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is  set  aside  and  the  matter  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  the
    first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of two hours.


 2) None of the findings of fact are to stand.


 3) That the appeal is to be heard  before  any  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Eden.


 4) I direct that the principal issue outstanding is  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant has received financial and emotional support from her parents
    that would go beyond  the  normal  love  and  affection  between  adult
    children and their parents.


 5) That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve  a  bundle  of
    such subjective and/or objective evidence upon which they seek to  rely
    at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.


 6) That the Appellant's Sponsor do attend the restored hearing.


 7) That a Nepali interpreter do attend the restored hearing.


No application is made for an anonymity direction and none is made.


Signed                              Date 10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 10 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



