
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07005/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th October 2017                          |On 9th November 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                          ms apinke ganiyat solaja
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Adeolu (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Henderson, promulgated on 26th January 2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 13th January 2017.  The judge dismissed the  appeal  of
    the Appellant whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied for, and was
    granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and thus the matter
    comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Nigeria, born on 12th September
    1976.  She first entered the UK in  2004  as  a  visitor  and  remained
    unlawfully thereafter.  She has a daughter, [S], born on [ ] 2007.   It
    is a feature of this appeal that [S]'s  father  is  not  on  her  birth
    certificate but at the hearing before  Judge  Henderson,  the  name  of
    Adeole Qadri was give by the Appellant as father of the child.   Before
    Judge Henderson, the Appellant's evidence was  that  Adeole  Qadri  had
    left them in 2006 before [S]'s birth and she did  not  know  his  exact
    whereabouts, but knew that he was not in the UK, and has had no contact
    with [S].

 3. An another aspect of this appeal is that the Appellant  had  married  a
    Portuguese national by the name of Nelson Esteves on 19th October  2006
    and obtained an EEA residence card as his spouse  from  9th  July  2010
    until 9th July 2015.  She has a son from this marriage who was known as
    "[H]", and he was born on [ ] 2010.  At the date of the hearing  before
    Judge Henderson the children were  over  aged  10  years  and  6  years
    respectively and both are Nigerian nationals.  Mr  Nelson  Esteves  has
    deserted the Appellant.

The Judge's Determination

 4. The judge  did  not  find  the  Appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness
    (paragraph 24).  He did accept that the  children,  and  in  particular
    [S], were doing well at school and have many friends and connections in
    the UK.  The judge heard evidence that the Appellant's children  had  a
    relationship  with  a  Mrs  Balogun's  children,  and  the  Appellant's
    evidence was that the Appellant's children would be devastated if  they
    were separated from their friends, because  the  children  spoke  every
    evening by WhatsApp or video calls, and saw each  other  during  school
    holidays.  The judge observed that Mrs Balogun lived in Thornton Heath,
    in Surrey, whereas the Appellant lived in  Manchester  (paragraph  21).
    The judge made a finding that this  relationship  could  be  maintained
    even if [S] and [H] were in Nigeria (paragraph 26).

 5. Consideration was given to the application of Article 8, and the  judge
    observed that this was the main thrust of the Appellant's case, and  in
    particular [S], because she has lived in  the  UK  for  just  over  ten
    years, and was in  the  course  of  applying  for  British  citizenship
    (paragraph 28).  The judge  properly  addressed  the  key  question  as
    whether it will be reasonable to  expect  her  to  leave  the  UK,  and
    observed that the test appears in paragraph EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  and
    also in Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act (paragraph 28).

 6. The finding reached was, "it would be in [S]'s best interest to  remain
    in the UK, bearing in mind that she is now aged 10 and has  spent  most
    of the seven years from age 4 in the UK and is at an important stage of
    educational development", taking into account the  decision  in  Azimi-
    Moayed [2013] UKUT 197 (see paragraph 30).  More  recent  judgments  of
    the Court of Appeal, such as NA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  were
    also noted in the decision and the holding of Elias LJ, which  required
    a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the links in the UK  and
    in the country where it is proposed that a  child  should  return  (see
    paragraph 31).

 7. The judge did not accept that  the  Appellant  would  be  destitute  in
    Nigeria.  He accepted that it will be difficult as a single mother  who
    has not lived in Nigeria for over twelve years to  return  back  there.
    However, this was not the test that had to be applied.  That the  judge
    found that there were no very significant obstacles  to  her  returning
    back to Nigeria.  The children will be well catered for under the state
    funded education system there (paragraph 32).  The  misconduct  of  the
    parents was taken into account in the light of  the  judgment  in  Kaur
    [2017] UKUT 00014, and the judge expressly stated that the  Appellant's
    immigration history was not taken into account when assessing the  best
    interests of the children.  Nevertheless, it was  held  that,  "I  find
    that although [S]'s best interests would be to remain  in  the  UK  and
    continue her education here, it is not necessarily  the  case  that  it
    would be unreasonable for her to leave to the UK ..." (paragraph 36).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  did  not  adequately
    assess the grave consequences that would follow the Appellant's removal
    from the UK given the interests of [S] which had weighed heavily in the
    consideration of the judge in any event.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal on 16th August 2017 on
    the basis that it was  unclear  whether  the  judge  had  proceeded  to
    consider whether there was a breach of Article 8 outside the  Rules  or
    not, given the finding  that  there  were  no  sufficiently  compelling
    reasons to affect the balancing exercise as stated at paragraph 37, and
    given the heading "Article 8 and the Children", under which  the  judge
    considered the application of EX.1.  The judge had  also  arguably  set
    out an insufficient  analysis  of  the  principles  of  Razgar  and  an
    insufficient analysis of the proportionality exercise.  A full analysis
    on proportionality is necessary in the context of  wider  factors  that
    had  a  bearing  upon  the  situation.   This  was  a  case  where  the
    Appellant's child had spent an unbroken ten year period in the  UK  and
    the judge had noted at paragraph 4 of the decision that it was accepted
    that [S] had lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  seven  years
    immediately preceding the date of the application.

11. On 13th September 2017 a Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that the decision was not unreasonable
    and that the judge had not directed himself appropriately.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 19th October 2017, Mr Adeolu, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant submitted that there were two reasons  why  the
    judge had erred in law.  First, there was  the  risk  of  terrorism  in
    Nigeria which the judge had not referred to.  I pointed out  that  this
    was not an issue that featured  in  the  judge's  determination.   Nor,
    assuming that it had been overlooked by the judge, did it form any part
    of the grounds of application.  Permission to appeal also had not  been
    given on this basis.

13. Second, Mr Adeolu submitted that  the  judge  had  not  considered  the
    position of "[H]" but had only considered the position of [S], and that
    being so this appeal should be allowed.  I pointed out once again  that
    this too was incorrect because  the  judge  expressly  deals  with  the
    position of [H] at paragraph 26 of the determination.

14. Mr Adeolu then submitted that the Appellant's EEA partner had not  been
    properly considered, but the judge had referred to this at paragraph  2
    of the determination, and it also did not feature  in  the  grounds  of
    application, because it was not relevant to the  particular  issues  at
    hand in this appeal.

15. For his part, Mr Avery submitted that there was no error of law at all.
     At paragraph 24, the judge had taken  into  account  the  position  in
    Nigeria.  Furthermore, at paragraph 30, the judge had referred  to  the
    position of both [H] and of [S] in terms of their best  interests.   At
    paragraph 32, the judge had observed that state  funded  education  was
    available in Nigeria.  As for the EEA point, there was none at all, and
    it did not make sense to raise it now.

16. In reply, Mr Adeola submitted  that  at  paragraph  28  the  judge  had
    referred to how [S] had applied for British citizenship, and it was now
    the case that [S] had indeed  been  granted  British  citizenship.   Mr
    Adeola did not produce any proof of the grant of such citizenship.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  This is a case where  the  judge
    made a finding that,

         "On balance I accept that it would be in  [S]'s  best  interest  to
         remain in the UK, bearing in mind that she is now aged 10  and  has
         spent most of the 'seven years from age 4' in the UK and is  at  an
         important stage of her educational development" (see paragraph 30).



18. The judge then went on to refer to the recent Court of Appeal  judgment
    of Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705  (at  paragraph  31).
    However, what the judge did not do then was to refer to paragraph 49 of
    the judgment of Elias LJ, where his Lordship  states  that,  "the  fact
    that the child has been in the UK for seven  years  would  need  to  be
    given significant weight in the proportionality exercise", such that it
    would need to be recognised, "as a starting point that leave should  be
    granted unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary".

19. In this case, the judge recognised that the best interests of  [S]  lay
    in remaining in the UK (see paragraph 30).  There were no  "strong"  or
    "powerful" reasons shown by the Secretary  of  State  such  that  would
    displace the starting point (such as criminality on  the  part  of  the
    parents), and on that basis the  Appellant  should  have  been  granted
    leave to remain.

20. This was also consistent with the Respondent Secretary of  State's  own
    policy set  out  in  Section  11.2.4  of  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions Family Migration: Appendix FM, Section 1.0B, which  states
    that,

         "The longer the child has resided  in  the  UK,  the  more  of  the
         balance would begin to strengthen in terms of it being unreasonable
         to expect on the child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will  be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence  of
         more than seven years".

Re-Making the Decision

21. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th November 2017


