
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07330/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 March 2018                              |On 10 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                Cynthia Eshun
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr John Eshun (sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Cynthia Eshun, was born on 19 November  1983  and  is  a
    female citizen of Ghana.  She made an application for  leave  to  enter
    the United Kingdom for settlement as the spouse of a person present and
    settled here (Mr  John  Eshun).   Her  application  was  refused  by  a
    decision of the ECO Sheffield  on  4  September  2015.   The  appellant
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hindson)  which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 25 January 2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that  the  appellant  had
    produced  proper  evidence  in  respect  of  the  sponsor's   financial
    circumstances, that there were a  number  of  missing  bank  statements
    together  with  inadequate  documentary  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    sponsor's United Kingdom employment.  Before the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mrs
    Pettersen accepted that both the bank  statements  and  the  employment
    issue had been adequately addressed by the bundle  of  documents  which
    had been sent in and had been put before Judge Hindson.  Judge  Hindson
    had not considered in any detail the financial side of this application
    for settlement.  Rather, he found [15-16] that "given  the  paucity  of
    evidence about contact [between the appellant and sponsor]" he was  not
    satisfied that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  He did not go on to consider whether  or  not
    the Rules had been satisfied as regards the financial requirements and,
    whether in turn the appeal should be allowed on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article  8  ECHR).   His  finding  as  regards  the  relationship  was
    determinative.

 3. There is a difficulty in the judge's analysis.  The judge has based his
    conclusion that there was little evidence  about  contact  between  the
    appellant and sponsor on what he found [15] to  be  a  failure  by  the
    sponsor to provide evidence by way of his  passport  which  might  show
    entry/exit stamps proving that he had visited Ghana as he had  claimed.
    The sponsor claimed to have been to Ghana six times to visit  his  wife
    but the judge was not satisfied that there was any  evidence  to  prove
    that and further observed that it was evidence which "would  have  been
    easy to obtain".  The difficulty  for  the  judge  is  that  there  was
    evidence in the form of copies of the  entries  in  the  sponsor's  two
    passports (the first which expired  in  March  2014  and  a  subsequent
    renewed passport).  The papers are on the court file immediately  below
    the appellant's bundle of documents.  It is not entirely clear why  the
    passport copies are not part of that bundle but I am satisfied that the
    documents were, as  the  appellant  and  sponsor  claim,  before  Judge
    Hindson at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.   Mrs  Pettersen,  for  the
    ECO, accepted that the documents  had  not  been  submitted  after  the
    hearing (for example, in  connection  with  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal).  The entries in the copies of the passports show the  visits
    to Ghana in accordance with the evidence given by the sponsor.   It  is
    not clear why the judge has ignored or has failed to notice these  copy
    documents but his failure clearly constitutes an  error  of  law  which
    undermines his finding as to the genuineness  and  subsistence  of  the
    relationship.  In consequence, I  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision.

 4. I have remade the decision.  I have considered all the  evidence  which
    is on the file including that of the passport.  I accept that there  is
    evidence which does show that the sponsor has visited the appellant  in
    Ghana as he claims.  I accept that the appellant and sponsor remain and
    have been in a genuine and subsisting relationship.  No  issue  is  now
    taken by the respondent in respect of the financial documents which had
    concerned the ECO at the time of refusal.  In consequence, I find  that
    this appeal should be allowed on human rights grounds.





Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  25
    January  2017  is  set  aside.   I  have  remade  the  decision.    The
    appellant's appeal against the ECO's decision of 4  September  2015  is
    allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

 6. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
