
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/07772/2019
                                                               HU/07775/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 3 December 2019                   |On 17 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                            MD - First Appellant
                           MMM - Second Appellant
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Amar Alyas, Counsel instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Garratt who, following a hearing on 31 July 2019, dismissed the  appeal
    of  the  first  and  second  appellants  against  the  refusal  by  the
    respondent of their human rights claims.

 2. The judge noted that the first appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.   He
    was born in 1986.  The second appellant is his son, born in 2016,  also
    a citizen of Pakistan.

 3. The basis of the human rights claim advanced by the appellants was that
    they enjoyed family life with the wife of the first appellant, whom the
    judge called the sponsor, and with the youngest son of the  partnership
    between the first appellant and the sponsor, a son born in April  2019.
    The sponsor and the youngest son are  citizens  of  Pakistan  and  have
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom until April 2021.

 4. The reasons why the claims  of  the  appellants  were  refused  by  the
    respondent were set out by the judge.  The first appellant had come  as
    a visitor to the United Kingdom in 2009.  He then applied for leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds, which was refused in 2010.   An  appeal
    having been struck out in January 2011, he  then  applied  for  an  EEA
    residence card as a family member.  That was refused by the  respondent
    in June 2018 and subsequent attempts to appeal that decision  met  with
    no success.

 5. It was in July 2018,  the  first  appellant  applied  for  a  permanent
    residence card as a spouse, and that was refused, as was  a  subsequent
    application in October 2018.

 6. The application that formed the basis of the appeal before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was made in November 2018.

 7. The  respondent  considered  the  application  under  the  Rules.   The
    conclusion reached was that the first appellant did not  qualify  under
    paragraph 276ADE.  The second appellant also failed  under  the  Rules,
    including Appendix FM.  The respondent considered  whether  there  were
    exceptional  circumstances,  such  that  a   refusal   to   grant   the
    applications  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh.   In  that  regard   the
    respondent treated the best interests of  the  second  appellant  as  a
    primary consideration.

 8. The first appellant claimed to be unable to return to Pakistan  because
    of his established family life in the United Kingdom and  his  adoption
    of the British way of life.  However, the  respondent  considered  that
    the first appellant and the sponsor  could  return  to  Pakistan,  even
    though the sponsor and the youngest child had leave to remain  in  this
    country until 2021.  The sponsor is a citizen of Pakistan who would be,
    in the respondent's view, familiar with the life, language and  culture
    there.  It would also mean that the family unit would be kept together,
    albeit in Pakistan.  The best interests of the second  appellant  would
    be to remain with his parents and therefore  to  go  to  Pakistan  with
    them.

 9. The judge noted the submissions and evidence made at the hearing.   The
    judge recorded in particular that the first appellant  claimed  he  had
    made what he described as an innocent mistake in not giving details  of
    his conviction for a criminal offence when filling in the  application.
    The judge was not satisfied with the first appellant's stance  on  that
    issue.  That is plain from the judge's finding at  paragraph  27.   The
    first appellant had said that he was unaware  he  had  to  declare  all
    convictions.  The judge noted that it was specifically indicated on the
    application form that all convictions, whether spent or not, should  be
    disclosed.  The first appellant sought  to  blame  his  previous  legal
    adviser  but  the  judge  was  unpersuaded  by  that  as   an   excuse,
    particularly since the legal adviser had not been confronted  with  the
    assertion.

10. The judge considered the first appellant's submission that he  and  the
    sponsor could not live in Pakistan.   The  sponsor  had  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2011. If she remained there, she would be able  to
    obtain indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  2021,  when  she  would  have
    completed ten years' lawful residence in  the  United  Kingdom.   There
    were problems in going  back  to  Pakistan  as  a  family  because  the
    sponsor's family there had taken against her for various reasons  which
    would cause the sponsor and the first appellant difficulties.

11. The first appellant said he had not worked in Pakistan before coming to
    the United Kingdom.  His father had supported him.  He told  the  judge
    that he could not work in Pakistan as he had been away from the country
    for a period of time.  As far as problems  with  the  sponsor's  family
    were concerned, the first appellant was asked why he could not live  in
    a different city in Pakistan.  The appellant replied that  his  sponsor
    thought she would be harmed anywhere in that country and would not have
    financial assistance.

12. The sponsor also gave evidence.  She was asked about the fact  that  in
    an earlier appeal involving herself she had not made reference  to  any
    concerns regarding hostility from her family in Pakistan  as  a  reason
    why she could not return to that country.  She agreed that she had  not
    mentioned the start of her new relationship when  she  was  before  the
    judge in her appeal hearing.  She said she had not been asked about it.
     She was asked if, when she made her renewed application to  remain  in
    April 2018, she had informed the respondent that she in fact had a  new
    husband and child.  She said her solicitor had told her  that,  as  her
    new marriage was not valid in the United Kingdom, there was no need  to
    mention it, as the marriage was not recognised.  The  sponsor  and  the
    first  appellant  had,  however,  gone  through  an  Islamic   marriage
    ceremony.

13. Having set out the submissions of the parties, the judge then moved  to
    the conclusions and reasons.  The judge noted the submission on  behalf
    of the appellants that they could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge was not persuaded of the first appellant's excuse for
    failing to disclose his conviction. I have dealt with that already.

14. The judge then turned to what he considered to be the main issue in the
    case, which was whether there were very significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellants being able to live satisfactorily in  Pakistan.   The  judge
    reminded himself of  the  caselaw  relating  to  the  expression  "very
    significant".  The judge took note of Mubu (Immigration appeals  -  res
    judicata) [2012] UKUT 00398 (IAC).  The sponsor had not made  reference
    in previous proceedings to any difficulties emanating from  her  family
    in Pakistan and considered that this was relevant to  her  credibility.
    Indeed, the judge found that on a balance of probabilities he could not
    be satisfied that any such opposition existed or, even if it had,  that
    it had led to threats of serious harm.  Even if the judge were wrong in
    that conclusion,  he  observed  at  paragraph  31  that  there  was  no
    evidence,  apart  from  assertions,  to  show  the  existence  of   any
    opposition on the part of the brothers of the sponsor.

15. At paragraph 32, the judge turned to length of residence in the  United
    Kingdom and educational matters.  The judge explained why  he  did  not
    find that these amounted to very significant obstacles making the  best
    interests of both of the children  a  primary  consideration.   He  was
    satisfied they were young enough to be able to adapt to change  and  it
    was clearly in their best interests  to  be  with  their  parents.   No
    significant medical issues had been put forward.   Although  the  first
    appellant claimed never to have worked in Pakistan, he  had  worked  in
    the United Kingdom and that experience,  in  the  judge's  view,  would
    stand him in good stead on return.  The sponsor was  educated  and  she
    also, according to the judge, would be able  to  obtain  employment  if
    considered appropriate.

16. Paragraphs 33 and 34 of the decision read as follows:-

         "33. For the reasons I  have  given  and  applying  the  five-stage
             process Razgar I am unable to conclude that  the  decision  of
             the respondent is disproportionate.  I reach  that  conclusion
             bearing in mind  that  I  accept  that  the  sponsor  and  the
             youngest child have leave to remain until 2021  but  that,  of
             itself, is not a very  significant  obstacle  to  all  parties
             returning together.

         34.  As to the application of  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to the circumstances  of  this
             case I point out that neither child is  qualified  within  the
             meaning of Section 117D(1).  It is also my conclusion that the
             appellants' immigration status in the United Kingdom has  been
             precarious throughout and so little weight can be attached  to
             a private life established at that time."

17. The written grounds of application for permission to  appeal  contended
    as follows.  First, it was said that the judge took what was  described
    as a narrow view on  the  issue  of  the  first  appellant  failing  to
    disclose a previous conviction in his application for leave.  The first
    appellant acknowledged that it was an innocent mistake  but  the  judge
    failed to apply what are said to be "principles of fairness, hence  the
    decision is unreasonable and not in accordance with the law".

18. Various cases were put forward in support  of  this  ground,  including
    Patel (revocation of sponsor licence  -  fairness)  [2011]  UKUT  00211
    (IAC).  What the grounds failed to note however is that what the  Court
    of Appeal has had to say about fairness in the immigration context  has
    considerably developed since  2011.   There  is  little  scope  in  the
    circumstances of the present case for contending that the respondent or
    indeed the judge failed to afford procedural fairness to the appellant,
    in concluding as they did on the issue of  the  application  form  (see
    particularly Pathan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
    EWCA Civ 2103).

19. Mr Alyas, presenting the best  possible  case  that  could  be  put  in
    relation to the written grounds, submitted that the  first  appellant's
    explanation should have been accepted by  the  judge.   I  respectfully
    disagree.  As I  have  set  out,  the  judge  was  unpersuaded  by  the
    explanation and has given sufficient reasons for that finding.

20. The written grounds next contend that the judge made factual errors  in
    not appreciating that the parties  were  unmarried,  as  their  Islamic
    marriage certificate was not recognised as a valid UK marriage.   There
    is nothing in that ground and Mr Alyas was, in my view, correct not to
    pursue it before me.  The judge was plainly troubled by the fact  that,
    when the sponsor made an application for leave, she did  not  refer  to
    her new relationship.  Whether the Islamic marriage was recognised as a
    marriage under the law of England and  Wales  is  not  the  point;  the
    Islamic marriage was presumably of importance and significance  to  the
    sponsor and the first appellant.

21. The written grounds seek to  challenge  the  way  in  which  the  judge
    addressed the issue of  potential  difficulties  in  Pakistan  for  the
    appellants' immediate family by reference to alleged  family  hostility
    in Pakistan towards the sponsor.  I have  to  say  that  I  find  these
    passages of  the  written  grounds  difficult  to  comprehend.   It  is
    manifest in my view that the judge was entitled to have regard to  what
    the sponsor had or had not done in previous proceedings concerning  her
    own appeal.  She obviously knew that those proceedings had taken  place
    and she also knew what had been said by her in them.

22. The final aspect of the  written  grounds  which  Mr  Alyas  sought  to
    develop concern the issue of whether the judge materially erred in  law
    in what he said in paragraphs 33 and 34  of  the  decision,  concerning
    proportionality.  In granting permission, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    said it was arguable that the judge who wrote the decision  had  failed
    properly to consider whether the respondent's decision  amounted  to  a
    disproportionate breach of the Article 8 rights of the appellants.

23. I have to say, with respect, that I find this statement surprising.  It
    is clear from his careful decision that the judge properly reached  the
    conclusion at paragraphs 33 and 34 that the removal of  the  appellants
    from the United Kingdom  would  not  be  disproportionate.   The  judge
    analysed in detail the position  of  the  family  as  whole,  were  the
    respondent's decision to be upheld.  The judge gave clear  reasons  why
    in his view the family could relocate to Pakistan, without facing  very
    significant obstacles.

24. The fact that the sponsor and the youngest child have leave  to  remain
    until 2021 is nothing to the point.  That they have been granted  leave
    is not a statement on behalf of the United Kingdom government that they
    are expected to remain in this country.  The sponsor plainly wishes  to
    remain here in order that she might achieve  the  requisite  period  of
    residence to make an application for indefinite leave  to  remain.  But
    that has no bearing on this appeal.  On the contrary,  it  is  no  more
    than the wish of the sponsor and her family to make the United  Kingdom
    their country  of  residence.  Such  a  wish  is  a  matter  which  the
    Strasbourg Court has repeatedly said is not within the ambit of Article
    8 of the ECHR, as properly construed.

25. The judge's conclusion that the whole family could and should return to
    Pakistan is not only one he was entitled to reach but, in my view,  the
    only rational conclusion that could be  reached.   It  cannot  be  said
    that, in so finding, the judge committed any legal error.




Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date: 12 December 2019






                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
