
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07510/2018
                                                HU/07512/2018, HU/07513/2018
                                                HU/07514/2018, HU/07515/2018
                                                               HU/07516/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 11 January 2019                   |On 16 May 2019                       |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                     N N
                                    M M N
                                     W N
                                    M M N
                                    M U N
                                     U N
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Wilkins of Counsel, instructed by Sabs
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mt Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     These are the appellants' appeals against the  decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Mensah dated  8  October  2018  dismissing  the
    appellants' appeals against the decision of  the  respondent  dated  16
    March 2018 refusing of their human rights claims.

2     The appellants are all nationals of Pakistan, the first  appellant  NN
    having arrived in the United Kingdom on 17  February  2010  with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 student valid  until  1  December  2011.  NN  was
    already married to the second appellant Mr MN in Pakistan in 2006. They
    already had one child at the time of the first appellant's  entry  into
    United Kingdom, their daughter WN, born in April 2009 in Pakistan.

3     On or around August 2010, the Mr MN and WN entered the United  Kingdom
    as Tier 4 dependents of NN. NN had been pregnant on her arrival in  the
    United Kingdom, and gave  birth  to  the  fourth  appellant  Ms  MN  in
    September 2010. On 1 December 2011 NN made a  further  application  for
    leave to remain, as a Tier 2 migrant. This was refused without right of
    appeal on 29 February 2012. In NN's most recent  application  form  for
    leave to remain, she does not assert that she  has  had  any  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom since 31 November 2011.

4     The fifth and sixth appellants, Master RN and Master UN, were born  in
    the United in April 2012, and September 2013 respectively.

5     An application for asylum was made on or around March 2014  which  was
    refused in March 2015 and an appeal dismissed in July 2015. Two further
    sets representations, in January 2016, and  March  2016,  were  refused
    without right of appeal, but further  representations  on  family  life
    grounds dated November 2017 were rejected in the decision under  appeal
    dated 16 March 2018, with a right of appeal.

6     The respondent's decision was that none  of  the  appellants  met  the
    requirements for leave to remain under Appendix FM,  or  paragraph  276
    ADE(1)  of  the  immigration  rules,  and  there  were  no   compelling
    circumstances outside of the rules to justify  leave  to  remain  being
    granted on family or private life grounds.

7     The  appellants'  subsequent  appeals  came  before  the  judge  on  6
    September 2018. The judge held, in summary as follows:

    (i)    the appellants would all be returned  by  the  respondent  as  a
         family unit and there would be no material  interference  in  their
         family life together [6];

    (ii)   NN and Mr MN had not shown very significant obstacles  to  their
         integration into Pakistan, and did not satisfy the requirements for
         leave to remain on private life grounds under  paragraph  276ADE(1)
         [6];

    (iii)  the judge acknowledged that WN and Ms  MN  had  resided  in  the
         United Kingdom for at least seven years [7];

    (iv)   the evidence of NN and Mr MN regarding the languages  spoken  by
         the family was  confusing  and  contradictory  [9]  and  the  judge
         approached their evidence with caution [10];

    (v)    NN and Mr MN 'are willing to do  anything,  including  making  a
         false asylum claim and overstaying, in order to keep their children
         in the UK to benefit from the UK education system and life  in  the
         UK. This behaviour and willingness to misuse the system in my  view
         significantly increases the public interest in  the  entire  family
         returning to Pakistan" [10].

8     The judge concluded her consideration as follows:

         "12.     The two eldest children have been in the UK they have both
         been in the UK for 7 years. This is a significant period  of  time.
         For (WN) she has been in the UK from about aged 1 and a half  years
         to now aged 9 years and for (Ms MN) he (sic) was born in the UK and
         is now aged 8. I agree with Mrs Fell neither child has  spent  what
         is often described as their most formative years in the UK and both
         are still very young when assessing their ability to adjust to life
         in Pakistan. Neither has started secondary school or is approaching
         important examinations. In  fact  as  far  as  their  education  is
         concerned they are at an end where it is in my view  reasonable  to
         assume they have time to adjust to the Pakistan education system. I
         accept at those ages they would have some private life of their own
         through school and school friends etc, but I consider their private
         lives would still be very  family  centric  and  focussed.  I  have
         weighed up their private lives and the length of time they had been
         in the UK.

         13.      On the facts in this case  I  don't  accept  it  would  be
         unreasonable for the entire family, including all of  the  children
         to return together. I refuse their appeals  under  276ADE.  I  also
         find that there are no exceptional circumstances which  would  make
         removal disproportionate under Article 8. The main  appellants  say
         they are not criminals and it is true they have not been  convicted
         of any criminal offences but they have  both  been  in  the  UK  in
         breach of Immigration Laws and their conduct is  not  conducive  to
         the  maintenance  of  immigration  control  and  the  public   good
         generally. Keeping children in the UK illegally for seven years  is
         not a trump card to status despite what some people think.  I  have
         balanced the rights of the entire family and I am wholly  satisfied
         it is in the  best  interests  of  all  the  children  they  remain
         together as a family unit and return to Pakistan with their parents
         who are very capable of caring and supporting them in  Pakistan  as
         mature adults in good health."

9     The judge then dismissed the appeals.

10    The appellants appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  grounds  dated  19
    October 2018, arguing that the judge  erred  in  law,  in  summary,  as
    follows:

    (i)    failing to consider s.55 Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
         Act 2009, or to consider adequately the best interests of the  four
         children;

    (ii)    failing  to  direct  herself  in  law  in  accordance  with  MA
         (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 para 49, that:

             "The fact that the child has been in the UK  for  seven  years
             would  need  to   be   given   significant   weight   in   the
             proportionality  exercise  that  you  relate  reasons:  first,
             because  of  its  relevance  to  determining  the  nature  and
             strength of the child's best interests; and second, because it
             establishes as a starting  point  that  the  leave  should  be
             granted unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary";

    (iii)  failing to direct herself  in  law  as  to  the  application  of
         s117B(6) NIAA 2002; to determine whether the  two  eldest  children
         were 'qualifying children' and to determine  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect them to leave the United Kingdom, and  failing
         to have adequate regard to the  children's  integration  into  life
         into the UK (and reference was made to  MT  and  ET  (child's  best
         interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88(IAC) by way  of
         example of how such issues should be considered);

    (iv)   erroneously penalising the children  for  the  poor  immigration
         history of their parents.

11    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Keane on 14 November 2018 on those grounds.

    The hearing

12    I heard from the parties. Ms Wilkins relied on the grounds  of  appeal
    and argued that the judge failed to work in a  structured  way  through
    the statutory scheme under Part 5A of NIAA 2002,  and  indeed  did  not
    refer to the  provisions  under  that  Part  at  all.  There  was  some
    discussion as to the continued application the  guidance  given  within
    paragraph 49 of MA (Pakistan). The decision in  the  present  case  was
    dated 8 October 2018, therefore predating the Supreme Court's judgement
    in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53  on  24  October  2018.  Ms
    Wilkins argued that the Supreme Court has not explicitly overturned the
    guidance provided in paragraph 49 of the Court of Appeal's judgement in
    MA (Pakistan), and argued that it was still good law. Thus,  the  judge
    had erred in law in failing to identify powerful reasons to  rebut  the
    presumption that, WN and Ms MN having resided in the United Kingdom  in
    excess of seven years, they should be granted leave to remain. Further,
    the judge's consideration of the children's integration into the United
    Kingdom was cursory, failing to have adequate regard to the documentary
    evidence in the appellant's bundle from their schools.

13    Further, following KO (Nigeria), Ms Wilkins argued that the judge  had
    erred in giving significant weight to the adverse  immigration  history
    of the parents, which is contrary to the ratio in the  Supreme  Court's
    judgment at [16]-[17].

14    Mr Tan accepted that the judge's  decision  lacked  some  detail,  but
    asserted that it  contained  an  adequate  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the children at [13] and the judge had held  in  the  same
    paragraph that she did not accept that it would be unreasonable for the
    entire family including the children to return  together.  Even  though
    Part  5A  of  NIAA  2002  had  not  been  referenced,  the  finding  on
    reasonableness was adequate.

15    Further, Mr Tan argued that the judge had been entitled to  take  into
    account the parents' adverse immigration history,  and  their  lack  of
    credibility regarding the languages spoken within the family. The judge
    did make reference at [4] to having considered the appellant's  bundle,
    which indicated that she had had regard to its contents.

16    Both parties confirmed that if the judge's decision  were  set  aside,
    the rehearing of the appeal could take place before the Upper Tribunal.
    Ms Wilkins suggested that there  were  no  significant  factual  issues
    which would require further oral evidence, and Mr Tan  agreed  that  he
    would not have any cross-examination for the first  two  appellants  if
    the matter proceeded to be reheard that day.

17    I ruled for reasons given below that the judge did materially  err  in
    law in making her decision, and I set the decision aside.

18    I heard submissions on the remaking of the decision in the  appeal  as
    follows. Mr Tan pointed out that there was no successful  challenge  to
    the judge's  finding  at  [6]  that  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to the first or second appellants returning to Pakistan. They
    both spoke relevant languages, and had significant roots in the culture
    of the country.

19    Mr Tan accepted that WN and Ms MN were qualifying children under  Part
    5A NIAA 2002 and that the question of whether it would be reasonable to
    expect them to leave the United  Kingdom  arose.  Mr  Tan  referred  to
    extracts from the Respondent's published  guidance  'Family  Migration:
    Appendix FM Section 1.0b; Family Life (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10-Year Routes' Version 2.0, dated 19 December  2018.  At
    page 68 the guidance provided the starting point  in  the  respondent's
    consideration of the position of children will be that  the  respondent
    would 'not normally  expect  a  qualifying  child  to  leave  the  UK.'
    However, Mr Tan referred to page 69, which  set  out  further  guidance
    said to have been provided in the light of the Supreme Court  judgement
    in KO (Nigeria).

20    Notwithstanding the starting point above, the guidance  provided  that
    there may be some specific circumstances where it would  be  reasonable
    to expect a qualifying child to leave the UK. There were  a  number  of
    bullet points said to be relevant to that question.  Mr  Tan  suggested
    that the judge had held that the members of the family  spoke  relevant
    languages of Pakistan. A letter from WN's school at page  [13]  of  the
    appellants' bundle suggested that she enjoyed telling her  class  about
    her background and sharing information about her religion with  others,
    suggesting that she also had a  cultural  connections  to  Pakistan.  A
    school report on Ms MN at [44] also suggested that she shared with  the
    class in great detail why the Muslim creation  story  is  important  to
    Muslims, showing her religious and cultural connection  with  Pakistan.
    He argued that the children were not at any  critical  stage  of  their
    education. Mr Tan made reference to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 1 July 2015  dismissing  the  first  appellant's  asylum
    appeal. She had given evidence that she had four brothers in  Pakistan,
    and her claim to have  been  in  fear  of  them  was  rejected  by  the
    Tribunal. The appellant therefore had some family support in  Pakistan.
    Mr Tan argued in summary that all  the  appellants  were  nationals  of
    Pakistan; there was some family support there; they would have cultural
    familiarity with  Pakistan;  there  were  no  language  issues  and  no
    physical or medical problems of concern.  It  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the two older children to  return  to  Pakistan,  and  thus  the
    remaining appellants also.

21    Ms Wilkins relied on  her  skeleton  argument.  She  argued  that  the
    parents' immigration history was not  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    whether it would be reasonable to expect  the  two  older  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom. The guidance at paragraph 49 of  MA  Pakistan
    was still relevant authority, and there were no powerful reasons in the
    present case as to why the two older children  should  not  be  granted
    leave to remain. Where the children had spent more than seven years  in
    United Kingdom, it would almost invariably be in their  best  interests
    to remain in the United Kingdom. WN, although born in Pakistan, left at
    the age one and a half would have no memory of that country. There  was
    no finding that the children spoke fluent Urdu. It was not  logical  to
    argue that moving from  a  multifaith  community  such  as  the  United
    Kingdom to Pakistan where is  Islam  is  the  predominant  faith  would
    necessarily be in the best interests of  any  of  the  members  of  the
    family; such a presumption would  risk  making  a  decision  which  was
    discriminatory on grounds of religion.

22    Any family support in Pakistan is doubtful at best. The fact that  the
    children have spoken  about  their  background  and  culture  to  their
    friends at school in  fact  represented  evidence  of  integration.  Ms
    Wilkins referred to her skeleton argument which referenced a number  of
    documents  within  the  appellants'  bundle  regarding  the  two  older
    children's progress and integration at school.

    Discussion

23    MK (best interests of child) India [2011]  UKUT  475  (IAC)  provides,
    regarding the assessment of best interests of children:

         "(i)     The best interests of the child is a broad notion and  its
         assessment requires the taking into  account  and  weighing  up  of
         diverse factors, although  in  the  immigration  context  the  most
         important of these have been identified by the Supreme Court in  ZH
         (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, the Court of Appeal in AJ (India)  [2011]
         EWCA Civ 1191 and by the Upper Tribunal in  E-A  (Article  8  -best
         interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC).

         (ii)     Whilst an important part of ascertaining what are the best
         interests of the child is to  seek  to  discover  the  child's  own
         wishes and views (these being given due weight in  accordance  with
         the age and maturity of the child)  the  notion  is  not  a  purely
         subjective one and requires an objective assessment.

         (iii)    Whilst consideration of the best interests of the child is
         an integral part of the  Article  8  balancing  exercise  (and  not
         something apart from it), ZH (Tanzania) makes clear that  it  is  a
         matter which has to be  addressed  first  as  a  distinct  inquiry.
         Factors relating to the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
         effective immigration control  must  not  form  part  of  the  best
         interests of the child consideration.

         (iv)     What is required by consideration of the best interests of
         the child is an "overall assessment" and it follows that its nature
         and  outcome  must  be  reflected  in  the   wider   Article   8(2)
         proportionality assessment. Consideration of the best interests  of
         the child cannot be reduced to a mere  yes  or  no  answer  to  the
         question of whether removal of the child and/or relevant parent  is
         or is not in the child's best interests. Factors pointing  for  and
         against the best interests of the child being to stay  or  go  must
         not be overlooked.

         (v)      It is important when considering a  child's  education  to
         have regard not just to the evidence  relating  to  any  short-term
         disruption of current schooling that will be caused by any  removal
         but also to that relating to the impact on  a  child's  educational
         development, progress and opportunities in the broader sense."

24    I find, with respect to the judge, that to the extent  she  considered
    the best interests of the children at all, this was cursory,  appearing
    in the last three lines of  the  decision.  It  is  not  apparent  that
    consideration  was  undertaken  as   a   separate   exercise   to   the
    proportionality balancing exercise required in the appeal.

25    In particular, I find that the judge failed, in the assessment of  the
    children's best interests, to  have  any  or  adequate  regard  to  the
    evidence of the ties of the qualifying children WN and Ms MN to  United
    Kingdom. The following evidence was summarised in Ms Wilkins'  skeleton
    argument:

         "a.      In respect of the third appellant (WN)  her  head  teacher
         comments that "It is clear that she works hard when at home as well
         as in school as she is achieving 10/10 on  her  spellings,  weekly.
         (WN) is a good friend to her classmates and other  children  around
         the school. She always has a smile on her face and  tries  to  make
         sure that everyone is okay. If they are not, she makes  it  purring
         to try and help. Her helpfulness is also clear in the classroom  as
         she enjoys completing jobs for the teacher.  Evident  she  does  is
         with a smile on her face. She shows a real love for school. (WN) is
         extremely inquisitive and spends carpet time listening  attentively
         and asking questions about things she does not understand. She also
         enjoys  telling  the  class  about  her  background   and   sharing
         information about her religion with  others.  Her  great  sense  of
         humour alongside every else, makes a real pleasure to have  in  the
         classroom" (p.13). This is echoed by her Year 4 teacher,  who  says
         "(WN) often has a class giggling with her lovely sense  of  humour,
         she is a caring friend to all and she has a lovely heart!"  (p.69).
         Her Year 3 teacher reported  that  she  "Works  cooperatively  with
         other members of the class" and "is keen  to  share  her  ideas  in
         class discussions" (p.76).

         b. The Fourth Appellant's (Ms MN's) head teacher comments: "(Ms MN)
         is a model pupil with an excellent attitude to school and learning.
         (Ms MN) is a popular member of the class who has many friends,  she
         is a kind, caring and  exceptionally  well-behaved  member  of  the
         class" (p.12). Her Year 2 teacher Mrs (HB) also said she has  "lots
         of friends and works well with everyone ... (Ms MN)  loves  sharing
         her knowledge, ideas and opinions with the class, she is also  open
         minded, she understands  that  others  have  their  own  ideas  and
         opinions to which  she  listens  to  carefully  ...   (Ms  MN)  has
         excellent general knowledge, this has meant that she has made  some
         informative and sensible  contributions  to  class  discussions  in
         science" (pp.28-29). (Ms MN) was awarded the Head  Teachers  Award,
         and her teachers commented that  she  "has  also  demonstrated  how
         respectful, kind and caring she can be. (Ms MN) is always eager  to
         help others in her class" (p.49)." (In  fact  that  last  reference
         should be to page 44 of the appellant's bundle).

26    Accepting that  many  pupils  at  school  may  well  receive  positive
    comments from teachers about their progress and participation in school
    life, I find that the above evidence represents significant integration
    by WN and Ms MN into their school. That Ms  MN  was  awarded  the  Head
    Teachers Award was significant. However,  none  of  that  material  was
    referred to by the judge, and,  notwithstanding  Mr  Tam's  efforts  to
    persuade me that the judge's reference at[4] to her having  had  regard
    to the content of the appellant's bundle, I find that that was not,  in
    the context of  the  present  appeal,  an  adequate  reference  to  the
    evidence from the school.

27    In the absence of an adequate finding as to what would be in the  best
    interests of the children, the judge's brief conclusion that  it  would
    not be  unreasonable  the  entire  family  to  return  to  Pakistan  is
    undermined.

28    Further, the following is provided in KO (Nigeria):

         "15.     I start with  the  expectation  that  the  purpose  is  to
         produce a straightforward set of rules, and in particular to narrow
         rather than widen the residual area of discretionary  judgment  for
         the court to take account of public interest or other  factors  not
         directly reflected in the wording of the statute. I also start from
         the presumption, in the absence of clear language to the  contrary,
         that the provisions are intended to be consistent with the  general
         principles relating to the "best interests" of children,  including
         the principle that "a child must not  be  blamed  for  matters  for
         which he or she is not  responsible,  such  as  the  conduct  of  a
         parent" (see Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2013] UKSC 74, [2013] 1 WLR 3690, para 10 per Lord Hodge).

         The specific provisions

         16.      It is natural to begin with the first  in  time,  that  is
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). This paragraph is directed solely  to  the
         position of the child. Unlike its predecessor DP5/96 it contains no
         requirement to consider the criminality or misconduct of  a  parent
         as a balancing factor. It is impossible in my view to  read  it  as
         importing such a requirement by implication.

         17.       As  has  been  seen,  section  117B(6)  incorporated  the
         substance of the rule without material change, but this time in the
         context of the right of the parent to remain. I would infer that it
         was intended to have the same effect. The question again is what is
         "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ said in MA (Pakistan) Upper
         Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,
         [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there is nothing in the  subsection  to
         import a reference to the conduct of the parent. Section 117B  sets
         out a number of factors relating to those seeking leave to enter or
         remain, but criminality is not one of them. Subsection  117B(6)  is
         on its face free-standing, the only qualification  being  that  the
         person relying on it is not liable  to  deportation.  The  list  of
         relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above)  seems
         to me wholly appropriate and  sound  in  law,  in  the  context  of
         section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)."

29    The assessment of whether it would be reasonable to  expect  child  to
    who had lived in the United Kingdom seven years  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom is thus to be considered in the same way under  (276ADE(1)(iv))
    and s.117B(6) NIAA 2002, and  in  neither  case  does  that  assessment
    contain any requirement to consider criminality or  misconduct  on  the
    part of the parent as a balancing factor. However, it is  with  respect
    to the judge clear that the adverse immigration history of the  parents
    was a significant factor in determining whether it would be  reasonable
    for the children to leave the United Kingdom. The judge thus  erred  in
    law.

30    I find these errors material to the outcome of the appeal, and  I  set
    the judge's decision aside.

    Remaking

31    KO (Nigeria) also contains the following:

         "18.     On the other hand, as the IDI  guidance  acknowledges,  it
         seems to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider  where
         the parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave. It is only if, even on that  hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to  remain.  The  point  was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:

             "22.      In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.      He noted (para 21) that Lewison  LJ  had  made  a  similar
         point in considering  the  "best  interests"  of  children  in  the
         context of section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
         Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

             "58.      In my judgment, therefore,  the  assessment  of  the
             best interests of the children must be made on the basis  that
             the facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has
             no right to remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"

         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves."

32    It is also instructive to consider in KO  (Nigeria)  paragraphs  [46]-
    [52], in which Lord  Carnwath  gave  his  reasons  for  dismissing  the
    appeals of NS and AR. Those appeals featured children who  had  resided
    in the UK for over 10 years at the  time  of  a  hearing  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins on 5 November 2014, who dismissed  the  appeals.
    At [50], Lord Carnwath quoted from the Upper Tribunal's decision:

         "I do remind myself that one of  the  children,  particularly,  has
         been in the United Kingdom for more than ten years  and  that  this
         represents the greater part of a young life by someone who  can  be
         expected to be establishing a private and family life  outside  the
         home. I remind myself, too, that none of the children here have any
         experience of life outside the United Kingdom and  they  are  happy
         and settled and doing well. The fact is their parents have no right
         to remain unless removal would contravene their human rights.

         I remind myself of my findings  concerning  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration  control  by  removing  the  first,  second  and  third
         appellants. Given their behaviour I would  consider  it  outrageous
         for them to be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom. They must
         go and in all the circumstances I find that  the  other  appellants
         must go with them." (paras 198-199)

33    At [51], Lord Carnwath continued:

         "51.      Mr  Knafler  supports  the  other  appellants  in   their
         challenge to the reasoning of MM (Uganda). He says that it is  even
         clearer in the context of section 117B that parental misconduct  is
         to be disregarded. I accept that UTJ Perkins' final  conclusion  is
         arguably open to the interpretation that  the  "outrageousness"  of
         the parents' conduct was somehow relevant to the  conclusion  under
         section 117B(6). However, read in its full context I do  not  think
         he erred in that respect. He had correctly directed himself  as  to
         the wording of the subsection. The parents' conduct was relevant in
         that it meant that they  had  to  leave  the  country.  As  I  have
         explained (para 18 above), it was in that context that it had to be
         considered whether it was reasonable for the children to leave with
         them. Their best interests would have been for the whole family  to
         remain here. But in a context where the parents had to  leave,  the
         natural expectation would be that the children would go with  them,
         and there was nothing in the evidence  reviewed  by  the  judge  to
         suggest that that would be other than reasonable."

34    In  EV  (Philippines)  &  Ors  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, the following guidance was given as  to
    the assessment of best interests of children:

         "35.     A decision as to what is in the best interests of children
         will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
         length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
         been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
         to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
         with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
         medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
         and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
         their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens."

35    In relation to those matters, I make the following  findings,  on  the
    position of WM and Ms MN:

    (a)    WM is aged 10, and Ms MN is 8 �.

    (b)    WM arrived in the UK in August 2010, shortly before  Ms  MN  was
         born in the UK, and so both have been present in the UK for about 8
         � years.

    (c)    They have presumably been in formal education  since  reception,
         and will now be in year 5 and 3 respectively.

    (d)    There is no evidence that WN has returned to Pakistan since  she
         first arrived in 2010, and there is no evidence that Ms MN has ever
         been to Pakistan. To that extent, I find that  they  will  have  no
         direct experience of living in that country.  However,  bearing  in
         mind the undisturbed finding of the judge that  their  parents  had
         not told the truth about what languages were spoken in  the  family
         home, I find that the children will have some familiarity with Urdu
         and Punjabi. They have been brought up by  Pakistani  parents,  and
         have familiarity with Pakistani culture; indeed it is recorded that
         they talk about their  background  and  religion  to  their  fellow
         pupils at school.

    (e)    It is difficult to assess how renewable their  connections  with
         Pakistan might be. Although the witness statements of NN and Mr  MH
         assert it would be disastrous for the children to have to return to
         Pakistan, there is no discussion as to what connections the  family
         still retain in that country or  what  their  employment  prospects
         might be. In the decision of the Tribunal in  NN's  asylum  appeal,
         reference AA/05169/2015, her claim to fear serious  harm  from  her
         family members as a result of marrying Mr MN (a  man  said  to  the
         outside of her  cast),  was  found  to  lack  credibility.  NN  has
         therefore not established that she fears and has  no  contact  with
         her four brothers in Pakistan, as alleged in her asylum  claim.  Mr
         MN had given evidence to that Tribunal, recorded at [16],  that  he
         had previously been employed in Pakistan repossessing  vehicles  on
         behalf of  various  banks.  It  was  said  that  he  had  been  the
         proprietor of his own business; he  had  had  an  office,  and  had
         worked throughout  Punjab  (paras  [17],  [8],  [31]).  With  those
         findings are as a starting point, and in the absence of  any  other
         evidence, I am unable to find that there would be  any  significant
         difficulties experienced by the family in securing accommodation or
         employment in the medium to long term, even if there would be  some
         disruption to their  lives  in  the  short  term  by  returning  to
         Pakistan.  It  is  not  asserted  that  there  are  no  educational
         facilities in Pakistan that the children could attend.

    (f)    On the issue of language, I repeat  what  I  have  said  at  (d)
         above.

36    As to issues raised at para 35(g) in EV  (Philippines),  I  find  that
    there any proposed removal of WN and Ms  MN  from  the  United  Kingdom
    would represent a significant interference with their private life that
    they have developed in the United Kingdom. I repeat the summary of  the
    evidence from their schools,  set  out  at  [25]  above.  There  is  no
    specialist evidence, for example in the form of an  independent  social
    worker, setting out the extent of the effect on  the  children  of  any
    proposed removal from United Kingdom, but even in the absence  of  such
    evidence, I accept that the children will be upset about  the  prospect
    of them leaving their school, and the  friends  that  they  have,  both
    within and outside of school. The evidence is that they are  both  very
    well settled into the education  system  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and
    participate fully in school life. I am able to  assume,  on  the  basis
    that they attend mainstream school, that they are fluent in English and
    may well identify as being  as  much  of  British  origin  as  they  do
    Pakistani.

37    I also appreciate that  at  the  time  that  this  decision  is  being
    produced, MRN will also have  recently  passed  his  7th  birthday  and
    should also now be treated as a qualifying child. I take  into  account
    the evidence in the appellant's bundle about his  progress  at  school;
    the letter from the Head Teacher of the children's school dated 13 July
    2018 also describes that he had settled well in year 1, had  made  good
    progress, and had good friendships within the class, and  engaged  with
    his peers in class and on the playground. I also take into account  the
    fact that UN will have a private life in the United  Kingdom,  although
    at aged five, this will be more closely tied with his immediate  family
    and his home.

38    If the assessment of the qualifying children's best interests were  to
    compare whether it would in their best interests (i) to  remain  living
    in the United Kingdom with all of the other members of the  family,  or
    (ii) to live in Pakistan with all the members of their family, I  would
    have found that it would be in their best interests to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, albeit by a fairly narrow margin. That margin would  be
    narrow, as it should not be presumed that any specific  hardship  would
    result in the family returning to Pakistan, due to the parents' lack of
    candour about their likely situation  there.  On  balance,  however,  I
    would have found that it would be in the children's best  interests  to
    retain the status quo.

39    Further, had this appeal been determined prior to  the  Supreme  Court
    judgement in KO (Nigeria) I would have had  no  hesitation  in  finding
    that, applying the guidance in paragraph 49  of  MA  (Pakistan),  there
    were not sufficiently powerful reasons justifying the  removal  of  the
    qualifying children from United Kingdom, even taking into  account,  as
    the law then required, their parents adverse  immigration  history,  in
    the final assessment of whether it would be reasonable to  expect  them
    to leave the United Kingdom.

40    However, it seems to me that  the  Supreme  Court's  judgement  in  KO
    (Nigeria) now requires the Tribunal to  presume  that  parents  without
    leave to remain will be removed, demanding the assessment of whether it
    would be in the children's best interests (i) to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom without their parents, or (ii) to be in the family's country of
    origin, with their parents (KO (Nigeria), paras [18], [51]). Given  the
    fairly common sense view expressed in the Supreme Court judgement  that
    it would normally be reasonable for children to be with their  parents,
    the range of circumstances when it would be deemed to be in  a  child's
    better interests to remain in the UK without their parents, than to  be
    with their  parents  in  the  country  of  origin,  seems  very  small.
    Different considerations may well  apply,  no  doubt,  if  one  of  the
    parents, or one or more children of the family was British or otherwise
    had a right to reside in the UK. However, that situation does not apply
    in the present case.

41    Given that NN and Mr MN have not  established  by  evidence  that  any
    specific hardship would result to  the  family  upon  their  return  to
    Pakistan, I find it inevitable that I arrive at the conclusion that the
    presence of all of the family members in Pakistan would be in the  best
    interests of the children, rather than some  or  all  of  the  children
    remaining in the United Kingdom without their  parents.  There  are  no
    special considerations in the present case which would demonstrate that
    it would be in the children's best interests to be in that position, or
    that it would be unreasonable to require  the  children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, notwithstanding their parents' departure.

42    Thus, although applying different legal considerations  than  did  the
    original judge, I also find, applying s.117B(6) NIAA 2002, and  current
    relevant authority  relating  to  that  provision,  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for the qualifying children to  be  expected  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. The parents' past immigration record is  only  relevant
    in this respect on the basis that they happen  to  be  persons  without
    leave to remain in the UK.

43    I accept that NN and  Mr  MN  have  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationships with their qualifying children. However, as  it  has  not
    been established that it  would  be  unreasonable  for  the  qualifying
    children to be expected to leave the United Kingdom, NN and Mr  MN  are
    unable to establish that the public interest  does  not  require  their
    removal.

44    As far as I am required to apply other considerations on the  part  5A
    NIAA 2002, I note that although the judge does not  record  whether  an
    interpreter was used for the hearing before her, the notices of  appeal
    filed with the First-tier Tribunal suggested that an  Urdu  interpreter
    would be required. There is therefore at least doubt as to  whether  NN
    and Mr MN speak English fluently. Their witness statements  are  silent
    as to their income; it is doubtful that they have permission to work in
    the United Kingdom. There is no evidence in the appellant's  bundle  of
    any current income. I  am  not  satisfied  that  they  are  financially
    independent. Much of the private lives  of  the  appellants  have  been
    developed in the United Kingdom  whilst  here  unlawfully,  and  little
    weight is to be attached to it.

45    I find, bearing in mind the maintenance of immigration control  is  in
    the public interest, and taking into account all the matters I have set
    out above, that the removal of all of the appellants  from  the  United
    Kingdom would not represent a disproportionate interference with either
    their private or family lives.

    Decision

    The judge's decision involved the making of an error of law.

    I set aside the judge's decision.

    I remake decision, dismissing the appellants' appeals.


Signed:     Date: 14.5.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This appeal concerns the interests of minor children.  Unless  and until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  them  or
any member of their family. This direction applies both  to  the  appellants
and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:     Date: 14.5.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

