
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07218/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 April 2019                       |On 17 May 2019                       |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                    M m s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hosie  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of  the  respondent  made  on  9  March  2018  to  refuse  his
    application for leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.  The
    appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 6 July 1969.  He entered the
    UK as a visitor in December 2000.  He made an unsuccessful  application
    to remain in the UK and then overstayed.  He made  subsequent  attempts
    to regularise his leave.

2.   The appellant's claim is made on the basis of  his  long  residence  in
    the UK, his  medical  problems,  and  his  relationship  with  the  two
    daughters of his cousin with whom he is closely involved following  the
    death of their mother in June 2018.  I was told that the two girls  are
    aged 8 and 13 and not 8 and 18 as stated by the judge.  It was  claimed
    that the appellant has assumed a parental role for the two daughters of
    his late cousin and that it would not be in their best interests if  he
    were to be removed from the United Kingdom.

3.   The two daughters of his late cousin are currently  residing  with  Dee
    Cummings who the judge found was their primary carer.  The judge  found
    that the girls remain in  contact  with  their  biological  father  who
    supports them financially, albeit any other input is minimal as he  has
    remarried.  As a result, the role played  by  the  appellant  in  their
    lives is said to be an important one at this particular time  in  their
    lives having lost their mother.

4.   I find that Ms Smith identified errors made by  the  judge  which  were
    supported by Mr Diwnycz.

5.   At paragraph 58 the judge held that  "Notwithstanding  the  submissions
    made on the appellant's behalf he is no (sic) assuming a parental  role
    towards the girls."  It was difficult to deduce whether the "no"  meant
    "now" or "not".    I  find  that  whilst  the  rest  of  the  paragraph
    identified the appellant's involvement in the girls' lives,  there  was
    no consideration or finding by the judge as to whether there was family
    life between the appellant and the girls.

6.   Dee Cummings had given evidence that  the  appellant  was  an  integral
    part of the lives of the girls and that if the appellant were to leave,
    the girls would suffer a loss.  There was further information about the
    length of time of their mother's illness during which the appellant and
    Dee Cummings were involved with the care of the  girls.   The  argument
    before the judge was the type of parental care and/or relationship  the
    appellant has had with the girls since their mother's illness and after
    her death. I find that the judge failed to make a finding as to whether
    the appellant was exercising parental care over the two girls.

7.   I accept Ms Smith's argument that in a case  where  the  appellant  has
    daily contact with the children, where he is a family member and is  in
    a caring role, it was critical for the judge to engage with this aspect
    of  the  case.   Furthermore,  any  finding  family  life  would   have
    intrinsically  affected  the  balancing  exercise  on  account  of  the
    considerations in Section 117B and the case law in this area.

8.   I find that  the  judge  took  into  account  irrelevant  factors  when
    considering the role the appellant plays in the children's lives.   For
    instance, the fact that their deceased mother was a single  mother  and
    the fact that their biological father who has little contact  with  his
    daughters supports them financially.  These factors should not supplant
    the consideration of the appellant's role in the lives of the  children
    over the two-year period when their mother was dying and  the  role  he
    has played in their lives since her death.

9.   I also accept Ms Smith's argument that in considering Section 117B  and
    the balancing exercise, the judge restricted  her  approach  by  saying
    that she had to follow a particular course  because  sub-paragraph  (5)
    states that little weight should be given to a  private  life  that  is
    established by a person at a time when the person's immigration  status
    is precarious and sub-paragraph (4) which  states  that  little  weight
    should be given to a private life that is established by a person at  a
    time when the person's immigration status is unlawful.

10.  Ms Smith submitted that since the judge's decision, the  Supreme  Court
    in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 paragraph 49 makes clear that factors
    in Section 117B must be taken into account but are  not  determinative.
    The Supreme Court held that inbuilt into the concept of "little weight"
    itself is a small degree of flexibility.

11.  For the above reasons I find that the judge's  decision  cannot  stand.
    It is set aside in order to be remade.

12.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross for rehearing  by  a
    FtTJ other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Hosie.


Signed                                  Date:  15 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

