
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07168/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2019                            |On 14 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 Beulah [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Toora, Counsel, instructed by IAS Liverpool
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by a citizen  of  St  Lucia,  born  in  November  1946,
against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal
against a decision of the respondent on 6 March 2018 refusing her leave  to
remain in the United Kingdom and on the basis of  her  private  and  family
life.

2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Froom  who
was concerned about allegations that the hearing was unfair.  He said:

  "While the appellant may ultimately struggle to succeed  in  her  appeal,
  she is entitled to a fair hearing.  It is arguable that, if it  is  shown
  that the FtTJ was unduly dismissive of the appellant's  health  concerns,
  as alleged, there was procedural unfairness.  This goes to the  issue  of
  whether there is an extant family life  between  the  appellant  and  her
  adult children."

3. The allegations that the hearing was conducted unfairly are  set  out  in
extensive grounds, apparently written by the  appellant  and  supported  by
witness statements from close members of her family.  I paraphrase them  by
saying that they complain that the judge was hectoring  and  impatient  and
unwilling to listen.  This is not quite the point picked up by Judge  Froom
when he gave permission.  He was particularly concerned that the judge  may
not  have  had  proper  regard  to   the   appellant's   health   concerns.
Additionally, it seems to be  his  worry  that  the  degree  of  dependency
established by the evidence, or that should have been  established  by  the
evidence, gave more weight to the appellant's case.

4. The grounds are sufficiently cogent for the judge to have been  asked  to
comment and her comments were  sent  in  a  memorandum.   Essentially,  she
recognised that she speaks loudly and endeavours  to  speak  clearly.   She
denied that she was behaving in any way improperly.  She appears to concede
there was some slight justification in some of the other criticisms because
she said:

  "I was surprised by  [the  appellant's]  claim  to  have  ongoing  yearly
  reviews after five years as this was not supported by her evidence nor my
  own experience of having had breast cancer."

5. The point is that the judge was looking at the appellant's own  evidence.
 She was not making herself into an expert because of her  own  experience.
The judge did not trivialise the risks facing the appellant in the event of
her return.  She acknowledged that it was the  appellant's  case  that  she
would be particularly vulnerable to burglary but pointed out there  was  no
evidence to support that fear beyond the appellant's own  experience  which
was of being burgled twice in her lifetime.

6. I find it noteworthy that  there  is  no  supporting  evidence  from  the
representative who appeared in the First-tier Tribunal.  Neither  is  there
any evidence that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  challenged  about  the
way she was conducting the hearing at the hearing.  Mr Toora  properly  and
professionally recognised the difficulties in the case that he had  to  put
and the absence of support from the lawyers previously involved.

7.  The  grounds  further  criticise  the  judge  for  assuming   that   the
appellant's money was in the United States,  rather  than  East  Caribbean,
dollars but there is no evidence that the  judge  erred  as  alleged.   The
judge does  not  identify  the  currency  beyond  using  the  dollar  sign.
Certainly there is nothing in the decision that indicates the judge thought
the currency given were US dollars.

8. I also note the Rule 24 notice  from  the  Secretary  of  State  and  Mrs
Aboni's contention that there was nothing that she had needed to draw to my
attention to support the idea that the hearing was in any way improper.

9. There is also concern about the finding that  the  claimant  has  been  a
burden to public funds.  The evidence about this is rather obscure.   There
is no direct evidence that  any  substantial  sums  were  paid.   There  is
evidence that there is a national health number and it seems that is  given
to person when she tries to pay a bill.  It is important to read  what  the
judge said.  She said that the appellant "has been a drain on  the  NHS  as
she has been registered and made regular use of a GP and been referred to a
number of specialists for further examinations and tests.

10. The appellant cannot help being ill and it is  not  suggested  that  the
appellant acted improperly  in  seeking  treatment.  The  judge  noted  the
absence of any evidence that payments had been made or that  the  surcharge
is levelled against everyone.

11. It is unsatisfactory when a person leaves the hearing room feeling  that
her case has not been done properly.  However it is the nature  of  appeals
that one party will lose and it is hard for people sometimes to distinguish
objectively between being treated unfairly and losing an  unwinnable  case.
As the First-tier Tribunal Judge recognised, there is a  lot  of  emotional
investment in this case.  The appellant  wants  to  remain  in  the  United
Kingdom and her relatives want her to remain in the United  Kingdom.   They
want her to remain in the United Kingdom for very human  reasons.   She  is
the matriarch of the family and is respected.  She  plays  a  role  in  the
family and is appreciated.

12. The fact is she cannot come within any of the Rules.   She  entered  the
United Kingdom in June 2016 with six months' leave  as  a  visitor.   After
seven months she applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

13. The appellant has clearly not established any  right  under  the  Rules.
The judge, appropriately, looked for "very significant  obstacles"  to  the
appellant's reintegration into life in St Lucia.  The judge found that  the
claimant had been living there for many years, that she owned a house there
that had been let out during her stay in the United Kingdom  and  found  no
evidence of a high degree of support or dependency on her relatives in  the
United Kingdom.

14. Clearly there is a close personal relationship  and  Mr  Toora  drew  my
attention particularly to the finding at paragraph 39 "that there has  been
some financial support since she has been in the UK".  The judge also noted
evidence of practical support.

15. I decided not to give  an  extempore  decision,  in  the  hearing  room,
because I wanted to step back a little.  It is quite  obvious  to  me  that
there are strong feelings here  based  around  human  and  loving  concerns
between family members and the appellant who is now 72 years old.

16. I do not find it  helpful  to  look  for  a  sharp  demarcation  between
"private life" or "family life".  The concept of "private and family  life"
is an entire entity under the European Convention on Human Rights which  is
about the state respecting human relationships and leaving people to get on
with their lives.  What matters is not so  much  the  categorisation  of  a
relationship as "family" or "private" but whether it is a relationship that
the United Kingdom is required under the Convention to promote or  respect.
The degree of care and affection here is not  properly  analogous  to  that
that exists between husband and wife or between parents and minor children.
 It is a loving relationship based on respect for a person who is no longer
young.  There is no obligation to promote  that  relationship  in  the  way
there is an obligation to promote the relationship between life partners or
parents and little children.  There is no  evidence  that  the  appellant's
illness is anything like the level of severity necessary for  it  to  be  a
major consideration in any human rights balancing  exercise.   The  judge's
mind was appropriately focused on the kind of relationship.  The judge  was
clearly entitled to regard  it  essentially  as  private  life  established
during a precarious time so not something to which much  weight  should  be
given.

17. I can see nothing here which would  justify  a  decision  to  allow  the
appeal on human rights grounds.  The appellant has lived for  most  of  her
life in  the  Caribbean  and  lived  there  apparently  successfully  until
applying for a visitor visa.  She has some property there.  It is very hard
to see why she cannot return and I do not criticise the First-tier Tribunal
in any way for reaching the conclusion that she could.  The short point  is
the judge considered the things that really mattered and reached  a  wholly
sustainable conclusion.  Even if the judge might have categorised something
at the private life end of the spectrum when categorising it as family life
would have been more appropriate, there is  nothing  here  that  begins  to
suggest that  refusing  leave  on  human  rights  grounds  is  in  any  way
disproportionate.  There is just nothing to this case that could lead to it
succeeding.

18. Neither am I persuaded that there is anything  in  the  judge's  conduct
which is so bad that the decision should be  set  aside.   I  do  not  find
anything wrong in the judge's conduct at all.  She may well have  genuinely
lost  the  confidence  of  the  appellant  and  her  family  but  they  are
disappointed because they are not getting the result  they  wanted.   There
has been no error here and, if there has, there has been no material error.
 I realise this decision is going to disappoint the appellant but the  fact
is she is not entitled to live in the United Kingdom with her children  and
grandchildren.  The law does not provide for that and it not a human right.



19. I dismiss the appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

     Notice of Decision

     This appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 March 2019                  |



