
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC/FH-ck-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07282/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Skype for Business at Field House  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 December 2020                          |On 21 January 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Origho Reginald Eruteya
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Divaris, instructed by Jasvir Jutla & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of  State  has  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with
    permission granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, on 23 September 2019, allowing the
    appeal of Mr Eruteya against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  19
    July 2019 refusing a human rights claim.

2.   In the event I need say little about the appeal.  The judge allowed  it
    on the basis first that she accepted that it was more likely  than  not
    that Mr Eruteya had resided in the United Kingdom for twenty years  and
    secondly that in light of the medical evidence, in particular  from  Dr
    Ford, a consultant at King's College  Hospital,  he  met  the  test  of
    Article 3 medical condition and as a consequence the appeal was allowed
    on that basis.  The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  in
    respect of both matters.

3.   At the hearing before me Mr Clarke accepted,  entirely  properly,  that
    the challenge to the Article 3 findings could not succeed in  light  of
    the decision of the Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) [2020] UKSC 17.

4.   It is relevant to note that at paragraph 12 of her decision  the  judge
    observed that in light of the medical evidence it  was  clear  that  Mr
    Eruteya required access to dialysis to survive and  had  shown  on  the
    balance of probabilities that he would not  have  access,  due  to  the
    prohibitive cost and location of potential treatment,  to  dialysis  in
    Nigeria on return and that  therefore  there  was  a  risk  of  intense
    suffering in the event of his return to Nigeria.  The medical  evidence
    of Dr Ford stated that death would be likely to follow in a  matter  of
    days or weeks.

5.   This falls clearly within the guidance in AM in particular as  set  out
    at paragraph 31 of that decision.  Accordingly, the judge's conclusions
    on Article 3 are not shown to contain any legal error, and  the  appeal
    must therefore succeed on that basis.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 8 January 2021





