
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07990/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 October 2018                           |On 6 November 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                             MRS Fatema yasmeen
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Michael West, Counsel instructed by City Heights
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Laurence Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Ross sitting at Taylor House on 14  June  2018)  dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  to  refuse  her  human
    rights claim which she had principally pursued on the ground  that  she
    had accrued  10  years'  continuous  lawful  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The first Tribunal Judge found that  the  appellant's  lawful
    leave had ceased on 31 March 2017, whereas the tenth anniversary of her
    entering the United Kingdom was on 18 October 2017.  After adopting the
    balance sheet approach recommended in Hesham Ali [2016]  UKSA  60,  the
    Judge  held  that  the  respondent  had  proved  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities  that  the  need  for   effective   immigration   control
    outweighed the private life considerations in the appellant's favour.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On  22  August  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "I was satisfied there is an arguable error of law in this decision
         in that the Judge may have been in error in his findings  that  the
         appellant's application for leave was not made within  14  days  of
         her becoming an overstayer, given the date of the  service  of  the
         decision on  the  appellant.   I  do  not,  however,  find  it  was
         incumbent on  the  Judge  to  make  findings  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's earlier applications as  they  were  not  the  decision
         against which she was appealing.  It is, however, arguable that the
         Judge should have considered the benefits brought by the  appellant
         when considering Article 8.  As the law stood as  at  the  date  of
         decision and indeed at present, the appellant's stay in the  United
         Kingdom was precarious.  The Judge cannot take  note  of  the  fact
         that the law may change at some unknown date in the future."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 3. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr West (who did not appear below) developed the case advanced  in
    the permission application that the Judge was wrong in law to hold that
    the appellant had not accrued 10 years' continuous lawful residence  so
    as to qualify for leave to remain under the Rules.  In reply, Mr Tarlow
    submitted that the Judge had directed  himself  appropriately,  and  no
    error of law was made out.

Discussion

 4. It is not in dispute that the  appellant,  a  national  of  Bangladesh,
    resided in the UK lawfully from 18 October 2007, when  she  arrived  in
    the UK with valid entry clearance as a student, until  31  March  2017,
    when  a  decision  to  refuse  her  leave  to  remain  as  a   Tier   1
    (Entrepreneur) migrant on 15 March 2016  was  maintained  following  an
    administrative review, the outcome of which was that  the  decision  to
    refuse was maintained, with no right of appeal. What happened  next  is
    also not factually in  dispute.   The  dispute  centres  on  the  legal
    consequences.

 5. Judge Ross accepted the appellant's case that the negative decision was
    not received by his solicitors until 2 May 2017,  a  delay  of  over  a
    month since it was issued.  He also accepted that on 10  May  2017  the
    appellant had made an application for leave to remain on the  basis  of
    family or private life established in the UK; and that on 9 August 2017
    the application was varied  to  an  application  for  ILR  outside  the
    Immigration Rules; and that on 26 September 2017  the  application  was
    varied for a second time to an application for ILR on the basis of  the
    appellant having accrued 10 years' continuous lawful residence.

 6. Judge Ross accepted that the appellant was not an  overstayer  contrary
    to Rule 276B(v) at the time that she applied for leave to remain on  10
    May 2017.  This was because less than 14 days had elapsed  between  the
    date of the receipt of the refusal decision of 31 March  2017  and  the
    date of the fresh application.

 7. However, Judge Ross held that this  did  not  avail  the  appellant  in
    establishing lawful residence in the period leading up to  the  10-year
    watershed or in the subsequent period preceding the refusal decision on
    17 March 2018.  His reasoning was that the appellant did not  meet  any
    of the requirements  set  out  in  Rule  276A(b),  and  also  that  the
    appellant did not enjoy section 3C leave under the 1971 Act because she
    was not awaiting the result of an appeal.

 8. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  in  this  case  on  the  mistaken
    understanding that everything pivoted on whether the appellant  was  an
    overstayer at the time of her application on 10 May 2017; and that, but
    for Judge Ross wrongly finding that  she  was  an  overstayer  at  this
    point, he would have or should have  found  that  she  had  accrued  10
    years' continuous lawful residence in accordance with the Rules.

 9. However, as I have already  indicated,  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant was  not  an  overstayer  at  the  time  when  she  made  her
    application on 10 May 2017.  The real issue is whether  the  Judge  was
    wrong to find that this  did  not  avail  the  appellant  in  terms  of
    qualifying for ILR under Rule 276A.  Mr West's  submission  is  simple.
    He submits that if the appellant is not an overstayer, then it  follows
    that she must be lawfully resident in the UK.

10. Having reviewed (a) the 1971 Act, (b) the relevant Rules  and  (c)  the
    relevant Policy Guidance, I am satisfied that the Judge's  analysis  of
    the law was correct and that Mr West's argument is fallacious.

11. Under the 1971 Act, the appellant did not have any form of lawful leave
    in the United Kingdom after the issue and/or receipt  of  the  negative
    administrative review decision.  The appellant's last  grant  of  leave
    had expired some years ago, and she did not have section  3C  leave  as
    she had no right of appeal from the administrative review decision.

12.  Rule  276A(b)  defines  lawful  residence.   The  definition  includes
    continuous residence pursuant to existing leave to enter or remain.  It
    does not include residence while an out-of-time application is pending.



13. Accordingly, consistent with  the  1971  Act,  the  appellant  was  not
    lawfully resident in the UK when she made a fresh application for leave
    to remain on 10 May 2017, and she was also not lawfully resident in the
    UK in the period leading up to the 10-year anniversary  of  her  lawful
    entry into the UK.

14. Rule 276B sets out the requirements for indefinite leave to  remain  on
    the ground of long residence in the UK.  The first requirement is  that
    the applicant has had at least 10 years' continuous lawful residence in
    the UK.  The second requirement is that, having regard  to  the  public
    interest, there are no reasons why it  would  be  undesirable  for  the
    person to be given indefinite leave to remain on  the  ground  of  long
    residence.  The third requirement is that the applicant does  not  fall
    for  refusal  under  the  general  grounds  of  refusal;   the   fourth
    requirement is that the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge
    of the English language and sufficient  knowledge  about  life  in  the
    United Kingdom; and the fifth requirement is that the applicant has not
    been in the UK in breach of the Immigration Laws,  except  that,  where
    paragraph 39E of the Rules applies, any current period  of  overstaying
    will be  disregarded.   Any  previous  period  of  overstaying  between
    periods of leave will  also  be  disregarded  where,  the  case  of  an
    application made on or after 24 November 2016,  paragraph  39E  of  the
    Rules applied.

15. The fallacy of Mr West's argument is that it fails  to  recognise  that
    the fifth requirement is distinct from the first  requirement.   It  is
    possible to satisfy the first requirement, but not to satisfy the fifth
    requirement. Equally, it is possible to satisfy the fifth  requirement,
    but not satisfy the first requirement.  An example of the former  would
    be a person who had accrued 10 years' continuous  lawful  residence  in
    the UK, but who then delayed making an application  for  ILR  for  more
    than 14 days after the expiry of his last grant of leave.

16. Judge Ross correctly directed himself that the appellant did  not  fall
    foul of  Rule  276B(v)  in  that  the  appellant  had  made  a  further
    application for leave to remain within 8 days of  the  receipt  of  the
    negative administrative review decision.

17. Judge Ross also correctly directed himself that this did not,  however,
    determine the question as to whether the appellant  had  complied  with
    the first requirement, which was whether she had accrued  at  least  10
    years' continuous lawful residence in the UK as defined in Rule 276A.

18. Mr West helpfully directed my attention to  the  Home  Office's  Policy
    Guidance of 2017 at page 15,  which  provides  as  follows:  "'Gaps  in
    Lawful Residence' - You may grant the application if  an  applicant:  >
    has short gaps in lawful residence through making previous applications
    out of time by no more than 28  calendar  days  where  those  gaps  end
    before 24 November 2016  > has short gaps in  lawful  residence  on  or
    after November 2016 but leave was granted in accordance with  paragraph
    39E of the Immigration Rules > Meets all  the  other  requirements  for
    lawful residence."

19. As one would expect, the appellant's position under the Policy Guidance
    is no different from her position under the Rules.  The  appellant  did
    not meet all the relevant requirements for the grant of ILR  under  the
    Rules, and there is nothing in the Policy Guidance  that  salvages  her
    position.

20. Mr West submits in the alternative that the Tribunal erred  in  failing
    to consider properly the appellant's Article 8 claim outside the Rules.
     He submits that the appellant's case was a near miss  case  under  the
    Rules, and that this  should  have  been  taken  into  account  in  the
    proportionality exercise.  Since the appellant  has  invested  tens  of
    thousands of pounds in the  UK,  both  as  an  Entrepreneur  and  as  a
    student, she is, he submits, fully integrated into UK society.

21. The error of law challenge overlooks the fact that the  appellant  only
    came close to accruing 10 years' lawful residence  through  pursuing  a
    lengthy   administrative   review   process   which   was    ultimately
    unsuccessful,  culminating  in  a  negative  decision  which   robustly
    maintained the earlier immigration decision that the appellant was  not
    a genuine entrepreneur, and that she had not set up a viable business.

22. I consider that the Judge gave adequate reasons for  finding  that  the
    refusal decision was proportionate to  the  legitimate  public  aim  of
    effective  immigration  control,  and  that  Mr  West's  error  of  law
    challenge is no more than an expression of disagreement  with  findings
    and conclusions that were reasonably open to the Judge on evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 17 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

