
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07183/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 20 August 2019                    |On 9 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Malvern Munashe Chibukwa
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Norman, Counsel instructed by Tann Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse  him
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.  The claimant is subject to  a
    deportation order signed on 6 June 2017 and made as  a  consequence  of
    his being sent to twenty months detention at a Young Offender Institute
    on 15 July 2016 for two counts of possession of class A drugs  (cocaine
    and heroin) with intent to supply on 15 July 2016.

 2. The claimant asserted a right to remain on human rights  grounds  after
    receipt of the deportation order.  Submissions were  made  on  22  June
    2017 and these led to the refusal of leave on human rights grounds on 2
    March 2018.

 3. The Secretary of State set out the claimant's immigration history.   He
    is a citizen of Zimbabwe and he was born in May 1996.  He  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a dependant of his mother  with  entry  clearance  to
    expire in February 2005.  He was given leave to remain in line with his
    mother's until 13 December 2013.   In  January  2015  he  made  a  late
    application for further leave which was refused in  February  2015.  He
    remained in the United Kingdom without permission.

 4. On 18 February 2016 he was arrested for possession of prescribed  drugs
    with intent to supply and on 14  February  2017  he  was  sentenced  to
    twenty months' detention for two counts of possession  with  intent  to
    supply class A drugs.  The deportation order was signed on 6 June  2017
    and he was released from custody on 1 December 2017.

 5. The Secretary of State directed herself  to  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules.  She said the deportation was conducive to the public  good  and
    in the public interest because of the sentence that had  been  imposed.
    The Secretary of State recognised that the rules created exceptions  to
    the usual consequences of being convicted of a serious  offence  and  a
    possible exception was at paragraph  399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    That applied where a foreign criminal had been lawfully resident in the
    United Kingdom for most of his life and  was  socially  and  culturally
    integrated into the United Kingdom and there would be very  significant
    obstacles to the foreign criminal's integration into the country  where
    he would be sent.  The Secretary of  State  did  not  accept  that  the
    claimant had lived lawfully in the United Kingdom for most of his life.
     He had certainly lived in the United Kingdom since he was aged  8  but
    there were gaps in his leave and he had certainly no  right  to  remain
    since December 2013.

 6. Neither did the Secretary  of  State  accept  that  the  appellant  was
    socially  and  culturally  integrated.   There  had  been  evidence  of
    childhood involvement at a  church  in  Birmingham  but  there  was  no
    evidence that he had been employed or taken part in any voluntary  work
    or that he  was  financially  independent  or  that  he  had  made  any
    contribution to the wider  community  but  he  had  committed  criminal
    offences.  Similarly the Secretary of State did not accept  that  there
    were very significant obstacles to the claimant's integration into life
    in Zimbabwe.  Although he had no adult experience  of  life  there  his
    parents were Zimbabwean and it  was  said  that  he  could  familiarise
    himself with the country.  The Secretary of State did not accept  there
    were very compelling circumstances preventing deportation because there
    was  a  strong  public  interest  in  his  deportation  following   his
    conviction of supplying unlawful drugs.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal's approach was less than satisfactory.

 8. The judge accepted evidence that the claimant spoke English and  Shona.
    She also accepted evidence that the claimant had begun  a  relationship
    with his girlfriend which might be described as a serious  relationship
    but they were not living together.  The girlfriend was  not  a  partner
    under the Rules.

 9. The judge set out to apply the Rules. Paragraph 339(a) does not  assist
    the claimant because he did not have a parental relationship. Paragraph
    339(b) did not apply because he did not have a partner under the rules.

10. Further, the judge did not accept that there would be very  significant
    obstacles to the claimant's integration into life  in  Zimbabwe.   This
    was based on the  possibility  of  parental  support  from  the  United
    Kingdom and his ability to speak Shona.

11. However the judge found at paragraph 20 of  her  Decision  and  Reasons
    that the appellant had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
    most of his life and that he was socially and culturally integrated  in
    the United Kingdom.

12. She then looked at the appellant's offending.  She was satisfied on the
    evidence,  particularly  the  judge's  sentencing  remarks,  that   the
    appellant was not the  instigator  in  the  matters  that  led  to  his
    imprisonment. He had played a lesser part in the offence than  had  his
    co-accused and the claimant was of previous good character.  The  judge
    went on to allow the appeal.

13. The judge said at paragraph 30 of her decision:

         "The [claimant], has for the most part been in the UK lawfully.  Of
         a period of twelve years three years has been precarious and partly
         unlawful.  Whilst the rest has been unlawful.  He came to the UK as
         a dependant of his mother whilst still in his formative years.   He
         has spent the majority of his life in the UK and that I find  is  a
         factor that reduces the public interest in immigration control."

14. She then purported to have conducted a balancing exercise  and  decided
    to allow the appeal.

15. I cannot understand paragraph 30.

16. The claimant was born on 13 May 1996. He arrived in the United  Kingdom
    on 3 February 2005 apparently  with  leave  as  the  dependant  of  his
    mother. He was then 7 years and almost 9 months old. His leave  expired
    on 13 December 2013. It follows that he has had permission to be in the
    United Kingdom for 8 years, 10 months and some days. He was 17 years  7
    months and some days old when his leave expired so he had then been  in
    the United Kingdom for just over half of his life. By the time that  he
    made his application for leave on human rights grounds he  had  clearly
    not been in the United Kingdom lawfully for most of his  life  and  the
    proportion was less by the time the judge heard the appeal.

17. I wondered if the judge meant to say that the claimant had been in  the
    United Kingdom for the most part unlawfully but that would not  explain
    paragraph 20.

18. Be that as it may the Secretary of State  particularly  criticised  the
    assertion that the fact that he had spent the majority of his  life  in
    the UK "is a factor that reduces the  public  interest  of  immigration
    control".

19. It is not clear what the judge meant by reducing the  "public  interest
    of immigration control".

20. The grounds point out, correctly, that it is wrong to assert  that  the
    fact of long residence  reduces  the  public  interest.   There  is  no
    justification whatsoever for that although I suspect rather than  there
    being the glaring error that it seems it is a rather  careless  way  of
    saying that the length of residence is a factor which might be  thought
    to be balanced against the public interest in removal.  The  difficulty
    is that only applies under the Rules when the residence has been mostly
    lawful and here it was not.

21. I agree that the judge erred by making much of  the  claimant's  lesser
    involvement in the criminal offences that brought him before the  Crown
    Court.  The overwhelmingly most important criterion for  assessing  the
    seriousness of the offence is the sentence.  That is essential  because
    there are two qualifying conditions under the rules and under  part  5A
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  that  direct  the
    approach to human rights appeals involving people who  are  subject  to
    deportation.  Essentially  the  sentence  of  twelve  months'  duration
    qualifies a person for automatic  deportation  but  certain  exceptions
    apply and a sentence of  four  years  or  more  restricts  further  the
    exceptions that apply.  It will be going too  far  to  say  that  other
    matters are never of any  relevance  because  an  article  8  balancing
    exercise is necessarily widely drawn but it is not helpful  for  judges
    to indulge in an examination of the minutiae  of  the  offending.   The
    Crown Court can  be  expected  to  have  given  proper  regard  to  the
    mitigating factors and  even  if,  extraordinarily,  it  did  not,  the
    Tribunal is in no position to correct any error. In  appeals  involving
    deportation once the qualifying sentences have been imposed the reasons
    for them will not normally be of much interest and  are  probably  best
    avoided because consideration can give the impression of error.

22. I agree too that the judge has given too much regard to  the  prospects
    of rehabilitation.  Deportation is not about  rehabilitation,  even  in
    the case of people  convicted  when  they  are  minors  (there  may  be
    exceptions for EEA nationals).  The judge has clearly given some weight
    to that.

23. The judge found that the claimant could not benefit from  Section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  That  is  clearly
    right because there is no partner or child to consider.

24. The Secretary of State said that the judge  had  effectively  paid  lip
    service  to  the  phrase  "very  compelling  circumstances"  and   "has
    erroneously diluted the public interest".

25. I have to say I have difficulty in  understanding  why  the  judge  has
    allowed the appeal on the findings that have been  made.   Clearly  she
    felt sorry for him.  The claimant has lived in the United Kingdom for a
    long time and it is not his fault that  he  was  brought  as  a  child.
    Although he has committed the offences indicated he has  not  committed
    other offences.  Although he has some distant links with Zimbabwe it is
    in most ways a foreign country to him.  It is a difficult country where
    life is challenging and it is reasonable to assume he will not find  it
    easy to adapt to living there.

26. Ms Norman made points on the claimant's behalf.  I agree with her  that
    it is not the claimant's fault that he did not have leave for  much  of
    his time in the United Kingdom.  Some of the  gap  was  caused  by  his
    mother's inefficiency in making a  late  application.   That  does  not
    really diminish the fact that he  was  in  the  United  Kingdom  having
    entered with permission  and  was  making  his  home  there.   That  is
    something that can be  balanced  in  the  scales  for  the  appellant's
    advantage.  The trouble is that there is little else that can  be  said
    on this appellant's behalf.  The strongest point is the  time  that  he
    spent in the United Kingdom and statute law, which seems to  have  been
    largely ignored by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, says how this  should
    be treated.  Section 117C of the 2002 Act asserts that the  deportation
    of foreign criminals is in  the  public  interest  but  two  exceptions
    apply.  Exception 2 has no relevance here.  The appellant's  friend  is
    not a qualifying partner but even if she were there is a finding by the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that she could live in Zimbabwe.  Exception 1
    applies when three contingencies occur.  One is that  the  claimant  is
    socially, culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.  The  judge  has
    made that finding in his favour.  Second a  cumulative  requirement  is
    that the claimant has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for
    most of his life.  He has not.  A third cumulative requirement is  that
    "there will be very significant obstacles" to his integration into  the
    country where he would be deported.  The judge found that there were no
    very significant obstacles to the claimant reintegrating into  life  in
    Zimbabwe (paragraph 22).

27. It is quite clear that the judge's findings can only support a decision
    that the claimant cannot take advantage of the  Exceptions  created  by
    Parliament.

28. I have to conclude that the judge's decision to allow  the  appeal  was
    are wrong. There reasoning is obscure and there  are  materially  wrong
    directions.

29. I further conclude that the only proper decision  on  the  findings  of
    fact is to substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.

30. I have reflected  before  taking  this  course.   I  have,  of  course,
    realised that from the claimant's point of view it is very unattractive
    for him to have had this hanging over his head now for some  years,  to
    think he won because his appeal was allowed in the First-tier  Tribunal
    and now to be told that he must prepare  himself  to  be  deported.   I
    recognise too that there is some evidence of better  relations  in  the
    community and certainly no evidence of further trouble.  It may be that
    he has learnt his lesson and will not  attract  the  attention  of  the
    criminal courts again.  The first experience of custody does  sometimes
    have that effect.  It is by no means an unbelievable  claim.   None  of
    this helps him.

31. There is nothing here that permits a decision to allow the appeal under
    the Rules or outside the Rules.  There are no exceptional circumstances
    and the statutory tests are not met.

32. It follows therefore that I allow the Secretary of State's  appeal.   I
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  I  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the claimant's appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State.



Notice of Decision

I allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

I substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision to refuse him leave to remain on human  rights
grounds.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 October 2019                 |


