
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number HU/07939/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2018                           |On 11 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                            Mr Mohammad RasalMiah
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel instructed by Thamina Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and his date  of  birth  is  7
    November 1979.  He made an application for indefinite leave  to  remain
    (ILR) which was refused by the Secretary of State on 3 March 2016 under
    and paragraphs 276B and322 (2) of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant
    appealed against the decision.  His appeal was dismissed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bartlett in a decision which was promulgated  on  18July
    2017.  The Upper Tribunal refused to grant the Appellant permission  to
    appeal.  That decision was  quashed  and  permission  granted  by  Vice
    President of the Upper Tribunal C  M  G  Ockelton  on  28  August  2018
    following a decision of the High Court.  Thus the matter came before me
    on 22 November 2018 to decide whether Judge Bartlett erred.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

2.   Judge  Bartlett  summarised  the  Appellant's  immigration  history  at
    paragraph 2 of his decision.  The Appellant  came  to  the  UK  on  1st
    September 2005 with entry clearance as a student.  He was granted leave
    on various occasions thereafter.  On 16  July  2014  the  Secretary  of
    State refused an application made by the Appellant on  29  May  2014for
    leave as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur).  The Appellant appealed.  His  appeal
    was dismissed in a decision of  the  FTT  on  17  December  2014  under
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules on the basis that the  judge
    hearing that appeal was satisfied that the Respondent  had  established
    that the Appellant submitted false bank  statements  (from  City  Bank)
    with his application.

3.   In the appeal before Judge Bartlett the Respondent did not accept  that
    the Appellant had ten years'  lawful  residence.   The  Appellant  gave
    evidence at the hearing.  He focussed  on  the  issue  under  paragraph
    322(2).  The Respondent relied on a Document Verification Report  (DVR)
    in respect of the documents from  City  Bank  on  which  the  Appellant
    relied in his application in 2014.

4.   The Appellant's evidence was that the documents that he submitted  with
    his Tier 1 application  of  29  May  2014  were  not  fraudulent.   The
    Appellant's evidence was that the contact number on the  DVR  for  City
    Bank Ltd that the Respondent had  identified  was  a  mobile  telephone
    number.  He  had  searched  the  internet  and  had  not  found  mobile
    telephone numbers for the bank.   As  the  DVR  did  not  identify  the
    details of the person contacted at the bank  he  claimed  that  it  was
    defective.  His evidence was that the documents from City Bank Ltd were
    genuine.  In addition, he submitted an additional letter from City Bank
    Ltd of 17 December 2014 addressed to his solicitors and a letter of  18
    June 2017 from the  bank.  The  original  of  the  latter  document  he
    produced at the hearing before Judge Bartlett.

5.   The judge directed himself in relation to Devaseelan (Second Appeals  -
    ECHR-Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka.  The  judge  found  that  the
    submissions in relation to the 2014 determination were an attempt to re-
    open the earlier decision despite the rejection of  such  arguments  by
    both the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal in their refusal to
    grant permission.  He found there was no good reason to depart from the
    findings made by the judge  in  2014.   He  went  on  to  consider  the
    veracity of the documents in the light of the evidence now produced  by
    the Appellant. The judge noted that the bank documents from  City  Bank
    Ltd in dispute concerned the  Appellant's  uncle's  account  with  that
    bank.  There was no issue with the Appellant's own bank  account.   The
    judge took  into  account  what  the  Appellant  said  about  the  DVR.
    However, the judge concluded, at paragraph 24, that he did not consider
    that the Appellant's evidence to carry  much  force  and  that  it  was
    perfectly reasonable to expect the Home Office to have special  contact
    telephone numbers  for  some  financial  institutions  and  that  these
    numbers are not publicly available.  He found  that  the  fact  that  a
    mobile telephone number was used rather than a  landline  was  entirely
    immaterial.  The judge went on to find  that  the  DVR  was  clear  and
    reject the Appellant's case. The  judge  considered  the  evidence  now
    submitted by the Appellant and found internal  anomalies  within  those
    documents.  The judge  found  when  all  factors  were  considered  the
    Respondent had discharged the burden of proof and established that  the
    documents that the Appellant relied on were false. The judge went on to
    state that the Appellant had made false representations for the purpose
    of obtaining  leave  and  that  therefore  the  Appellant  fell  within
    paragraph  322(2)  and  did  not  satisfy  paragraph  276B(ii)(c)   and
    paragraph 276B(iii)[1].

6.   The judge considered  whether  the  Appellant  had  accrued  ten  years
    continuous lawful residency in the  UK  noting  that  he  had  made  an
    application for leave to remain on the basis of his private and  family
    life on 22 June 2015 which was as the judge found "within  the  28  day
    'grace' period and pursuant to the Respondent's guidance and policy the
    Appellant had Section 3C leave from this date".   The  judge  made  the
    following findings:-

         "30. Mr Singer submitted that this  application  was  varied  on  5
             August 2015 which  was  before  the  Respondent  rejected  the
             Appellant's application dated of 22 June 2015.   I  accept  Mr
             Singer's  submission.   The  Respondent's  letter   dated   29
             September  2015   purporting   to   reject   the   Appellant's
             application dated 22 June 2015 as invalid makes no mention  of
             5 August 2015 and as such it cannot be an affective refusal or
             rejection.  The letter from the Appellant's solicitors dated 5
             August clearly states that this 'application' was a variation.
               The  Respondent's  guidance  and   policy   is   to   permit
             applications  to  be  varied  and  under  Section  3C  of  the
             Immigration Act 1972 leave continues.  I consider that this is
             supported by JH (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 78.   As  is
             made clear in JH (Zimbabwe) the fact that  the  Appellant  had
             little prospect of success in his 22 June 2015 application  is
             not material for Section 3C  leave  purposes.   Therefore  the
             Appellant can satisfy paragraph 276B(v).

         31.  However, this does not mean that the Appellant has established
             ten years' continuous residency.  As a result of  my  analysis
             above I have found that the Appellant's  application  dated  5
             August 2015 commenced on 22 June 2015, 5  August  2015  letter
             from the Appellant's representative, sets out  that  it  is  a
             variation  of  22  June  2015  application  and  not   a   new
             application.  I consider that this is  the  correct  analysis,
             particularly in light of my findings above.  Therefore as  the
             Appellant made an application on 22 June 2015 on the basis  of
             ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residency,   he   made   this
             application more than 28 days before he  would  have  acquired
             ten years' continuous residence in the United Kingdom  (as  he
             arrived on 1 September 2015 he would have acquired ten  years'
             residency on 1 September 2015 as it is not claimed there  were
             any other gaps in residency).  The  Respondent's  guidance  in
             this area is clear and she will only  accept  applications  on
             the basis of ten years' continuous lawful  residency  if  they
             are 28 days or less before the ten year  period  has  accrued.
             As the Appellant's application commenced on 22 June 2005, this
             is substantially in excess of the 28 days.  Therefore  at  the
             date of application he had not accrued  ten  years'  residency
             whether lawful or not.

         32.  I consider that there are  no  policy  reasons  why  my  above
             analysis should not be applied.  The  Respondent's  policy  of
             allowing individuals to apply a maximum of 28 days before they
             have  acquired   ten   years'   residency   is   a   pragmatic
             administrative  matter.   To  allow  individuals  to  put   an
             application substantially in advance of the 28 days  by  means
             of making entirely different applications and then varying  to
             a ten years' continuous lawful  residency  application,  which
             they could do a number of times, would  potentially  undermine
             the certainty and purpose of the ten year residency Rule.

         33.  Therefore I find that the Appellant cannot  satisfy  paragraph
             276(i)(a).

         34.  No evidence has been provided to me that the Appellant's  wife
             and child are not still in Bangladesh  and  therefore  I  find
             that the Appellant cannot satisfy Appendix FM.

         35.  I consider that as the Appellant has  strong  family  ties  to
             Bangladesh in the form of his wife, child and uncle  they  can
             help him to reintegrate into  Bangladesh.   I  find  that  the
             Appellant speaks the language  in  Bangladesh  and  spent  his
             first 26 years in Bangladesh including years in education.   I
             consider that the Appellant has family support and he will  be
             able to find work and reintegrate into Bangladesh.   Therefore
             the Appellant cannot satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

         36.  Despite all of the above this is an appeal based on Article  8
             ECHR.  Therefore I have given consideration to Section 117C of
             the 2002 Act.

         37.  I find that the Appellant can speak English as he was able  to
             participate fully in the hearing.  I have no information about
             the Appellant's financial means at the date of this appeal and
             therefore he has not discharged the burden of  proof  to  show
             that he is financially independent.  The Appellant has been in
             the United Kingdom lawfully but he does not have a  qualifying
             child or partner here.

         38.  When considering Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration  Rules
             I have given due consideration to Agyarko v Secretary of State
             for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 and its  guidance  that
             'it remains the position that the ultimate question is  how  a
             fair balance should be struck  between  the  competing  public
             interest  in  individual  interests   involved,   applying   a
             proportionality test.'

         39.  Therefore I must consider  the  five  step  test  set  out  in
             Razgar, R (on the Application of) v SSHD [2004]  UKHL  27.   I
             find that the Appellant does  not  have  family  life  in  the
             United Kingdom and therefore he has no family life  here.   In
             relation to a private life I accept  that  the  Appellant  has
             been in the United Kingdom for a substantial  period  of  time
             and he will have  formed  some  sort  of  private  life  here.
             However, as set out above for there to be an  interference  in
             the Appellant's private life his moral or  physical  integrity
             must be compromised.  I do not accept that this is so in  this
             appeal and I do  not  consider  that  any  evidence  has  been
             provided that could discharge the  burden  of  proof  in  this
             respect.  Further, I find that the Respondent's decision is in
             accordance with the Immigration Rules and  the  Appellant  has
             not satisfied the Immigration Rules as detailed above.  I have
             found that the Appellant has committed fraud  in  relation  to
             his 2014 appeal and since  then  I  consider  that  he  cannot
             establish any unfairness in his treatment.  Therefore  I  find
             that  the  Respondent's  decision  is  proportionate  to   the
             legitimate aim of immigration control."

7.   There was only one ground of appeal  pursued  before  the  High  Court.
    That was that the judge did not properly apply paragraph 34G[2] of  the
    Immigration Rules. The decision reads as follows:-

         "The amended grounds, settled  by  counsel,  rely  on  one  ground,
         namely, that applying Rule 34G(i) of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
         varied application should have been treated as if had been made  in
         August 2015 (the date of posting), not June 2015 (the date  of  the
         original application).  The  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT)  erred  in
         treating it as made in June 2015.

         In my judgment this ground is clearly arguable.

         The Upper Tribunal did not address this point.

         If the Claimant's analysis is correct, it could make  a  difference
         to the outcome.  The FTT found at paragraph 31 that the Claimant he
         would have acquired ten years residency on 1  September  2015,  and
         the Defendant would accept applications on the basis of  ten  years
         residency if they were made 28 days or less  before  the  ten  year
         period has accrued.  The date in August was 28 days or less  before
         the ten- year period accrued, but the date in June was not, so  the
         difference was significant".

Error of Law

8.   The focus of  the  error  is  what  is  stated  by  Judge  Bartlett  at
    paragraph 31 of his decision.  Properly applying paragraph  34  of  the
    Rules, the date of the application was  5  August  2015  and  therefore
    within 28 days before the ten- year period  accrued  and  therefore  on
    this analysis, as conceded by Mr Walker, in the absence  of  a  counter
    challenge to the findings made by Judge Bartlett, the Appellant accrued
    ten years' lawful continuous residence.  For  this  reason,  the  judge
    erred and I set the decision aside.

Conclusions

9.   Mr Symes asked me to adjourn the matter  to  enable  the  Appellant  to
    submit further evidence.   I  questioned  why  the  Appellant  had  not
    produced further evidence in accordance with directions issued  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on 11 September  2018.   Mr  Symes  explained  that  the
    Appellant was privately paying and that his previous solicitors had not
    advised him to produce further evidence before the finding of an  error
    of law. Mr Symes accepted that his was  not  the  right  way  of  doing
    things but that it was the current state of play. I understood from  Mr
    Symes that the Appellant's current solicitors had been representing him
    for a week. There was no adequate explanation why they had not taken it
    upon themselves to  prepare  further  evidence  in  the  event  of  the
    remaking of the appeal.  Mr Walker did not object  to  an  adjournment;
    however, he did not provide me with a reason for this. There  has  been
    protracted litigation over a significant period. The Appellant has been
    represented throughout and I reasonably infer that he is aware  of  the
    issues in his case and that it has  been  explained  to  him  by  those
    representing him that lawful continuous residence was not determinative
    of his appeal.  There was no satisfactory explanation  to  account  for
    the  failure  to  prepare  the  Appellant's  case  and  submit  further
    evidence. There was no properly identified  evidence  that  may  become
    available in the event of an adjournment.  There  was  no  good  reason
    drawn to my attention to justify an adjournment. It was  very  much  in
    the public interest, applying the overriding objective, to  proceed  to
    remake the appeal on the evidence before the FTT. I  heard  submissions
    from both parties.

10.  Judge Bartlett concluded that the Appellant did not  satisfy  paragraph
    276B(ii)(c). It is clear that what  he  meant  by  this  is  that  when
    considering the public interest and the Appellant's conduct it would be
    undesirable to grant him ILR. There is no challenge to this conclusion.
     In any event, as properly  found  by  Judge  Bartlett,  the  Appellant
    cannot  meet  the  requirements  under  the  Rules  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276B (iii).

11.  The judge accepted that  the  Appellant  had  been  in  the  UK  for  a
    significant period and that he would have formed some sort  of  private
    life here.  There was no further evidence before me. The Appellant  has
    significant family ties  to  Bangladesh  (see  paragraph  35  of  Judge
    Bartlett's decision).  The judge did not have  before  him  information
    relating to the Appellant's financial means and found that he  was  not
    financially independent.  Whilst  the  Appellant  has  been  given  the
    opportunity to produce further evidence in support of his appeal, there
    was before me no evidence over and above the evidence that  was  before
    Judge Bartlett.  There was no reason for me to go behind  the  findings
    of the FTT under paragraphs 267B (ii) or (iii) or as regards the  wider
    article 8 assessment.

12.  The Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Rules and has  failed
    to  produce  evidence  which  is  capable  of  establishing  compelling
    circumstances. The decision is proportionate taking  into  account  the
    circumstances in this case and s117B of the 2002 Act.

13.  The appeal is dismissed under Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 11 January 2019

-----------------------

[1]Paragraph 276B (ii) reads as follows:-


    "Having regard to the public interest there  were  no  reasons  why  it
    should be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to remain on
    the ground of long residence, taking into account his:-


      a) age;


      b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom;


      c) personal history, including character,  conduct,  associations  and
         employment records; and


      d) domestic circumstances; and


      e) previous criminal record and the nature of any offence of which the
         person has been convicted; and


      f) compassionate circumstances;


      g) any representations received on the person's behalf.


Paragraph 276B (iii) reads as follows:


    "the applicant does not fall for refusal under the general grounds  for
    refusal".


[2]The relevant rules read as follows:-


    "Variation of Applications or Claims for Leave to Remain


    34E. If a person wishes to vary the purpose of an application for leave
         to remain in the United Kingdom, the variation must comply with the
         requirements of paragraph  34  (as  they  apply  at  the  date  the
         variation is made) as if the variation were a new application.   If
         it does not, subject  to  paragraph  34B,  the  variation  will  be
         invalid and will not be considered.


    ...


    Date and application (or variation of  an  application)  for  leave  to
    remain is made


    34G. For the purposes of these Rules, the date on which an  application
         (or a variation of application in accordance with paragraph 34E  is
         made is:


          1) where the paper application form is  sent  by  post  by  Royal
             Mail, whether or not accompanied by a fee waiver request form,
             the date of posting  is  shown  on  the  tracking  information
             provided by Royal Mail or, if not  tracked,  by  the  postmark
             date on the envelope or


    ...


