
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/07922/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 January 2019                  |On 30 January 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                           AKHTAR JAMEEL MOHAMMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel (counsel) instructed by KG Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  Designated
First-tier Tribunal Judge  McClure  promulgated  on  12  April  2018,  which
dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 24 January 1980. He is a national of India  who
entered the UK as a student on 12 February 2010. He has remained in  the  UK
since then.

4. On 20 September 2016 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the  UK
on article 8 ECHR grounds.  On 5 July 2017 the Secretary  of  State  refused
the Appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. Designated  First-tier
Tribunal Judge McClure  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 26 October  2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The grounds of appeal are the First-tier Tribunal has materially erred
    in law in its  approach  to  insurmountable  obstacles  by  failing  to
    consider the appellant's partner's ability to relocate in light of  her
    medical conditions. Although the First-tier  Tribunal's  assessment  of
    family  life  and  the  appellant's  partner's  position  once   having
    relocated contained adequate reasons and is not directly challenged  by
    the appellant, it is arguable that insufficient regard as been  had  to
    whether or not the appellant's partner could practically get  to  India
    in light of her agoraphobia and other  mental  health  problems  (which
    were evidenced before the  First-tier  Tribunal)  or  whether  this  in
    itself posed an insurmountable obstacle to family  life  being  enjoyed
    outside of the United Kingdom.


    The First-tier Tribunal's decision does contain an  arguable  error  of
    law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal  and  permission  to
    appeal is therefore granted."

The Hearing

6. (a) For the appellant, Ms Patel moved the grounds of appeal. She told  me
that the Judge's approach to consideration  of  whether  or  not  there  are
insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  outside  the  UK  is
flawed. She told me that the respondent accepts that the appellant is  in  a
genuine and subsisting relationship with his  British  citizen  partner  and
that the relationship was established in January 2012. She took  me  through
the appellant's partner's medical conditions and produced a letter from  the
community mental health nurse involved in the  appellant's  partner's  care,
dated 26 November 2018.

(b) Ms Patel told me that the Judge acknowledges the  appellant's  partner's
physical  and  mental  health  conditions  but  does  not  explain  how  the
appellant's partner could reasonably travel to India. She told  me  that  in
the decision the Judge accepts that the  appellant's  partner  was  born  in
1960 & has suffered from the same mental health conditions since she was  17
years old. She referred me  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  which  contains  a
definition of agoraphobia.

(c) Ms Patel relied on paragraphs 48, 56,  57  and  60  of  Agyarko  v  SSHD
[2017] UKSC 11, and told me that the Judge's proportionality  assessment  is
inadequate. She told me that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  a  Chikwamba
argument, reminding me that there is a finding that the appellant's  partner
receives disability living allowance, so that  there  is  no  need  for  the
appellant to meet the financial requirements of appendix FM.

(d) Ms Patel urged me to set the decision aside.

7. (a) For the respondent, Mr Bates told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain an error, material or otherwise. He adopted the terms  of  the  rule
24 response, dated 27 November 2018, and told me  that  it  is  likely  that
Chikwamba was not relied on before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  so  that  the
Judge cannot be criticised for  not  considering  something  which  was  not
placed before him, but in any event Mr  Bates  told  me  that  there  is  no
evidence that the appellant can meet the English  language  requirements  of
the  immigration  rules,  so  that  success  is  an  application  for  entry
clearance is not a foregone conclusion.

(b) Mr Bates told me that the Judge adequately  considered  the  appellant's
partner's medical needs, and told me that the decision contains  sustainable
conclusions that the appellant's partner's  medical  needs  can  be  met  by
adequate Indian medical facilities. He reminded me that the burden of  proof
rests on the appellant and told me that there has been no specific  evidence
of an obstacle within the journey to India, nor that, if there  is  such  an
obstacle, the obstacle is insurmountable.  He  told  me  there  is  no  real
specification of the difficulties that the appellant and his partner face.

(c) Mr Bates took me to [63] and [64]  of  the  decision,  where  the  Judge
considers what would happen if the appellant's partner was to leave the  UK,
and what would happen if the appellant's partner was to remain  in  the  UK.
He told me that the decision is adequately reasoned. He asked me to  dismiss
the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8. It  is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  either  the
suitability or eligibility requirements of appendix FM. In the  respondent's
reasons for refusal  letter  the  respondent  considers  paragraph  EX.1  of
appendix FM. Paragraph EX.1 of  appendix  FM  applies  in  cases  where  the
eligibility requirements are not met. It does not apply in  cases  with  the
suitability  requirements  are  not  met.  However,  what  is   central   to
consideration  of  article  8  ECHR  grounds  of  appeal  in  this  case  is
consideration of the appellant's partner's physical and  mental  challenges,
so  that  the  consideration  of  paragraph   EX.1   informs   the   overall
proportionality exercise.

9. Between [8] and [15] the Judge takes correct guidance  in  law.  At  [13]
the Judge highlights the respondent's acceptance that the appellant and  his
partner are in a genuine and subsisting relationship and at  both  [13]  and
[15] the Judge draws a clear focus on considering  whether  there  are  very
significant obstacles to family life continuing outside the United Kingdom.

10. The Judge's findings of fact  lie  between  [16]  and  [45].  The  Judge
records the appellant's partner's mental health difficulties and,  at  [40],
specifically finds that the appellant's partner  suffers  from  agoraphobia.
The Judge sets out the effect of the symptoms of the appellant's illness.

11. At [53] the Judge correctly sets out  that  the  central  issue  is  the
appellant's partner's medical conditions. Between [53] and  [56]  the  Judge
finds that there is adequate medical treatment available to the  appellant's
partner in India.

12. No challenge is taken to the Judge's findings that the appellant  cannot
meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1). On the  facts  as  the  Judge
found them to be, because of the appellant's age  and  the  length  of  time
that he has been in the UK, he cannot meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
276 ADE(1)(i) to (v). The only remaining consideration of that paragraph  is
whether or not there are  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
integration into life in India. Consideration of the  appellant's  partner's
ability to  integrate  in  India  is  not  a  relevant  consideration  under
paragraph 276 ADE.

13. At [62] the Judge is correct to take guidance from  section  117B(4)  of
the 2002 Act. The relationship between the appellant  and  his  partner  was
entered into when the appellant was present in the UK unlawfully. The  Judge
could only attach little weight to the relationship in  the  proportionality
exercise.
14. In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 it was held that the ECHR  intended  that  the
words "insurmountable obstacles" should be understood  in  a  practical  and
realistic sense, rather  than  as  referring  to  obstacles  which  made  it
literally impossible for the family to  live  together  in  the  country  of
origin of the non-national  concerned.  The  definition  of  "insurmountable
obstacles" at EX.2 Appendix FM as  meaning  "very  significant  difficulties
which would be faced by the applicant or their partner in  continuing  their
family life together outside the UK and  which  could  not  be  overcome  or
would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their  partner"  was
consistent with Strasbourg case law.  In general, in  cases  concerned  with
precarious family life, a very strong or compelling  claim  is  required  to
outweigh the public interest in immigration control".
15. Although the appellant and his partner gave evidence before  the  First-
tier Tribunal. The record of proceedings shows  that  the  appellant  merely
said that his partner suffers  from  agoraphobia.  The  appellant's  partner
says in her oral evidence that the effect of agoraphobia was that she  would
only go out in a car and that she gets support from her  partner.  She  also
said that she cannot get on a train or  a  bus.  The  appellant's  partner's
daughter  said  that  the  appellant's  partner  has  benefited   from   her
relationship with the appellant and that the appellant will not go  out  and
does not have any other social interaction.

16. The appellant's witness statement dated 8 January  2018  refers  to  the
medical evidence from the  appellant's  partner's  community  mental  health
nurse. The appellant says

    "My partner simply cannot live in India with me and have the  level  of
    medical support that she has in the United Kingdom."

17. The appellant's partner wrote a letter dated 30 November 2017.  In  that
letter  the  appellant's  partner  speaks  of  her  relationship  with   the
appellant, and the symptoms of agoraphobia. The appellant's partner says

    "I definitely can't travel to India. I would if I could. I  can't  even
    get on the bus ..."

18. The record of proceedings tells me that no submissions were  made  about
obstacles to travel to India. The letters  from  the  appellant's  partner's
community  mental  health  nurse  say  that  separation  would   leave   the
appellant's partner isolated and  vulnerable.  They  do  not  say  that  the
appellant's partner cannot travel. It is only the medical  report  dated  26
November 2018 which says that the  appellant's  partner  cannot  use  public
transport. That is evidence which was not before the First-tier Tribunal.

19. On the evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  the
submissions  made  for  the  appellant,  the  question  for  the  First-tier
tribunal to consider was whether or not family life can continue  in  India.
That is clearly the question that the Judge  adequately  grappled  with.  He
sets out adequate reasons for coming to his conclusion. In effect,  he  took
the wording of paragraph EX.1  &  EX.2  of  the  immigration  rules  as  the
template for his overall proportionality assessment.

20. On the facts as the Judge found  them  to  be  there  is  provision  for
treatment for the appellant's partner's physical and  mental  conditions  in
India. There was no reliable  evidence  before  the  Judge  driving  at  the
practicality of travel to India. No submissions were  made  about  obstacles
to international travel. The argument  made  before  me,  and  the  evidence
contained in the community mental health nurse's letter of 26/11/2018,  were
not before the Judge. In this appeal, the appellant raises a new matter.

21. In BM (Iran) (2015) EWCA Civ 491 the Appellant sought to argue that  the
FTTJ failed to take into account the Respondent's policy against removal  to
Iran in the Article 8 exercise. The Court of Appeal  held  that  the  First-
Tier could not be said to have erred in law by failing to have regard  to  a
point that was not raised before it. It was not an obvious point  and  there
was nothing in the case law  to  alert  the  First-Tier  to  it,  let  alone
support it. No evidential foundation had been  laid  down  for  it  and  the
material before the First-Tier did not even contain the policy on which  the
argument was based.

22. The Judge cannot be critiscised for making his findings on the basis  of
the evidence and submissions laid before him.

23. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

24. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge  applied  the
correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all  of
the  evidence.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's   fact-finding
exercise. There was no reliable evidential basis before the Judge  for  what
is now argued before me.  No  submissions  were  made  to  the  Judge  about
obstacles  to  international  travel.  The  appellant  might  not  like  the
conclusion that the Judge arrived at, but that conclusion is the  result  of
the correctly applied legal equation. The  correct  test  in  law  has  been
applied. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

25.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION

26.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 12 April 2018, stands.

Signed
                   Date 15 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

