
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07049/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 January 2019                      |On 15 February 2019              |
|                                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                Palwinder [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Reynolds instructed by MT UK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of India.  She appealed to a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 6 June 2017 in which she was refused further leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the basis of family and private life.

2.   The judge dismissed the  appeal.   An  issue  arose  subsequently  with
    regard to reliance placed by the appellant on the fact that  there  was
    by the time of the hearing a child affected by the Secretary of State's
    decision, i.e. the sponsor's daughter with whom he  had  recently  made
    contact.  The judge considered the evidence with regard to the daughter
    and concluded that it was not shown  that  she  had  any  link  to  the
    sponsor or that as a consequence she was unable to continue family life
    outside the United Kingdom.  The  grounds  of  appeal  centred  on  the
    judge's treatment of the evidence concerning the child.  At an error of
    law hearing before me on 22 June 2018, it was argued on behalf  of  the
    respondent that at least as advanced at the hearing  before  the  judge
    was a new matter  within  the  meaning  of  section  85(5)(vi)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

3.   Following a hearing on 5 September 2018 I ruled that the matter  was  a
    new matter and as consent had not been given by the Secretary of  State
    for the Tribunal to consider it the matter could go no further.

4.   I subsequently requested and received  written  submissions  from  both
    sides as to the proper disposition of the appeal.  I found both sets of
    written submissions helpful but decided that it would  be  valuable  to
    hear the parties addressing each other's arguments and  developing  the
    points made in the written submissions at an oral hearing which was the
    purpose of the hearing today.

5.   In his submissions Mr Reynolds argued that the complexion of  the  case
    was changed by the fact of the relationship with the child and the Home
    Office was now aware of that.  He argued  that  it  was  necessary  for
    there to be a direction for a de  novo  hearing  on  all  matters  with
    emphasis on the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor  and
    the child.  He noted that the alternative possibility would be a  fresh
    application, but argued that a  de  novo  hearing  would  be  the  most
    economical outcome for all concerned.

6.   Mr Melvin in his submissions  argued  that  on  remittal  a  First-tier
    Judge would face the same problem as before this  judge  and  that  the
    decision was made on the basis of one set of facts and  they  were  now
    different and it was a new matter.  It was difficult to get around this
    and it seemed that a fresh application was the only way forward.

7.   Mr Reynolds had no further points to make by way of response.

8.   I  am  grateful  to  the  representatives  for  the  written  and  oral
    submissions.

9.   In the written submissions put in on behalf of  the  appellant  it  was
    argued, on the point made by Mr Reynolds, that there  should  be  a  de
    novo hearing.  It was  argued  in  the  written  submissions  that  the
    judge's decision fell  to  be  set  aside  on  the  basis  of  lack  of
    jurisdiction.  It was argued that it  would  be  unsafe  to  leave  the
    residual and unappealed findings  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  intact
    because although some of those issues could clearly be demarcated  from
    the appealed issue, it was argued that  other  unappealed  issues,  for
    example EX.1, could not be so demarcated.

10.  In the written submissions put in on behalf of the  respondent  and  as
    developed by Mr Melvin today, it was argued that the  decision  of  the
    judge should stand, since there was no challenge to her findings  under
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE and there was no indication  that  any
    further evidence was to be called.

11.  I reserved my decision.

12.  In her decision the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had
    provided reasonable excuses for not attending the interviews offered to
    her in May and July 2016.  As regards the evidence of income, the judge
    was not satisfied that the specified evidence was submitted and that as
    a consequence the financial requirements of the  Rules  were  not  met.
    She was  satisfied  that  the  couple  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage.  As regards the issue of EX.1 and insurmountable obstacles to
    family life continuing outside the United Kingdom,  she  was  satisfied
    that there were no such obstacles.  She then went on to  say  that  the
    only obstacle which could be insurmountable was  the  question  of  the
    sponsor's daughter, but, as  noted  above,  did  not  accept  that  the
    necessary link was made out and that EX.1 did not apply.

13.  As regards the appellant's claim on the basis  of  private  life  under
    paragraph 276ADE, the judge found that she could not succeed  and  that
    there were not very significant obstacles to her integration back  into
    life in India.

14.  In the grounds of appeal, and to setting out a number of extracts  from
    leading authorities, the argument focused on the issue of the sponsor's
    daughter and it was argued that the judge had erred in  the  conclusion
    she came to in respect of a relationship between the  sponsor  and  his
    daughter contending that it was arguable that the findings in  relation
    to  the  sponsor's  relationship  with  his  daughter  were   perverse.
    Permission was granted on the basis of the grounds.

15.  I am satisfied that the judge's lack of  jurisdiction  to  address  the
    new  matter  which  was  the  issue  concerning  the  child   and   her
    relationship with her father,  is  clearly  severable  from  the  other
    findings in the decision.  That was  in  essence  the  only  matter  of
    appeal, and the other findings of the judge are unappealed and  are  in
    my judgment sound.  Although I  understand  the  pragmatism  that  lies
    behind the argument for remittal to the First-tier Tribunal,  it  comes
    up against the difficulty identified at the hearing, that any judge  to
    whom the  matter  was  remitted  would  be  confronted  with  the  same
    difficulty as this judge was confronted with which is  the  new  matter
    argument in respect of the relationship between  the  sponsor  and  his
    daughter.  The claim would therefore be no further forward in terms  of
    being able to advance arguments in that respect.  As a consequence  the
    pragmatic solution is not viable and in any event as a matter of law  I
    do not consider that the matter could be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal bearing in mind the points made above, i.e. that the issue  in
    respect of which the judge lacked  jurisdiction  is  clearly  severable
    from her other findings which are sound and are unchallenged.   It  may
    well be that the appellant will wish to make a fresh application  based
    on the relationship between the sponsor and his daughter, but that is a
    matter for her and those advising her.  As  matters  stand  I  conclude
    that there is no error of law in the judge's decision in respect of the
    points other than the new matter, and as a consequence  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

16.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 4 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 4 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

