
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07153/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th August 2017                      |On 21 August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                            MR. BASHIR JAMA NOOH
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. G Hodgetts, instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr. Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This  is  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Thomas
       promulgated on 7th September 2016, in which she dismissed the appeal
       by the appellant against the respondent's decision  of  28th  August
       2015 to refuse him entry clearance as the spouse of a refugee.


    2. The appellant is a national of Somalia.   At paragraph  [6]  of  her
       decision the FtT Judge  notes  that  the  appellant  had  previously
       applied for entry clearance on the same basis and an appeal  against
       that previous refusal was dismissed for the reasons  set  out  in  a
       decision promulgated on 30th June 2014.   The  evidence  before  the
       Judge is set out at paragraphs [9] to [14]  of  her  decision.   The
       Judge summarises the evidence at paragraphs  [16]  to  [21]  of  her
       decision.   At  paragraphs  [23]  to  [24],  the   Judge   correctly
       identifies the guidance that is set out in Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT
       00702 and properly notes that the starting point for the purposes of
       the appeal before her, is the previous decision of FtT  Judge  Ford.
       At paragraph [25] of her decision the Judge  sets  out  the  grounds
       upon which FtT Judge Ford dismissed the previous appeal.


    3. It is the subsequent application of the guidance by the  FtT  Judge,
       that is at the  heart  of  the  appeal  before  me.   The  appellant
       contends that there were witness statements and documents put before
       the FtT that the Judge simply dismisses because they do  not  relate
       to facts happening since  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Ford.   The
       appellant contends that the  Judge,  whilst  entitled  to  take  the
       decision of FtT Judge Ford as a starting point, should have  engaged
       with the new evidence rather than treating herself as bound  by  the
       previous decision.


    4.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Gillespie on 1st December  2016.  The  matter  comes  before  me  to
       consider whether or  not  the  determination  by  FtT  Judge  Thomas
       involved the making of a material error of law.


    5. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response  dated  26th  January  2017.
       The respondent opposed the appeal.  However, before me, Mr  Richards
       on behalf of the respondent conceded that the decision  of  the  FtT
       Judge discloses a material error of law.  He accepts  that  the  FtT
       Judge appears to have treated  herself  as  bound  by  the  previous
       decision of FtT Judge  Ford,  rather  than  engaging  with  the  new
       evidence and considering whether it was capable of  undermining  the
       findings previously made.  He accepts that the Judge does not appear
       to have considered the explanations advanced by or on behalf of  the
       appellant, that seek to explain matters identified by FtT Judge Ford
       in her decision.


    6. Mr Richards was right to make that  concession.   I  have  carefully
       read the decision of the FtT Judge.  The Judge was entitled to treat
       the fresh  evidence  with  some  circumspection,  but  although  the
       decision is thorough, the Judge appears to have treated  herself  as
       bound by the previous decision without making findings of  her  own,
       as to the fresh evidence adduced  before  her,  that  had  not  been
       before the Tribunal at the  time  of  the  previous  decision.   The
       outcome of the appeal might well have been the same, but I cannot be
       sure that it would have been.  The error  of  law  is  one  that  is
       therefore capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.


    7. The decision needs to be re-made and, as suggested by the parties, I
       have decided that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to the
       First-tier Tribunal, having taken into account paragraph 7.2 of  the
       Senior President's Practice Statement of 25th September  2012  which
       states;


          '7.2     The Upper Tribunal is likely on  each  such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that;


              (a) the effect of the  error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


              (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.'


    8.  In my view, the requirements of paragraph  7.2(a)  and  (b)  apply.
       The Judge has failed to set  out,  and  carefully  consider  in  her
       decision the evidence before her.  The  nature  and  extent  of  any
       judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive. The parties  will
       be advised of the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  in  due
       course.


 Notice of Decision


    9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


   10. The matter is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
       afresh.










Signed                                  Date     18th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD


As I have set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remitted
the matter for re-hearing I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date     18th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




