
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07184/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On Tuesday 13 July 2021              |On Thursday 05 August 2021           |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                               JAR (COLOMBIA)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Chirico,  Counsel  instructed  by  Elder  Rahimi
solicitors


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves minor children, I consider  it  is  appropriate  to  continue  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference, I
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    Respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Atreya promulgated on 15 April 2020 ("the Decision"). By the Decision,
    the Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's
    decision dated 9 April 2019, refusing his human rights claim founded on
    Article 8 ECHR based on his family and private life.  The claim was
    made in the context of a decision to deport the Appellant as a foreign
    national offender.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Colombia.  He says that he arrived in the
    UK with his mother on 31 July 1987.  Whether or not that is correct, he
    came to the UK as a child.  He is now aged forty-one years.  He was
    granted indefinite leave to remain ("ILR") on 25 July 1996 whilst still
    a child.  He has lived in the UK for over thirty-two years.

 3. The Appellant has a number of criminal convictions.  The index offence
    is one of conspiracy to defraud in which the Appellant first became
    involved in 2016.  He was convicted following a guilty plea on 24 July
    2017 and sentenced to four years' imprisonment.

 4. The Appellant is in a relationship with a British citizen.  They have
    two children now aged nine and two years respectively.  The youngest
    child has a congenital cardiac problem and other physical health
    conditions and remains under the care of Great Ormond Street hospital.
    The Appellant's partner has two adult children from a previous
    relationship.  One of those children lives with the Appellant and his
    partner.  He is on the autistic spectrum and is vulnerable.  The
    Appellant also has two adult children of his own who live independently
    but with whom he retains contact.

 5. The Judge found that the Appellant had lived half his life lawfully in
    the UK.  She also found that the Appellant is socially and culturally
    integrated in the UK notwithstanding his criminal offending.  She also
    accepted that there are very significant obstacles to integration in
    Colombia.  In relation to the impact of deportation on the Appellant's
    partner and children (including stepchildren), the Judge concluded that
    it would be unduly harsh for them to go with the Appellant to Colombia
    and that it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK without
    him.  The Judge recognised however that it was not sufficient for the
    Appellant to meet the two exceptions in the Immigration Rules ("the
    Rules") and Section 117C Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    ("Section 117C").  She referred to the need for the Appellant to show
    that there are very compelling circumstances over and above the
    exceptions which render his deportation disproportionate.  She
    concluded however that, balancing the interference with the Appellant's
    family and private life against the public interest, the decision to
    deport the Appellant was indeed disproportionate.

 6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal from the First-tier Tribunal
    on five grounds which can be summarised as follows:

         Ground one: the Judge erred by concluding that the best interests
         of the children were the most important consideration.

         Ground two: the Judge erred by failing to have proper regard to the
         public interest in particular by failing to identify any
         circumstances over and above the exceptions which could be
         considered to be very compelling.  Reference was made to various
         cases in support of the test said to be applicable.

         Ground three: the Appellant's partner and children had coped
         without the Appellant during his period of imprisonment and there
         was no evidence to show that the impact had been any more than that
         suffered by any partner or child separated from the other
         partner/parent. Again, various cases are cited.

         Ground four: the Judge erred by placing weight on the Appellant's
         rehabilitation in the absence of evidence that he had reformed
         (given the OASys assessment that the Appellant was at medium risk
         of non-violent reoffending).

         Ground five: the Judge failed to provide adequate reasons for his
         conclusions particularly in relation to the finding that there
         would be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's
         reintegration in Columbia.

 7. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever on
    10 May 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  The Judge had noted that the Appellant had been in the UK
         for a considerable period of time and had settled status.  He had
         previous convictions going back some years although no evidence the
         Respondent had sought to deport him then which may well have been
         an easier prospect.  The judge had taken account of all the
         evidence.  Inevitably in this case given the presence of children
         and their respective medical and emotional problems they featured
         heavily in the judges consideration of the evidence.

         4.   He set out in considerable detail the relevant law applicable
         and the case law relevant and recent in these types of cases.  He
         quoted extensively from the case law and indeed referred to cases
         referred to by the Respondent in the grounds.  It is clear that the
         judge was aware of the public interest and the very high threshold
         applicable in the Appellants case.  Essentially the Respondents
         grounds amount to a disagreement with the judges findings which is
         hardly surprising as this is a deportation case.  It cannot be said
         that every judge would have reached the same conclusion as this
         judge but nor can it be said that the judge was in error in his
         interpretation of the law and the principles within the case law.
         It is inevitably a judgement call and one made by the judge who
         heard all the evidence and saw witnesses giving evidence.  His
         decision was not wrong in law nor unreasonable.

         5.   There was no arguable error of law in this case."

 8. The Respondent renewed her application for permission to appeal to this
    Tribunal, relying on the same grounds and making additional points in
    relation to grounds one and two taken together under the heading of
    material misdirection of law and ground three under the heading of
    inadequate reasons and/or failure to resolve a conflict of opinion.

9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington on 18
   August 2020 in the following terms:

         "... All grounds are arguable - albeit the Judge set out the law at
         length between paragraphs 76 to 90, it is arguable the Judge failed
         to apply it or to give adequate reasoning for finding 'very
         compelling circumstances.'"

    Judge Rimington also gave directions that the error of law issue should
    be determined at a remote hearing absent objection from the parties.
    Neither party objected.

10. So it is that the hearing came before me.  The hearing was conducted
    via Microsoft Teams.  There were no technical issues affecting the
    conduct of the hearing.

11. The Appellant has filed an extensive rule 24 reply dated 25 September
    2020.  Unfortunately, although that was filed again (with a chronology)
    on the day before the hearing before me, Mr Tufan did not have it.  I
    therefore invited Mr Chirico to deal with this in detail in his oral
    submissions to allow Mr Tufan to consider it and reply. In addition to
    those documents, I had before me a bundle of the core documents
    including the Respondent's bundle and the Appellant's bundle before the
    First-tier Tribunal,

12. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains
    an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the decision
    or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.  Following the
    parties' submissions, I indicated that I found there to be no error of
    law in the Decision and upheld it.  I indicated that I would provide my
    reasons in writing which I now turn to do.

DISCUSSION

13. Mr Tufan adopted the Respondent's pleaded grounds.  He submitted that,
    in relation to the exceptions, it was not clear how the Judge had found
    there to be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration
    in Colombia.  Although he accepted that two of the children suffer from
    physical and other health conditions, Mr Tufan said that it was not
    clear how that met the high threshold of undue harshness, particularly
    since the family had coped during the Appellant's time in prison.  They
    had not had to turn to social services for assistance then but could do
    so in future if needs be.  That option had not been considered by the
    Judge.  The Judge had also failed to take into account the risk of
    reoffending when considering rehabilitation.    I deal with those
    points individually by reference to the Respondent's initial pleaded
    grounds as supplemented by the grounds to this Tribunal and taking into
    account the Appellant's rule 24 reply and Mr Chirico's oral
    submissions.

Grounds One and Two: Material Misdirection in law

14. The Respondent's grounds in this regard can be summarised as a
    complaint that the children's best interests have been elevated to a
    paramount consideration and that the Judge did not have regard to the
    very high threshold implicit in the need to show that there are very
    compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions which apply.
    The grounds to this Tribunal refer to what is said in LE (St Vincent
    and the Grenadines) v Secretary of Ste for the Home Department [2020]
    EWCA Civ 505 about the need to show something going "beyond the degree
    of harshness which would necessarily be involved for any child or
    partner of any foreign criminal faced with deportation".  As Mr Chirico
    points out, that is no longer good law following the Court of Appeal's
    judgment in HA (Iraq) and RA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 ("HA (Iraq)").  The question for the
    Judge to determine is the impact on these children.

15. As Mr Chirico rightly submitted, the Decision has to be read as a
    whole.  Although the Judge's findings are to be found in the last
    section of the Decision, what is there said must be read with the
    previous sections setting out the law, the submissions and the
    evidence.  I turn then to look at how the Judge determined the appeal
    in the context of the mis-directions of which the Respondent complains.



16. Having cited the relevant parts of the Rules and Section 117 as well as
    the principles which apply by reference to case-law at [76] to [90] of
    the Decision, the Judge opened the section setting out her findings
    with the following self-direction:

         "91. As set out above, the appellant's length of sentence means
         that neither paragraphs 399 or 399A which contain exceptions to
         deportations applies to the appellant because of the length of his
         sentence. They are nevertheless relevant to determining whether or
         not he can show very compelling circumstances over and above those
         set out therein.  He can only resist deportation if he can show on
         the balance of probabilities that there are very compelling
         circumstances over and above the exceptions to deportation and/or
         exceptional circumstances that would rent [sic] his deportation
         disproportionate.  In considering this I have had regard to the
         provisions of sections 117B and 117C of the 2002 Act"

    That is an impeccable self-direction in relation to the relevant parts
    of the Rules and statute.

17. When applying that test, the Judge considered first whether the
    exceptions were met.  At [104] to [107] of the Decision, the Judge
    considered the Appellant's family life and concluded that the exception
    was met in that regard.  At [108] of the Decision, the Judge found that
    the exception in relation to the Appellant's private life was met.  The
    Judge then moved on to consider whether there were very compelling
    circumstances over and above those exceptions at [109] to [110] as
    follows:

         "109.    I find that there will be very significant obstacles to
         integrate in Colombia because of the personal characteristics of
         the appellant and the overall picture of the evidence presented to
         me are that there are very compelling circumstances over and above
         described in the Exceptions 1 and 2 because the vulnerabilities of
         the children ([F], [A] and [K]) who both have particular needs and
         are dependent on the care of both parents who co parent them as
         well as the vulnerability of his partner's son who has autism as
         well as the vulnerability/compromised health/disability of his
         partner.  The appellant has always been and continues to be an
         active and involved father and the independent social worker whose
         evidence was not challenged by the respondent demonstrates to me
         the importance of the appellant's involvement, parenting, touch and
         support for the psychological well being and development of the
         children.  I do not accept the respondent's suggestion that the
         appellants children can approach social services if extra help is
         needed after the appellant is deported or that occasional visits
         and skype/face time contact will work for children under ten who
         need continuity of contact and physical touch.

         110. I am further concerned about the adverse impact of the
         appellant's deportation on her and the children and confirms at
         paragraphs 27-28 that 'Our world will be devastated.  I do not feel
         that I have the physical, psychological or emotional resources or
         resilience now to provide the level of care and support that the
         children will all need to negotiate the loss of their father and in
         the case of [K] the loss of the father figure in his life. [F] is
         at an age where losing his father will have a devastating impact
         and [A] will grow up never knowing her father...I won't be able to
         fund regular visits to Colombia...'

         111. Striking the balance as between the public interest in
         deportation of a serious criminal offender who has been sentenced
         to over four years for a serious offence and the history of the
         appellant's criminal offending and I find that it was a serious
         criminal offence but that the appellant has rehabilitated himself,
         overall is on the low risk of reoffending, addressed his behaviour
         by courses and demonstrated to me the impact on family members of
         his criminal offending risk overall is low.  I find that there are
         very compelling circumstances which outweigh the public interest in
         deportation in this particular case."

18. I accept that the interests of the children lay at the heart of the
    Judge's conclusions.  Although it appears within the summary of the
    parties' submissions, the Judge directed herself at [64] of the
    Decision in relation to those interests in the following way (also
    reiterating the "very compelling circumstances test"):

         "In relation to Article 8 ECHR there have to be very compelling
         circumstances over and above the exceptions to immigration rules.
         The best interests of the children are relevant but not a paramount
         consideration.  They must be balanced against the very strong
         public interest in deporting the appellant.  Some of the children
         are leading independent lives.  Kieran has a job offer to take up
         work as a life guard.  Two of the appellants children do not live
         with him and the others can continue contact with facetime and
         modern forms of communication."

19. When assessing the evidence, the Judge, as she was required to do,
    considered whether the impact of deportation on those children was
    unduly harsh.  She set out her findings in that regard at [105] to
    [107] of the Decision as follows:

         "105.    The appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship with [F] who is a qualifying child.  I accept he is
         vulnerable on account of his age and his documented emotional
         difficulties which has led to recognition at school and adaptations
         for his emotional needs.  I accept that the appellant is close to
         his child and that the appellant has always been a hands on father
         as evidenced by his involvement since he was a baby and doing most
         of the school drop offs and pick ups.

         106. The appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship as a
         parent with [A] who is a qualifying child and is vulnerable on
         account of her physical health and under the care of Great Ormond
         Street Hospital.  [A] was born in December 2018 when the appellant
         was in prison but I accept he has worked hard to bond with his
         youngest child and the appellant is able to put his child to bed at
         night.

         107. The appellant also has a genuine and subsisting relationship
         as a parent with [K] who is a young adult with autism and lives
         with the appellant.  He is a young vulnerable adult and has been a
         part of the appellant's household for the entirety of his life
         although the appellant is not the biological father I accept it is
         a parental relationship.  All three children ie [F] (SEN pupil
         passport 41), [A] and [K] (autism diagnosis at page 45) have
         special needs and I find it would be unduly harsh for them to leave
         the UK with the appellant and or lose their father who supports
         them on a daily basis and is an active and involved parent.  Taking
         into account the detailed measured and balanced expert evidence of
         the Independent Social Worker I do not find that the respondent can
         make good the submission that the appellant's partner can get help
         from social services to parent her children.  The importance of
         their father in their lives to touch them, play with them and
         develop cannot be underestimated as identified by the ISW at pages
         10.  I accept it would also have an adverse impact on the
         appellant's partner who is struggling herself at the current time
         with disability and grief following the loss of her mother.  I find
         it would be unduly harsh for the children who depend on their
         father as a co parent save for the periods he was in prison which
         does not amount to the majority of their lives to lose an active
         and involved father given the recognised importance of fathers to
         the development of boys ([F]) (page 10) who is vulnerable and has
         been recognised to be vulnerable by his school (SEN passport) and
         [A] who needs her father's support because of her health.  The
         ISW's unchallenged evidence was that '[F] and [A] have a close
         friendship with their father [J] ...should [J] be deported to
         Colombia it is my professional opinion that this will be
         detrimental emotionally to his children.'"

20. As I have already noted, the Court of Appeal has now made clear in HA
    (Iraq) that whether the impact on a child is unduly harsh is not to be
    measured against what might be expected to occur in the normal run of
    things, but on the basis of what that impact will be in the case at
    hand.  That is the exercise which the Judge performed.  There is no mis-
    direction in that regard.

21. It is also suggested in the Respondent's grounds that the Judge failed
    properly to give weight to the public interest.  In that regard, the
    Judge directed herself at [100] of the Decision as follows:

         "I must give weight to the public interest in the appellant's
         deportation.  I have taken account of all the evidence before me in
         carrying out an evaluative exercise in which I have balanced the
         public interest in deportation of foreign criminals together with
         the need to make a proportionate assessment of any interference
         with Article 8 rights.  I have had regard to the fact that the
         public interest includes not only protection of the public but also
         the need to deter others from committing offences and the social
         revulsion at the nature of the crime."

    That is an accurate self-direction as to the nature and extent of the
    public interest which applies in deportation cases.  As Mr Chirico also
    pointed out, the Judge made reference at [68] and [69] of the Decision
    to the "very strong weight attached to the public interest" and the
    Appellant's concession that the Appellant's offence was a very serious
    one.  The Judge clearly had in mind the strength of the public interest
    which applied and made no error in that regard.

22. As Mr Chirico summarised it, the very compelling circumstances were the
    fact of three vulnerable children with varying physical and mental
    health needs.  The Appellant's partner who is the carer of those
    children is also a carer for her aunt and has her own physical and
    mental health problems.  She was also grieving the loss of her mother.
    In addition, the Appellant had lived in the UK since he was a child and
    had only visited Colombia for a short period of weeks.  Mr Chirico
    fairly accepted that the Judge could have reached different conclusions
    but she had the correct test in mind, assessed the evidence she heard
    (most of which was not challenged) and reached a conclusion which was
    open to her.  As Mr Chirico submitted and I accept the very compelling
    circumstances over and above the exceptions do not need to be something
    different to those exceptions but can be formed of the particular
    strength of the factors within the exceptions in the particular case.
    That is the Judge's assessment in this case.

Ground three: Failure to provide adequate reasons for the "unduly harsh"
    finding

23. I have set out the Judge's findings in this regard at [19] above.  It
    is suggested in the Respondent's grounds that "significant disruption
    is an accepted consequence in any case where a parent is being removed
    from a family unit" and is not therefore a "very compelling
    circumstance".  The Respondent says that "there is nothing contained
    within the evidence that suggests the appellants family would be more
    adversely affected by removal than any other family in similar
    circumstances".  As I have already pointed out by reference to HA
    (Iraq) that is not the test.  The assessment for the Judge was whether
    the impact reaches the threshold of undue harshness in this case.

24. The grounds to this Tribunal repeat that point and seek to suggest that
    the family would cope in the absence of the Appellant.  However, the
    complaint made is an inadequacy of reasoning.  The Judge has explained
    why she concluded that the impact of the Appellant's deportation would
    be unduly harsh for his partner and children.  The points made at [5]
    of the grounds to this Tribunal are no more than an attempt to re-argue
    the case in that regard.  As Mr Chirico submitted and I accept, they
    are no more than a series of factual disagreements.

25. The other complaint made is that the family coped without the Appellant
    whilst he was in prison.  I assume the complaint is either that the
    Judge has failed to consider that or has failed to provide reasons why
    the family could not cope again either with or without social services
    support.  First, as Mr Chirico pointed out, the Judge considers this
    argument in any event at [109] of the Decision but rejects it.  She was
    entitled to do that.  As Mr Chirico also pointed out, there is a
    distinction to be drawn between a family coping with a short term
    separation caused by imprisonment and where the Appellant at least
    remains in the UK and a permanent one caused by deportation.  The
    position also had to be considered at date of the hearing.  The
    Appellant's youngest child ([A]) was born whilst the Appellant was in
    prison and the Appellant's partner's mother had since died.

26. If and insofar as the Respondent seeks to take issue in the grounds
   with what is said by the Independent Social Worker's report, as Mr
   Chirico pointed out, and the Judge observed on a number of occasions,
   that report was not challenged by the Respondent before Judge Atreya.
   The Judge was entitled to place weight on that evidence.

Ground four: Relevance of rehabilitation

27. The Judge set out her reasons for finding the Appellant to be
   rehabilitated at [102] of the Decision as follows:

         "...I also accept that the appellant has 'battled with demons' in
         prison and has undertaken courses in prison including drugs
         awareness, stoicism, family courses and tried to address the root
         courses [sic] of his depression and has made progress with the
         probation officer which had led to monthly meetings."

28. As Mr Chirico pointed out, the Judge had evidence about the relevance
    of the need to engage with mental health services and also had evidence
    from the probation services.  Based on that evidence, the Judge was
    entitled to make the finding she did.  The complaint made in the
    grounds amounts to a challenge to the weight which the Judge gave to
    that evidence but identifies no error of approach.  The Judge has
    reached a finding open to her on the evidence and has provided reasons
    therefor.

29. As it transpires, the Judge's faith in the Appellant's rehabilitation
    may have been misplaced.  Mr Tufan informed me that if there were to be
    a resumed hearing, the Respondent would need to place reliance on an
    updated PNC report showing that the Appellant has been convicted of a
    further offence in 2020 albeit as I understand it a lesser offence and
    one which did not culminate in a sentence of imprisonment.  As Mr Tufan
    accepted, however, the issue for me is not whether the Judge was wrong
    to reach this finding with the benefit of hindsight but whether she
    erred in her conclusion at the time.  There is no error in this regard.

Ground five: Lack of reasons for the "very significant obstacles" finding

30. The finding that there are very significant obstacles to the
    Appellant's integration in Colombia is included at [109] of the
    Decision set out at [17] above.  That follows on from what is said at
    [108] that "he [the Appellant] has been living and working in the
    community living and working and identifies with UK society as opposed
    to Colombian society which was evident by his temporary three week
    holiday in Colombia...".  The finding at [109] also has to be read with
    the evidence set out at [39] to [41] which, broadly summarised, is that
    the Appellant has visited Colombia only once since he left and only for
    a period of three weeks in 2016, has no family there and all his family
    are in the UK.  At [45] of the Decision, the Judge records that the
    Appellant speaks only broken Spanish.  Those are all factors which the
    Judge was entitled to consider.

31. In any event, though, on my reading of [109] of the Decision, the
    conclusion of the Judge is based on the Appellant's family life rather
    than his private life.  The reasoning may be brief but it is not
    inadequate.  There is no error of law.

CONCLUSION

32. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no error of law
    in the Decision.  I therefore uphold the Decision with the result that
    the Appellant's appeal remains allowed.



DECISION

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Atreya promulgated on 15 April
2020 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law. I therefore
uphold the Decision with the consequence that the Appellant's appeal
remains allowed.


Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  22 July 2021

