
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/07905/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2018                          |On 8 January 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                                     M K
                         (anonymity direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India who made a human rights claim in an
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of
    her family life with her partner Mr  A  H  and  their  British  citizen
    child.  The  application  was  refused  and  the  Appellant   appealed.
    Following a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 18 September 2018
    Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Page dismissed the Appellant's appeal.



 2. She sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Alis on 10 October 2018.  His  reasons  for  so  granting
    were: -

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
         Decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Page (hereinafter  called
         the Judge) who, in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on  September
         18, 2018 dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's
         decision to refuse her application on human rights grounds.


         2.   The Grounds argue  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  best
         interests of the children where the child was a British  child  and
         failed to carry  out  an  appropriate  proportionality  assessment.
         Additionally, the Judge applied the  wrong  test  when  considering
         section EX.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  applying  the
         test set out in subsection (b) whereas the appropriate test was set
         out in (a) which is mirrored in section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.


         3.   The appellant's ground of appeal concerning the incorrect test
         being applied overlooks the  fact  that  the  appellant  could  not
         satisfy Appendix FM because the Judge found she had used  deception
         (paragraph 21 of the decision) and she could not therefore meet the
         suitability requirements. This point appeared to be accepted by the
         appellant's representative as that was recorded in paragraph 27  of
         the decision.


         4.   With regard to the first ground of appeal  the  grounds  argue
         that the Judge failed to properly consider the  best  interests  of
         the child in circumstances where the child was a  British  citizen.
         It is arguable that the assessment of  article  8  failed  to  give
         sufficient weight to the best interests of a child who  is  British
         or have regard to the respondent's own policy. At paragraph  30  of
         the decision the Judge simply concludes  "there  is  no  compelling
         reason  why  article  8  should  be  considered  outside   of   the
         Immigration Rules".


         5.   Permission to appeal is granted on this single issue."


 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Ms Allen contended that the Judge had failed to  answer  the  essential
    question in the case which was whether or not it  would  be  reasonable
    for the Appellant's British citizen child to leave the  United  Kingdom
    as set out in Section 117 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002. She also relied on the grounds seeking permission to  appeal.
    Firstly, that the Judge had failed to apply the  seventh  principle  as
    set out in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 where it is  recorded  that  a
    child should not be blamed for matters for  which  he  or  she  is  not
    responsible such as the conduct of a parent. Ms Allen also referred  me
    to the recent Authority of KO (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2018]  UKSC  53.  She
    submitted that there is nothing within the Judge's decision to  suggest
    that he has "attempted to consider the best interest of the Appellant's
    daughter, independent to deception allegations and suitability  of  the
    Appellant". Further, that there is an absence of a  balancing  exercise
    of proportionality as per the five-stage test identified  in  Razgar  v
    SSHD [2004] UKHL 27. Finally, at paragraph 29 of the decision the Judge
    has relied  on  the  "wrong  legal  test".  It  is  not  the  issue  of
    "insurmountable obstacles" that fell  to  be  considered  but  that  of
    "reasonability".

 5. Mr Lindsay contended that the Judge's decision was sustainable and that
    at paragraph 24 he had taken into account the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's daughter. Further, that at paragraph 27 he had set the best
    interests of the child against the Respondent's intention to remove her
    to India.  There  had  therefore  been  lawful  consideration  of  this
    possibility. Beyond  that  the  decision  is  adequately  reasoned.  He
    referred me to the Authority of R (on  the  application  Chen)  V  SSHD
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
    [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC) and submitted that in an application for leave on
    the basis of an article 8 claim the Secretary of State is  not  obliged
    to consider whether an application for entry clearance will  ultimately
    be successful. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's  silence  on  this
    issue does not mean that it is accepted that the requirements of  entry
    clearance to be granted are satisfied. Ms Allen submitted (and I  agree
    with her) that this authority and its reference to  Chikwamba  bore  no
    relevance to the issues before me.

 6. I find that the Judge has  materially  erred  and  failed  to  properly
    consider the best interests of the Appellant's child  in  circumstances
    where she is a British citizen. The  assessment  under  article  8  has
    failed to give sufficient weight to the best interests of that child or
    the Respondent's own policy. At paragraph 30 of the decision the  Judge
    says little more than that there are "no exceptional  circumstances  to
    consider outside of the immigration rules". That is where the balancing
    exercise should have taken place.

 7. In  the  circumstances  I  set  aside  the  Judge's  decision.  He  has
    materially erred for the reasons set out  in  the  Appellant's  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Page.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                 Date:   17   December
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
