
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/07679/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham|        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd November 2017                  |        On 24th November 2017         |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                          Channalal Prabhudas Nayee
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Sehgal of VRS Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of India born on 1st December 1950.  On
    15th March 2016 he applied for entry clearance to enter the UK  as  the
    husband of the Sponsor, his  wife  Sushilaben  Chanualal  Nayee.   That
    application was refused for the reasons given in a Notice  of  Decision
    dated 1st March 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Asjad (the Judge) sitting  at  Birmingham  on  12th  July
    2017.  She decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given  in  her
    Decision dated 3rd August 2017.  The Appellant sought leave  to  appeal
    that decision, and on 7th September 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 3. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because although she found a genuine and
    subsisting  marriage  between  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor,   the
    Appellant failed to satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM of  HC  395
    because the Sponsor was wholly dependent on state funds and  had  lived
    separate and apart from the Appellant as  a  matter  of  choice  for  a
    number of years.  The Judge considered the provisions of  Section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  found  in
    particular that both the Appellant and the Sponsor  spoke  no  English.
    For the same reasons, the Judge found the decision  of  the  Respondent
    proportionate for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR.

 5. At the hearing before me, Ms Sehgal argued that the Judge had erred  in
    law in coming to  this  conclusion.   When  finding  that  family  life
    between the Appellant and the Sponsor could  continue  by  way  of  the
    Sponsor visiting the Appellant  in  India,  the  Judge  overlooked  the
    medical evidence showing that the Appellant could not travel  to  India
    for medical reasons.  The Judge had not considered whether  there  were
    any   exceptional   circumstances,   nor   whether   there   were   any
    insurmountable obstacles to the Sponsor joining her  husband  in  India
    for the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) of Appendix  FM.   Finally,  the
    Judge had failed to carry out any proper proportionality assessment.

 6. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    the Judge had directed himself appropriately and had made findings open
    to her.  Her reasons for her decision were sufficiently explained.   In
    particular, the Judge referred to the factors mentioned in Section 117B
    of the 2002 Act and clearly found that the public  interest  outweighed
    any compassionate circumstances in the case.

 7. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  The decision is not heavily detailed,  but
    the Judge made sufficient findings of fact and gave adequate reasons to
    support her decision.  In particular, it is clear from what  the  Judge
    wrote at paragraph 8 of the Decision that she carried out the balancing
    exercise necessary for any proper  assessment  of  proportionality  and
    made  a  proper  finding  that  the  public  interest  outweighed   any
    compassionate circumstances in the case.  The  Judge  properly  applied
    the provisions of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  It is true that in the
    Decision the Judge made no reference to the medical  condition  of  the
    Sponsor as shown in the medical reports produced by  way  of  evidence,
    but the Sponsor's inability to visit the Appellant in  India  was  only
    one factor considered by the Judge and it is apparent  that  the  Judge
    found a number of other  factors  supporting  the  public  interest  of
    immigration control.  The decision of the Judge that  the  decision  of
    the  Respondent  was  proportionate  was  not  perverse.    The   Judge
    considered  all  the  relevant  factors  in  the  case  including   any
    circumstances pertaining to the Appellant and the Sponsor  which  might
    be considered exceptional.  It is also true  that  the  Judge  did  not
    specifically deal with the provisions of paragraph EX.1.(b) of Appendix
    FM.  However, according to the Decision, this provision was not  relied
    upon at the hearing before the  Judge  and  no  evidence  was  produced
    directly relevant to the issue of  insurmountable  obstacles.   In  any
    event, it must follow from the Judge's finding that the decision of the
    Respondent was proportionate that the Judge also found that there  were
    no insurmountable obstacles to family life between  the  Appellant  and
    the Sponsor continuing outside the UK.

 8. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Dated 23rd November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton



